DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/5131Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information Society720 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-05475-1 | DOI 10.17226/5131Kenneth W. Dam and Herbert S. Lin, Editors, Committee to Study NationalCryptography Policy, National Research CouncilCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kenneth W. Dam and Herbert S. Lin, 
EditorsCommittee to Study National Cryptography PolicyComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.1996
RYPTOGRAPHY
ÕSOLE
N
ECURINGTHE

NFORMATION

OCIETY
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS2101 Constitution Avenue, NWWashington, DC 20418
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Boardof the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the
National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute ofMedicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their
special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proce-dures approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.Support for this project was provided by the Department of Defense (under contractnumber DASW01-94-C-0178) and the Department of Commerce (under contract number50SBNB4C8089).  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 96-68943International Standard Book Number 0-309-05475-3The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) will be glad to receive com-ments on this report.  Please send them via Internet e-mail to CRYPTO@NAS.EDU, or via

regular mail to CSTB, National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Avenue NW, Washing-ton, DC 20418.Copyright 1996 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiCOMMITTEE TO STUDYNATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY
KENNETH W. DAM, University of Chicago Law School, 
ChairW.Y. SMITH, Institute for Defense Analyses (retired), Vice ChairLEE BOLLINGER, Dartmouth College
ANN CARACRISTI, National Security Agency (retired)
BENJAMIN R. CIVILETTI, Venable, Baetjer, Howard and Civiletti

COLIN CROOK, Citicorp

SAMUEL H. FULLER, Digital Equipment Corporation

LESLIE H. GELB, Council on Foreign Relations

RONALD GRAHAM, AT&T Bell Laboratories
MARTIN HELLMAN, Stanford University

JULIUS L. KATZ, Hills & Company
PETER G. NEUMANN, SRI International

RAYMOND OZZIE, Iris Associates
EDWARD C. SCHMULTS, General Telephone and Electronics (retired)
ELLIOT M. STONE, Massachusetts Health Data Consortium

WILLIS H. WARE, RAND Corporation
StaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Study Director and Senior Staff Officer
JOHN M. GODFREY, Research Associate

FRANK PITTELLI, Consultant to CSTB
GAIL E. PRITCHARD, Project AssistantCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
WILLIAM A. WULF, University of Virginia, 
ChairFRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara
HENRY FUCHS, University of North Carolina
CHARLES GESCHKE, Adobe Systems Incorporated
JAMES GRAY, Microsoft Corporation
BARBARA GROSZ, Harvard University
JURIS HARTMANIS, Cornell University
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin

BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation

BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN MAJOR, Motorola
ROBERT L. MARTIN, AT&T Network Systems
DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley
WILLIAM PRESS, Harvard University

CHARLES L. SEITZ, Myricom Incorporated

EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine
CASIMIR S. SKRZYPCZAK, NYNEX Corporation
LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel CorporationMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer
PAUL D. SEMENZA, Staff Officer
JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Staff Officer
JEAN E. SMITH, Program Associate

JOHN M. GODFREY, Research Associate

LESLIE M. WADE, Research Assistant

GLORIA P. BEMAH, Administrative Assistant

GAIL E. PRITCHARD, Project AssistantCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONSROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation, 
ChairPETER M. BANKS, Environmental Research Institute of Michigan

SYLVIA T. CEYER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
L. LOUIS HEGEDUS, Elf Atochem North America Inc.

JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University
RHONDA J. HUGHES, Bryn Mawr College

SHIRLEY A. JACKSON, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory

KEN KENNEDY, Rice University

THOMAS A. PRINCE, California Institute of Technology
JEROME SACKS, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
L.E. SCRIVEN, University of Minnesota
LEON T. SILVER, California Institute of Technology

CHARLES P. SLICHTER, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ALVIN W. TRIVELPIECE, Oak Ridge National Laboratory

SHMUEL WINOGRAD, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

CHARLES A. ZRAKET, MITRE Corporation (retired)
NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-per-petuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engi-
neering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology
and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter

granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that
requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical
matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sci-

ences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, underthe charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organiza-
tion of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and

in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of
Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The Na-

tional Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs
aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and
recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. William A. Wulf

is interim president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the NationalAcademy of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appro-
priate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the
health of the public.  The Institute acts under the responsibility given to

the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an
adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify
issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is

president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Acad-emy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and
technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and
advising the federal government.  Functioning in accordance with general

policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the princi-
pal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the
National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the govern-
ment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The

Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman and

interim vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
viCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
INTRODUCTIONFor most of history, cryptographyÑthe art and science of secret writ-ingÑhas belonged to governments concerned about protecting their own
secrets and about asserting their prerogatives for access to information
relevant to national security and public safety.  In the United States, cryp-

tography policy has reflected the U.S. governmentÕs needs for effective
cryptographic protection of classified and other sensitive communica-
tions as well as its needs to gather intelligence for national security pur-
poses, needs that would be damaged by the widespread use of cryptogra-
phy.  National security concerns have motivated such actions as

development of cryptographic technologies, development of countermea-
sures to reverse the effects of encryption, and control of cryptographic
technologies for export.In the last 20 years, a number of developments have brought aboutwhat could be called the popularization of cryptography.  First, some

industriesÑnotably financial servicesÑhave come to rely on encryption
as an enabler of secure electronic funds transfers.  Second, other indus-

tries have developed an interest in encryption for protection of propri-
etary and other sensitive information.  Third, the broadening use of

computers and computer networks has generalized the demand for tech-
nologies to secure communications down to the level of individual citi-
zens and assure the privacy and security of their electronic records and
transmissions.  Fourth, the sharply increased use of wireless communica-

tions (e.g., cellular telephones) has highlighted the greater vulnerabilityviiCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiCONTENTSof such communications to unauthorized intercept as well as the diffi-culty of detecting these intercepts.As a result, efforts have increased to develop encryption systems forprivate sector use and to integrate encryption with other information
technology products.  Interest has grown in the commercial market for

cryptographic technologies and systems incorporating such technologies,
and the nation has witnessed a heightened debate over individual need
for and access to technologies to protect individual privacy.Still another consequence of the expectation of widespread use ofencryption is the emergence of law enforcement concerns that parallel, on

a civilian basis, some of the national security concerns.  Law enforcement

officials fear that wide dissemination of effective cryptographic technolo-
gies will impede their efforts to collect information necessary for pursu-
ing criminal investigations.  On the other side, civil libertarians fear that

controls on cryptographic technologies will give government authorities
both in the United States and abroad unprecedented and unwarranted
capabilities for intrusion into the private lives of citizens.CHARGE OF THE COMMITTEE TO STUDY
NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY
At the request of the U.S. Congress in November 1993, the NationalResearch CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB) formed the Committee to Study National Cryptography Policy.
In accordance with its legislative charge (Box P.1), the committee under-
took the following tasks:¥  Framing the problem.  What are the technology trends with which
national cryptography policy must keep pace?  What is the political envi-

ronment?  What are the significant changes in the post-Cold War environ-

ment that call attention to the need for, and should have an impact on,
cryptography policy?¥  Understanding the underlying technology issues and their expected devel-opment and impact on policy over time.  What is and is not possible with
current cryptographic (and related) technologies?   How could these ca-

pabilities have an impact on various U.S. interests?¥  Describing current cryptography policy.  To the committeeÕs knowl-
edge, there is no single document, classified or unclassified, within the
U.S. government that fully describes national cryptography policy.¥  Articulating a framework for thinking about cryptography policy.  The
interests affected by national cryptography policy are multiple, varied,
and related:  they include personal liberties and constitutional rights, the

maintenance of public order and national security, technology develop-viiiPREFACECryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSixPREFACEixBOX P.1Legislative Charge to the National Research CouncilPublic Law 103-160Defense Authorization Bill for Fiscal Year 1994Signed November 30, 1993SEC. 267. COMPREHENSIVE INDEPENDENT STUDY OF NATIONALCRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY.      (a) 
Study by National Research Council.ÑNot later than 90 days after the dateof the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall request the National
Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a comprehensivestudy of cryptographic technologies and national cryptography policy.      (b) 
Matters To Be Assessed in Study.ÑThe study shall assessÑ          (1) the effect of cryptographic technologies onÑ
              (A) national security interests of the United  States Government;

              (B) law enforcement interests of the United States Government;
              (C) commercial interests of United States industry; and
              (D) privacy interests of United States citizens; and

          (2) the effect on commercial interests of United States industry of export con-
trols on cryptographic technologies.      (c) Interagency Cooperation With Study.ÑThe Secretary of Defense shall directthe National Security Agency, the Advanced Research Projects Agency, and otherappropriate agencies of the Department of Defense to cooperate fully with the Na-
tional Research Council in its activities in carrying out the study under this section.The Secretary shall request all other appropriate Federal departments and agencies toprovide similar cooperation to the National Research Council.ment, and U.S. economic competitiveness and markets.  At a minimum,
policy makers (and their critics) must understand how these interests

interrelate, although they may decide that one particular policy configu-
ration better serves the overall national interest than does another.¥  Identifying a range of feasible policy options.  The debate over cryptog-
raphy policy has been hampered by an incomplete analysis and discus-
sion of various policy optionsÑboth proponents of current policy and of
alternative policies are forced into debating positions in which it is diffi-
cult or impossible to acknowledge that a competing view might have

some merit.  This report attempts to discuss fairly the pros and cons of a

number of options.¥  Making recommendations regarding cryptography policy.  No cryptog-
raphy policy will be stable for all time.  That is, it is unrealistic to imagine
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xCONTENTSthat this committee or any set of policy makers could craft a policy thatwould not have to evolve over time as the technological and political
milieu itself changes.  Thus, the committeeÕs recommendations are framed

in the context of a transition, from a world characterized by slowly evolv-

ing technology, well-defined enemies, and unquestioned U.S. technologi-
cal, economic, and geopolitical dominance to one characterized by rap-
idly evolving technology, fuzzy lines between friend and foe, and
increasing technological, economic, and political interdependencies be-
tween the United States and other nations of the world.Given the diverse applications of cryptography, national cryptographypolicy involves a very large number of important issues.  Important to

national cryptography policy as well are issues related to the deployment
of a large-scale infrastructure for cryptography and legislation and regula-
tions to support the widespread use of cryptography for authentication and
data integrity purposes (i.e., collateral applications of cryptography), even
though these issues have not taken center stage in the policy debate.The committee focused its efforts primarily on issues related to cryp-tography for confidentiality, because the contentious problem that this

committee was assembled to address at the center of the public policy
debate relates to the use of cryptography in confidentiality applications.
It also addressed issues of cryptography policy related to authentication
and data integrity at a relatively high level, casting its findings and rec-
ommendations in these areas in fairly general terms.  However, it notes

that detailed consideration of issues and policy options in these collateral
areas requires additional study at a level of detail and thoroughness com-
parable to that of this report.In preparing this report, the committee reviewed and synthesizedrelevant material from recent reports, took written and oral testimony

from government, industry, and private individuals, reached out exten-

sively to the affected stakeholders to solicit input, and met seven times to
discuss the input from these sources as well as the independent observa-

tions and findings of the committee members themselves.  In addition,

this study built upon three prior efforts to examine national cryptography
policy:  the Association for Computing Machinery report Codes, Keys, andConflicts:  Issues in U.S. Crypto Policy
,1 the Office of Technology Assess-
ment report Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments,2 and
xPREFACE1Susan Landau et al.,  Codes, Keys, and Conflicts:  Issues in U.S. Crypto Policy
, Associationfor Computing Machinery Inc., New York, 1994.2Office of Technology Assessment, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environ-ments, OTA-TCT-606, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., September 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxithe JASON encryption study.3  A number of other examinations of cryp-
tography and/or information security policy were also important to the
committeeÕs work.4   (Appendix N contains source documents (e.g., stat-
utes, regulations, memorandums of understanding), relevant to the na-
tional debate over cryptography policy.)WHAT THIS REPORT IS NOTThe subject of national cryptography policy is quite complex, as itfigures importantly in many areas of national interest.  To keep the project

manageable within the time, resources, and expertise available, the com-
mittee chose not to address in detail a number of issues that arose with
some nontrivial frequency during the course of its study.¥  This report is not a comprehensive study of the grand trade-offs
that might be made in other dimensions of national policy to compensate
for changes in cryptography policy.  For example, this report does not

address matters such as relaxing exclusionary rules that govern the court
admissibility of evidence or installing video cameras in every police hel-
met as part of a package that also eliminates restrictions on cryptography,
though such packages are in principle possible.  Similarly, it does not

address options such as increasing the budget for counterterrorist opera-
tions as a quid pro quo for relaxations on export controls of cryptography.
The report does provide information that would help to assess the impact
of various approaches to cryptography policy, although how that impact

should be weighed against the impact of policies related to other areas is
outside the scope of this study and the expertise of the committee as-
sembled for it.¥  This report is not a study on the future of the National Security
Agency (NSA) in the post-Cold War era.  A determination of what mis-
PREFACExi3JASON Program Office, JASON Encryption/Privacy Study, Report JSR-93-520 (unpub-
lished), MITRE Corporation, McLean, Va., August 18, 1993.4These works include Global Information Infrastructure, a joint report by the European
Association of Manufacturers of Business Machines and Information Technology Industry,the U.S. Information Technology Industry Council, and the Japan Electronic Industry De-
velopment Association (EUROBIT-ITI-JEIDA), developed for the G-7 Summit on the GlobalInformation Society, GII Tripartite Preparatory Meeting, January 26-27, 1995, Brussels; theU.S. Council for International Business statement titled ÒBusiness Requirements for En-
cryption,Ó October 10, 1994, New York; and the International Chamber of Commerce posi-tion paper ÒInternational Encryption Policy,Ó Document No. 373/202 Rev. and No. 373-30/9 Rev., Paris, undated.  Important source documents can be found in Lance J. Hoffman

(ed.), Building in Big Brother:  The Cryptographic Policy Debate,
 Springer-Verlag, New York,
1995, and in the cryptography policy source books published annually by the ElectronicPrivacy Information Center in Washington, D.C.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSsions the NSA should be pursuing and/or how it should pursue those
missions was not in the committeeÕs charge.  The report does touch lightly

on technological trends that affect the ability to undertake the missions to
which cryptography is relevant, but only to the extent necessary to frame
the cryptography issue.At the same time, this report does address certain conditions of thepolitical, social, and technological environment that will affect the an-
swers that anyone would formulate to these questions, such as the poten-
tial impact on policy of a world that offers many users the possibilities of
secure communications.¥  This report is not a study of computer and communications secu-
rity, although of course cryptography is a key element of such security.
Even the strongest cryptography is not very useful unless it is part of a
secure system, and those responsible for security must be concerned abouteverything from the trustworthiness of individuals writing the computer

programs to be used to the physical security of terminals used to access
the system.  A report that addressed system dimensions of computer

security was the National Research Council report Computers at Risk;5 this
current study draws on that report and others to the extent relevant for its
analysis, findings, and conclusions about cryptography policy.¥  This report is not a study of the many patent disputes that have
arisen with respect to national cryptography policy in the past several
years.  While such disputes may well be a sign that the various holders

expect cryptography to assume substantial commercial importance in the
next several years, such disputes are in principle resolvable by the U.S.
Congress, which could simply legislate ownership by eminent domain or
by requiring compulsory licensing.  Moreover, since many of the key

patents will expire in any case in the relatively near future (i.e., before any
infrastructure that uses them becomes widely deployed), the issue will

become moot in any case.¥  This report is not exclusively a study of national policy associated
with the Clipper chip.  While the Clipper chip has received the lionÕs

share of press and notoriety in the past few years, the issues that this
study was chartered to address go far beyond those associated simply
with the Clipper chip.  This study addresses the larger context and picture

of which the Clipper chip is only one part.5Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Comput-ers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Information Age,
 National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C., 1991.xiiPREFACECryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxiiiON SECRECY AND REPORT TIME LINEFor most of history, the science and technologies associated with cryp-tography have been the purview of national governments and/or heads

of state.  It is only in the last 25 years that cryptographic expertise has

begun to diffuse into the nongovernment world.  Thus, it is not surprising

that much of the basis and rationale underlying national cryptography
policy has been and continues to be highly classified.  Indeed, in a 1982

article, then-Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency Bobby R.
Inman wrote that[o]ne sometimes hears the view that publication should not be restrainedbecause Òthe government has not made its case,Ó almost always refer-
ring to the absence of specific detail for public consumption.  This rea-
soning is circular and unreasonable.  It stems from a basic attitude that
the government and its public servants cannot be trusted.  Specific de-

tails about why information must be protected are more often than noteven more sensitive than the basic technical information itself.  Publish-
ing examples, reasons and associated details would certainly damage
the nationÕs interests.  Public review and discussion of classified infor-
mation which supports decisions is not feasible or workable.6Secrecy is a two-edged sword for a democratic nation.  On the one
hand, secrecy has a legitimate basis in those situations in which funda-
mental national interests are at stake (e.g., the preservation of American
lives during wartime).  Moreover, the history of intelligence reveals many

instances in which the revelation of a secret, whether intentional or inad-
vertent, has led to the compromise of an information source or the loss of
a key battle.7On the other hand, secrecy has sometimes been used to stifle publicdebate and conceal poorly conceived and ill-informed national policies,
and mistrust is therefore quite common among many responsible critics6Bobby Inman, ÒClassifying Science:  A Government Proposal . . . ,Ó 
Aviation Week andSpace Technology, February 8, 1982, p. 10.
7For example, following press reports of deciphered Libyan messages before and after abombing in West Berlin in which an American soldier died, Libya changed its communica-
tions codes.  A senior American official was quoted as saying that the subsequent Libyan
purchase of advanced cryptographic equipment from a Swiss firm was Òone of the prices[the United States is] paying for having revealed, in order to marshal support of our allies
and public opinion, that intercepted communications traffic provided evidence that Libyawas behind the bombing of the Berlin disco.Ó  See ÒLibyans Buy Message-Coding Equip-
ment,Ó Washington Post, April 22, 1986, p. A8.PREFACExiiiCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSof government policy.  A common refrain by defenders of policies whoseorigins and rationales are secret is that Òif you knew what we knew, you

would agree with us.Ó  Such a position may be true or false, but it clearly
does not provide much reassurance for those not privy to those secrets for
one very simple reason:  those who fear that government is hiding poorly

conceived policies behind a wall of secrecy are not likely to trust the
government, yet in the absence of the substantive argument being called
for, the governmentÕs claim is essentially a plea for trust.
In pursuing this study, the committee has adopted the position thatsome secrets are still legitimate in todayÕs global environment, but that its
role is to illuminate as much as possible without compromising those
legitimate interests.  Thus, the committee has tried to act as a surrogate for

well-intentioned and well-meaning people who fear that the worst is hid-
ing behind the wall of secrecyÑit has tried to ask the questions that these
people would have asked if they could have done so.  Public Law 103-160

called for all defense agencies, including the National Security Agency, to
cooperate fully with the National Research Council in this study.For obvious reasons, the committee cannot determine if it did nothear a particular piece of information because an agency withheld that
information or because that piece of information simply did not exist.  But

for a number of reasons, the committee believes that to the best of its
knowledge, the relevant agencies have complied with Public Law 103-160

and other agencies have cooperated with the committee.  One important

reason is that several members of the committee have had extensive expe-
rience (on a classified basis) with the relevant agencies, and these mem-
bers heard nothing in the briefings held for the committee that was incon-
sistent with that experience.  A second reason is that these agencies had

every motivation and self-interest to make the best possible case for their
respective positions on the issues before the committee.  Thus, on the

basis of agency assurances that the committee has indeed received all
information relevant to the issue at hand, they cannot plausibly argue that
Òif the committee knew what Agency X knew, it would agree with Agency

XÕs position.ÓThis unclassified report does not have a classified annex, nor is therea classified version of it.  After receiving a number of classified briefings

on material relevant to the subject of this study, the fully cleared members
of the committee (13 out of the total of 16) agree that these details, while
necessarily important to policy makers who need to decide tomorrow
what to do in a specific case, are not particularly relevant to the larger
issues of why policy has the shape and texture that it does today nor to
the general outline of how technology will and policy should evolve in

the future.  For example, the committee was briefed on certain intelli-

gence activities of various nations.  Policy makers care that the activities

of nation X (a friendly nation) fall into certain categories and that those ofxivPREFACECryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvnation Y (an unfriendly nation) fall into other categories, because theymust craft a policy toward nation X in one way and one toward nation Y
in another way.  But for analytical purposes, the exact names of the na-

tions involved are much less relevant than the fact that there will always
be nations friendly and unfriendly to the United States.  Committee mem-

bers are prepared to respond on a classified basis if necessary to critiques
and questions that involve classified material.8As for the time line of this study, the committee was acutely aware ofthe speed with which the market and product technologies evolve.  The

legislation called for a study to be delivered within 2 years after the full
processing of all necessary security clearances, and the study committee
accelerated its work schedule to deliver a report in 18 months from its

first meeting (and only 13 months from the final granting of the last

clearance).  The delivery date of this study was affected by the fact that

the contract to fund this study was signed by the Department of Defense
on September 30, 1994.A NOTE FROM THE CHAIRThe title of this report is CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the InformationSociety.  The committee chose this title as one best describing our inquiry
and reportÑthat is, the committee has tried to focus on the role that
cryptography, as one of a number of tools and technologies, can play in
providing security for an information age society through, among other
means, preventing computer-enabled crimes and enhancing national se-
curity.  At the same time, the committee is not unaware of the acronym for

this reportÑCRISISÑand it believes that the acronym is apt.
From my own standpoint as chair of the NRC Committee to Study
National Cryptography Policy, I believe that the crisis is a policy crisis,
rather than a technology crisis, an industry crisis, a law enforcement cri-

sis, or an intelligence-gathering crisis.It is not a technology crisis because technologies have always beentwo-edged swords.  All technologiesÑcryptography includedÑcan be

used for good or for ill.  They can be used to serve society or to harm it,

and cryptography will no doubt be used for both purposes by different
groups.  Public policy will determine in large measure not just the net

balance of benefit and loss but also how much benefit will be derived

from constructive uses of this remarkable technology.
PREFACExv8The point of contact within the National Research Council for such inquiries is the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2101 Constitu-tion Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20418 (telephone 202-334-2605 or e-mailCSTB@NAS.EDU).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviCONTENTSIt is not an industry crisis, nor a law enforcement crisis, nor an intelli-
gence-gathering crisis, because industry, law enforcement, and the intelli-

gence establishment have all had to cope with rapid technological change,
and for the most part the vitality of these enterprises within the nation is
a testament to their successes in so coping.But a policy crisis is upon the nation.  In the face of an inevitably
growing use of cryptography, our society, acting as it must through our
government as informed by the manifold forums of our democratic pro-
cesses, has been unable to develop a consensus behind a coherent na-
tional cryptography policy, either within government or with the private
stakeholders throughout societyÑthe software industry, those concerned
with computer security, the civil liberties community, and so on.  Indeed,

the committee could not even find a clear written statement of national
cryptography policy that went beyond some very general statements.To be sure, a number of government proposals have seen the light ofday.  The best known of these proposals, the Clipper initiative, was an

honest attempt to address some of the issues underlying national cryp-
tography policy, but one of its primary effects was to polarize rather than
bring together the various stakeholders, both public and private.  On the

other hand, it did raise public awareness of the issue.  In retrospect, many

Administration officials have wished that the discourse on national cryp-
tography policy could have unfolded differently, but in fairness we rec-

ognize that the governmentÕs task is not easy in view of the deep cleav-

ages of interest reviewed in this report.  In this context, we therefore saw

it as our task, commanded by our statutory charge, to analyze the under-
lying reasons for this policy crisis and the interests at stake, and then to
propose an intelligent, workable, and acceptable policy.The Committee to Study National Cryptography Policy is a group of16 individuals with very diverse backgrounds, a broad range of expertise,
and differing perspectives on the subject.  The committee included indi-

viduals with extensive government service and also individuals with con-
siderable skepticism about and suspicion of government; persons with

great technical expertise in computers, communications, and cryptogra-
phy; and persons with considerable experience in law enforcement, intel-
ligence, civil liberties, national security, diplomacy, international trade,
and other fields relevant to the formation of policy in this area.  Commit-
tee members were drawn from industry, including telecommunications

and computer hardware and software, and from users of cryptography in

the for-profit and not-for-profit sectors; serving as well were academics
and think-tank experts.9  The committee was by design highly heteroge-
xviPREFACE9Note that the committee was quite aware of potential financial conflicts of interest amongseveral of its members.  In accordance with established National Research Council proce-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxviineous, a characteristic intended to promote discussion and synergy among
its members.At first, we wondered whether these different perspectives would
allow us to talk among ourselves at all, let alone come to agreement.  But

the committee worked hard.  The full committee met for a total of 23 days

in which we received briefings and argued various points; ad hoc sub-

committees attended a dozen or so additional meetings to receive even
more briefings; members of the committee and staff held a number of
open sessions in which testimony from the interested public was sought

and received (including a very well attended session at the Fifth Annual
Conference on Computers, Freedom, and Privacy in San Francisco in early
1995 and an open session in Washington, D.C., in April 1995); and the
committee reviewed nearly a hundred e-mail messages sent in response
to its Internet call for input.  The opportunity to receive not only written

materials but also oral briefings from a number of government agencies,

vendors, trade associations, and assorted experts, as well as to participate
in the first-ever cryptography policy meeting of the Organization for Eco-
nomic Cooperation and Development and of its Business Industry Advi-
sory Council, provided the occasion for extended give-and-take discus-
sions with government officials and private stakeholders.Out of this extended dialogue, we found that coming to a consensus
among ourselvesÑwhile difficultÑwas not impossible.  The nature of a

consensus position is that it is invariably somewhat different from a posi-

tion developed, framed, and written by any one committee member, par-
ticularly before our dialogue and without comments from other commit-

tee members.  Our consensus is a result of the extended learning and

interaction process through which we lived rather than any conscious

effort to compromise or to paper over differences.  The committee stands
fully behind its analysis, findings, and recommendations.We believe that our report makes some reasonable proposals for na-
tional cryptography policy.  But a proposal is just thatÑa proposal for

action.  What is needed now is a public debate, using and not sidestep-

ping the full processes of government, leading to a judicious resolution of
pressing cryptography policy issues and including, on some important
points, legislative action.  Only in this manner will the policy crisis come

to a satisfactory and stable resolution.PREFACExviidures, these potential financial conflicts of interest were thoroughly discussed by the com-mittee; no one with a direct and substantial financial stake in the outcome of the reportserved on the committee.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiCONTENTSACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe full list of individuals (except for those who explicitly requestedanonymity) who provided input to the committee and the study project is
contained in Appendix A.  However, a number of individuals deserve

special mention.  Michael Nelson, Office of Science and Technology Policy,

kept us informed about the evolution of Administration policy.  Dorothy

Denning of Georgetown University provided many useful papers con-
cerning the law enforcement perspective on cryptography policy.  Clinton

Brooks and Ron Lee from the National Security Agency and Ed Roback

and Raymond Kammer from the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology acted as agency liaisons for the committee, arranging briefings
and providing other information.  Marc Rotenberg from the Electronic

Privacy Information Center and John Gilmore from Cygnus Support pro-

vided continuing input on a number of subjects as well as documents
released under Freedom of Information Act requests.  Rebecca Gould

from the Business Software Alliance, Steve Walker from Trusted Informa-

tion Systems, and Ollie Smoot from the Information Technology Industry

Council kept the committee informed from the business perspective.  Fi-

nally, the committee particularly acknowledges the literally hundreds of
suggestions and criticisms provided by the reviewers of an early draft of
this report.  Those inputs helped the committee to sharpen its message

and strengthen its presentation, but of course the content of the report is
the responsibility of the committee.The committee also received a high level of support from the National
Research Council.  Working with the Special Security Office of the Office

of Naval Research, Kevin Hale and Kimberly Striker of the NRCÕs Na-
tional Security Office had the complex task of facilitating the prompt
processing of security clearances necessary to complete this study in a
timely manner and otherwise managing these security clearances.  Susan
Maurizi worked under tight time constraints to provide editorial assis-
tance.  Acting as primary staff for the committee were Marjory

Blumenthal, John Godfrey, Frank Pittelli, Gail Pritchard, and Herb Lin.
Marjory Blumenthal directs the Computer Science and Telecommunica-
tions Board, the program unit within the National Research Council to

which this congressional tasking was assigned.  She sat with the commit-
tee during the great majority of its meetings, providing not only essential
insight into the NRC process but also an indispensable long-term per-

spective on how this report could build on other CSTB work, most nota-

bly the 1991 NRC report Computers at Risk.  John Godfrey, research associ-
ate for CSTB, was responsible for developing most of the factual material
in most of the appendixes as well as for tracking down hundreds of loose
ends; his prior work on a previous NRC report on standards also pro-xviiiPREFACECryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxixvided an important point of departure for the committeeÕs discussion onstandards as they apply to cryptography policy.  Frank Pittelli is a con-

sultant to CSTB, whose prior experience in computer and information
security was invaluable in framing a discussion of technical issues in
cryptography policy.  Gail Pritchard, project assistant for CSTB, handled

logistical matters for the committee with the utmost skill and patience as
well as providing some research support to the committee.  Finally, Herb
Lin, senior staff officer for CSTB and study director on this project, ar-
ranged briefings, crafted meeting agendas, and turned the thoughts of
committee members into drafts and then report text.  It is fair to say that

this study could not have been carried out nor this report written, espe-
cially on our accelerated schedule, without his prodigious energy and his
extraordinary talents as study director, committee coordinator, writer,
and editor.Kenneth W. Dam, 
ChairCommittee to Study
  National Cryptography Policy
PREFACExixCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
A ROAD MAP THROUGH THIS REPORT15
PART IÑFRAMING THE POLICY ISSUES1GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE
INFORMATION AGE19

1.1The Technology Context of the Information Age, 
191.2Transition to an Information SocietyÑIncreasing
Interconnections and Interdependence, 221.3Coping with Information Vulnerability, 
271.4The Business and Economic Perspective, 
301.4.1Protecting Important Business Information, 
301.4.2Ensuring the NationÕs Ability to Exploit
Global Markets, 381.5Individual and Personal Interests in Privacy, 
401.5.1Privacy in an Information Economy, 
411.5.2Privacy for Citizens, 
441.6Special Needs of Government, 
461.7Recap, 
48xxiCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxiiCONTENTS2CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND
INFRASTRUCTURE51

2.1Cryptography in Context, 
512.2What Is Cryptography and What Can It Do?, 
522.3How Cryptography Fits into the Big Security Picture, 
572.3.1Factors Inhibiting Access to Information, 
582.3.2Factors Facilitating Access to Information, 60
2.4The Market for Cryptography, 
652.4.1The Demand Side of the Cryptography
Market, 662.4.2The Supply Side of the Cryptography Market, 
722.5Infrastructure for Widespread Use of Cryptography, 
742.5.1Key Management Infrastructure, 
742.5.2Certificate Infrastructures, 
752.6Recap, 
773NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION79
3.1Terminology, 
793.2Law Enforcement:  Investigation and Prosecution, 
813.2.1The Value of Access to Information for
Law Enforcement, 
813.2.2The Legal Framework Governing Surveillance, 
843.2.3The Nature of the Surveillance Needs of
Law Enforcement, 
883.2.4The Impact of Cryptography and New Media
on Law Enforcement (Stored and Communicated

Data), 903.3National Security and Signals Intelligence, 
943.3.1The Value of Signals Intelligence, 
953.3.2The Impact of Cryptography on Signals
Intelligence, 1013.4Similarities in and Differences Between Foreign
Policy/National Security and Law Enforcement

Needs for Communications Monitoring, 1023.4.1Similarities, 
1023.4.2Differences, 
1043.5Business and Individual Needs for Exceptional Access
to Protected Information, 1043.6Other Types of Exceptional Access to Protected
Information, 1083.7Recap, 
109Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxiiiPART IIÑPOLICY INSTRUMENTS4EXPORT CONTROLS113
4.1Brief Description of Current Export Controls, 
1134.1.1The Rationale for Export Controls, 
1134.1.2General Description, 
1144.1.3Discussion of Current Licensing Practices, 
1224.2Effectiveness of Export Controls on Cryptography, 
1274.3The Impact of Export Controls on U.S. Information
Technology Vendors, 1344.3.1De Facto Restrictions on the Domestic
Availability of Cryptography, 1344.3.2Regulatory Uncertainty Related to Export
Controls, 1384.3.3The Size of the Affected Market for
Cryptography, 1454.3.4Inhibiting Vendor Responses to User Needs, 
1524.4The Impact of Export Controls on U.S. Economic and
National Security Interests, 1534.4.1Direct Economic Harm to U.S. Businesses, 
1534.4.2Damage to U.S. Leadership in Information
Technology, 1554.5The Mismatch Between the Perceptions of Government/
National Security and Those of Vendors, 1574.6Export of Technical Data, 
1594.7Foreign Policy Considerations, 
1624.8Technology-Policy Mismatches, 
1634.9Recap, 
1655ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES167
5.1What Is Escrowed Encryption?, 
1675.2Administration Initiatives Supporting Escrowed
Encryption, 1695.2.1The Clipper Initiative and the Escrowed
Encryption Standard, 1705.2.2The Capstone/Fortezza Initiative, 
1765.2.3The Relaxation of Export Controls on Software
Products Using ÒProperly EscrowedÓ 64-bit
Encryption, 1775.2.4Other Federal Initiatives in Escrowed
Encryption, 1795.3Other Approaches to Escrowed Encryption, 
179Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxivCONTENTS5.4The Impact of Escrowed Encryption on Information
Security, 1815.5The Impact of Escrowed Encryption on Law
Enforcement, 1845.5.1Balance of Crime Enabled vs. Crime
Prosecuted, 1845.5.2Impact on Law Enforcement Access to
Information, 1855.6Mandatory vs. Voluntary Use of Escrowed
Encryption, 1875.7Process Through Which Policy on Escrowed Encryption
Was Developed, 1885.8Affiliation and Number of Escrow Agents, 
1895.9Responsibilities and Obligations of Escrow Agents
and Users of Escrowed Encryption, 1935.9.1Partitioning Escrowed Information, 
1935.9.2Operational Responsibilities of Escrow Agents, 
1945.9.3Liabilities of Escrow Agents, 
1975.10The Role of Secrecy in Ensuring Product Security, 
2015.10.1Algorithm Secrecy, 
2015.10.2Product Design and Implementation Secrecy, 
2045.11The Hardware/Software Choice in Product
Implementation, 2085.12Responsibility for Generation of Unit Keys, 
2115.13Issues Related to the Administration Proposal to
Relax Export Controls on 64-bit Escrowed Encryption
in Software, 2135.13.1The Definition of ÒProper Escrowing,Ó 
2135.13.2The Proposed Limitation of Key Lengths to
64 Bits or Less, 2145.14Recap, 
2156OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL
CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY216

6.1The Communications Assistance for Law
Enforcement Act, 2166.1.1Brief Description of and Stated Rationale for
the CALEA, 2176.1.2Reducing Resource Requirements for
Wiretaps, 2186.1.3Obtaining Access to Digital Streams in
the Future, 220Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxv6.1.4The CALEA Exemption of Information Service
Providers and Distinctions Between Voice and
Data Services, 2216.2Other Levers Used in National Cryptography Policy, 
2216.2.1Federal Information Processing Standards, 
2226.2.2The Government Procurement Process, 
2246.2.3Implementation of Policy:  Fear, Uncertainty,
Doubt, Delay, Complexity, 2256.2.4R&D Funding, 
2276.2.5Patents and Intellectual Property, 
2286.2.6Formal and Informal Arrangements with Various
Other Governments and Organizations, 2316.2.7Certification and Evaluation, 232

6.2.8Nonstatutory Influence, 
2346.2.9Interagency Agreements Within the
Executive Branch, 2356.3Organization of the Federal Government with Respect
to Information Security, 2376.3.1Role of National Security vis-‹-vis Civilian
Information Infrastructures, 2376.3.2Other Government Entities with Influence on
Information Security, 2416.4International Dimensions of Cryptography Policy, 
2436.5Recap, 
244PART IIIÑPOLICY OPTIONS, FINDINGS, ANDRECOMMENDATIONS7POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE249
7.1Export Control Options for Cryptography, 
2497.1.1Dimensions of Choice for Controlling the Export
of Cryptography, 2497.1.2Complete Elimination of Export Controls on
Cryptography, 2517.1.3Transfer of All Cryptography Products to the
Commerce Control List, 2547.1.4End-use Certification, 
2567.1.5Nation-by-Nation Relaxation of Controls and
Harmonization of U.S. Export Control Policy on
Cryptography with Export/Import Policies of
Other Nations, 2567.1.6Liberal Export for Strong Cryptography with
Weak Defaults, 257Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxviCONTENTS7.1.7Liberal Export for Cryptographic Applications
Programming Interfaces, 2597.1.8Liberal Export for Escrowable Products with
Encryption Capabilities, 2627.1.9Alternatives to Government Certification of Escrow
Agents Abroad, 2637.1.10Use of Differential Work Factors in
Cryptography, 2647.1.11Separation of Cryptography from Other Items
on the U.S. Munitions List, 2647.2Alternatives for Providing Government Exceptional
Access to Encrypted Data, 2657.2.1A Prohibition on the Use and Sale of Cryptography
Lacking Features for Exceptional Access, 2657.2.2Criminalization of the Use of Cryptography in the
Commission of a Crime, 2737.2.3Technical Nonescrow Approaches for Obtaining
Access to Information, 2747.2.4Network-based Encryption, 
2787.2.5Distinguishing Between Encrypted Voice
and Data Communications Services for
Exceptional Access, 2817.2.6A Centralized Decryption Facility for Government
Exceptional Access, 2847.3Looming Issues, 
2867.3.1The Adequacy of Various Levels of Encryption
Against High-Quality Attack, 2867.3.2Organizing the U.S. Government for Better
Information Security on a National Basis, 2897.4Recap, 
2928SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS293
8.1Synthesis and Findings, 
2938.1.1The Problem of Information Vulnerability, 
2938.1.2Cryptographic Solutions to Information
Vulnerabilities, 2968.1.3The Policy Dilemma Posed by Cryptography, 
2978.1.4National Cryptography Policy for the
Information Age, 2988.2Recommendations, 
3038.3Additional Work Needed, 
3388.4Conclusion, 
339Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxviiAPPENDIXESACONTRIBUTORS TO THE NRC PROJECT ON NATIONAL
CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY343

A.1Committee Members, 
343A.2Additional Contributors to the Project, 
349BGLOSSARY353

CA BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY364
C.1A Very Short History of Cryptography, 
364C.2Capabilities Enabled by Cryptography, 
365C.2.1Ensuring the Integrity of Data, 
365C.2.2Authentication of Users, 
367C.2.3Nonrepudiation, 
370C.2.4Preservation of Confidentiality, 
371C.3Basic Constructs of Cryptography,
 374
C.4Attacks on Cryptographic Systems, 
378C.5Elements of Cryptographic Security, 
383C.6Expected Lifetimes of Cryptographic Systems, 
384C.6.1Background, 
385C.6.2Asymmetric Cryptographic Systems, 
385C.6.3Conventional Cryptographic Systems, 
388C.6.4Timing Attacks, 
390C.6.5Skipjack/Clipper/EES, 
391C.6.6A Warning, 
391C.6.7Quantum and DNA Computing, 
392C.6.8Elliptic Curve Cryptographic Systems, 
394C.6.9Quantum Cryptography, 
394DAN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE:
HISTORY AND CURRENT STATUS396

D.1The Legal Framework for Domestic Law Enforcement
Surveillance, 396D.1.1The General Prohibition on Electronic
Surveillance, 396D.1.2Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and
Safe Streets Act of 1968 and the Electronic
Communications  Privacy Act of 1986, 
396D.1.3The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 
403D.2Historical Overview of Electronic Surveillance, 
410Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxviiiCONTENTSEA BRIEF HISTORY OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY414
E.1Export Controls, 
414E.2Academic Research and the Control of Information
About Cryptography, 415E.3Commercial Cryptography, 
417E.4Recent Developments, 
419FA BRIEF PRIMER ON INTELLIGENCE421
F.1The Intelligence Mission, 
423F.2The Intelligence Cycle, 
425F.2.1Planning, 
426F.2.2Collection, 
426F.2.3Processing, 
428F.2.4Analysis, 
428F.2.5Dissemination, 
429GTHE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY
POLICY430

G.1International Dimensions of Cryptography Policy, 
430G.2Similarities in and Differences Between the United States
and Other Nations with Respect to Cryptography, 431G.3Foreign Export Control Regimes, 
434G.4Foreign Import and Use Control Regimes, 
436G.5The State of International Affairs Today, 
438G.6Obtaining International Cooperation on Policy Regarding
Secure Communications, 439G.7The Fundamental Questions of International Cryptography
Policy, 444G.7.1Who Holds the Keys?, 
444G.7.2Under What Circumstances Does the Key Holder
Release the Keys to Other Parties?, 444G.7.3How Will Nations Reach Consensus on
International Cryptography Policy Regarding
Exports and Use?, 447HSUMMARY OF IMPORTANT REQUIREMENTS FOR A
PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE450
IINDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY455
I.1Banking and Financial Services, 
455I.2Medical Consultations and Health Care, 
457I.3Manufacturing, 
461Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxixI.4The Petroleum Industry, 
463I.5The Pharmaceutical and Chemical Industries, 
465I.6The Entertainment Industry, 
466I.7Government, 
466JEXAMPLES OF RISKS POSED BY UNPROTECTED
INFORMATION469

J.1Risks Addressed by Cryptography for
Authentication, 469J.2Risks Addressed by Cryptography for
Confidentiality, 470J.3Risks Addressed by Cryptography for Both
Authentication and Confidentiality, 471J.4Risks Addressed by Cryptography for Data Integrity, 
472KCRYPTOGRAPHIC APPLICATIONS PROGRAMMING
INTERFACES474
LOTHER LOOMING ISSUES RELATED TO
CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY477

L.1Digital Cash, 
477L.1.1Anonymity and Criminal Activity, 
480L.1.2Public Trust, 
480L.1.3Taxation, 
482L.1.4Cross-Border Movements of Funds, 
482L.2Cryptography for Protecting Intellectual Property, 
482MFEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING STANDARDS485

NLAWS, REGULATIONS, AND DOCUMENTS RELEVANT
TO CRYPTOGRAPHY489

N.1Statutes, 
489N.1.1Wire and Electronic Communications Interception
and Interception of Oral Communications
(U.S. Code, Title 18, Chapter 119), 489N.1.2Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
(U.S. Code, Title 50, Chapter 36), 511N.1.3Pen Register and Traffic Analysis (U.S. Code,
Title 18, Chapters 121 and 206), 526N.1.4Communications Assistance for Law
Enforcement Act of 1995, 540N.1.5Computer Security Act of 1987, 
551N.1.6Arms Export Control Act (U.S. Code, Title 22,
Chapter 39), 558Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxxCONTENTSN.2Executive Orders, 
573N.2.1Executive Order 12333 (U.S. Intelligence
Activities), 573N.2.2Executive Order 12958 (Classified National
Security Information), 589N.2.3Executive Order 12472 (Assignment of National
Security and Emergency Preparedness
Telecommunications Functions), 612N.2.4National Security Directive 42 (National Policy for the
Security of National Security Telecommunications
and Information Systems), 620N.3Memorandums of Understanding (MOU) and Agreement
(MOA), 627N.3.1National Security Agency/National Institute of
Standards  and Technology MOU, 
627N.3.2National Security Agency/Federal Bureau of
Investigation MOU, 630N.3.3National Security Agency/Advanced Research
Projects Agency/Defense Information Systems
Agency MOA, 632N.4Regulations, 
636N.4.1International Traffic in Arms Regulations
(22 CFR, Excerpts from Parts 120-123, 125,

and 126), 636N.4.2Export Administration Regulations, 
655INDEX677
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxxiRYPTOGRAPHY
ÕSOLE
N
ECURINGTHE

NFORMATION

OCIETY
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1In an age of explosive worldwide growth of electronic data storageand communications, many vital national interests require the effective
protection of information.  When used in conjunction with other ap-

proaches to information security, cryptography is a very powerful tool for
protecting information.  Consequently, current U.S. policy should be

changed to promote and encourage the widespread use of cryptography
for the protection of the information interests of individuals, businesses,
government agencies, and the nation as a whole, while respecting legiti-
mate national needs of law enforcement and intelligence for national se-
curity and foreign policy purposes to the extent consistent with good
information protection.BASIC POLICY ISSUESThe Information Security ProblemTodayÕs information age requires U.S. businesses to compete on aworldwide basis, sharing sensitive information with appropriate parties
while protecting that information against competitors, vandals, suppliers,Executive SummaryCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX ES.1The Foreign Threat to U.S. Business InterestsOf the wide variety of information risks facing U.S. companies operating interna-tionally, those resulting from electronic vulnerabilities appear to be the most signifi-cant.  The National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC), an arm of the U.S. intelli-

gence community established in 1994 by presidential directive, concluded thatÒspecialized technical operations (including computer intrusions, telecommunica-tions targeting and intercept, and private-sector encryption weaknesses) account for
the largest portion of economic and industrial information lost by U.S. corporations.ÓSpecifically, the NACIC noted that[b]ecause they are so easily accessed and intercepted, corporate telecommu-nicationsÑparticularly international telecommunicationsÑprovide a highlyvulnerable and lucrative source for anyone interested in obtaining trade se-
crets or competitive information.  Because of the increased usage of these
links for bulk computer data transmission and electronic mail, intelligencecollectors find telecommunications intercepts cost-effective.  For example,

foreign intelligence collectors intercept facsimile transmissions through gov-ernment-owned telephone companies, and the stakes are largeÑapproxi-mately half of all overseas telecommunications are facsimile transmissions.
Innovative ÒhackersÓ connected to computers containing competitive infor-mation evade the controls and access companiesÕ information.  In addition,
many American companies have begun using electronic data interchange, a
system of transferring corporate bidding, invoice, and pricing data electroni-cally overseas.  Many foreign government and corporate intelligence collec-
tors find this information invaluable._______________SOURCE:  National Counterintelligence Center, 
Annual Report to Congress on For-eign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, July 1995, pp. 16
Ð17.customers, and foreign governments (Box ES.1).  Private law-abiding citi-
zens dislike the ease with which personal telephone calls can be tapped,
especially those carried on cellular or cordless telephones.  Elements of

the U.S. civilian infrastructure such as the banking system, the electric
power grid, the public switched telecommunications network, and the air
traffic control system are central to so many dimensions of modern life
that protecting these elements must have a high priority.  The federal

government has an important stake in assuring that its important and
sensitive political, economic, law enforcement, and military information,
both classified and unclassified, is protected from foreign governments or
other parties whose interests are hostile to those of the United States.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3Cryptographic Dimensions of Information Security SolutionsInformation vulnerabilities cannot be eliminated through the use ofany single tool.  For example, it is impossible to prevent with technical

means a party authorized to view information from improperly disclos-
ing that information to someone else.  However, as part of a comprehen-

sive approach to addressing information vulnerabilities, cryptography is
a powerful tool that can help to assure the confidentiality and integrity of
information in transit and in storage and to authenticate the asserted
identity of individuals and computer systems.  Information that has been

properly encrypted cannot be understood or interpreted by those lacking
the appropriate cryptographic ÒkeyÓ; information that has been integrity-checked cannot be altered without detection.  Properly authenticated iden-

tities can help to restrict access to information resources to those properly
authorized individuals and to take fuller advantage of audit trails to track
down parties who have abused their authorized access.Law Enforcement and National Security DilemmasPosed by CryptographyFor both law enforcement and national security, cryptography is atwo-edged sword.  The public debate has tended to draw lines that frame

the policy issues as the privacy of individuals and businesses against the
needs of national security and law enforcement.  While such a dichotomy

does have a kernel of truth, when viewed in the large, this dichotomy is
misleading.  If cryptography can protect the trade secrets and proprietary

information of businesses and thereby reduce economic espionage (which
it can), it also supports in a most important manner the job of law enforce-
ment.  If cryptography can help protect nationally critical information

systems and networks against unauthorized penetration (which it can), it
also supports the national security of the United States.  Framing discus-

sion about national cryptography policy in this larger law enforcement
and national security context would help to reduce some of the polariza-
tion among the relevant stakeholders.On the other hand, cryptography intended primarily to maintain theconfidentiality of information that is available to the general public for
legitimate purposes such as defending against information theft is also
available for illegitimate purposes such as terrorism.  Encryption thus

does pose a threat to the capability that law enforcement authorities may
seek under appropriate legal authorization to gain access to information
for the purpose of investigating and prosecuting criminal activity.  En-

cryption also poses a threat to intelligence gathering for national securityCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYand foreign policy purposes, an activity that depends on access to infor-mation of foreign governments and other foreign entities.Note that other applications of cryptographyÑfor purposes of assur-ing data integrity and authenticating identities of users and computer
systemsÑdo not pose dilemmas for law enforcement and national secu-rity in the same way that confidentiality does.National Cryptography Policy for the Information AgeFor many years, concern over foreign threats to national security hasbeen the primary driver of a national cryptography policy that has sought
to maximize the protection of U.S. military and diplomatic communica-
tions while denying the confidentiality benefits of cryptography to for-
eign adversaries through the use of export controls on cryptography and
related technical data.  More recently, the U.S. government has aggres-

sively promoted the domestic use of a certain kind of cryptographyÑescrowed encryptionÑthat would provide strong protection for legiti-mate uses but would permit access by law enforcement officials when
authorized by law.  Today, these and other dimensions of current na-

tional cryptography policy generate considerable controversy.All of the various stakes are legitimate:  privacy for individuals, pro-
tection of sensitive or proprietary information for businesses, ensuring
the continuing reliability and integrity of nationally critical information
systems and networks, law enforcement access to stored and communi-
cated information for purposes of investigating and prosecuting crime,
and national security access to information stored or communicated by
foreign powers or other entities and organizations whose interests and
intentions are relevant to the national security and the foreign policy
interests of the United States.  Informed public discussion of the issues

must begin by acknowledging the legitimacy both of information gather-
ing for law enforcement and national security purposes and of informa-
tion security for law-abiding individuals and businesses.The conduct of the debate regarding national cryptography policyhas been complicated because a number of participants have often in-
voked classified information that cannot be made public.  However, the

cleared members of the National Research CouncilÕs Committee to StudyNational Cryptography Policy (13 of the 16 committee members) con-
cluded that the debate over national cryptography policy can be carriedout in a reasonable manner on an unclassified basis.  Classified material
is often important to operational matters in specific cases, but it is neither
essential to the big picture of why cryptography policy is the way it is nor
required for the general outline of how technology will and policy should
evolve in the future.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5BOX ES.2The Past and Future World EnvironmentPastFuture Trends
Computing and communicationswere expensive and rare.Communications networks were an-alog and voice oriented; commu-
nications made heavy use of ded-icated lines.Telecommunications was controlledby a small number of players.The U.S. economy was unquestion-ably dominant in the world.The economy was oriented towardmaterial production.The security threat was relativelyhomogeneous (Soviet Union and
Cold War).Cryptography was used primarily formilitary and diplomatic purposes.
Government had a relative mo-nopoly on cryptographic expertiseand capability.Computing and information acquisition,retrieval, and processing are inexpensiveand ubiquitous.  Rapid growth is evident
in the development and deployment of
diverse technology-enabled services.Communications networks are digital andoriented toward video and data trans-
missions.Communications make heavy use ofshared infrastructure and multiple chan-
nels of different media (e.g., satellites,wireless).  Passive eavesdropping is thusharder to detect.Telecommunications involves a largenumber of players.The U.S. economy is important but notdominant in the world, and it is increas-ingly interlinked with allies, customers,suppliers, vendors, and competitors all
over the world.The economy is oriented toward informa-tion and services.Security threats are much more heteroge-nous than in the Cold War, both in ori-
gin and in nature.Cryptography has important applicationsthroughout all aspects of society.  Non-

governmental entities have significantexpertise and capability built on anopen, public, and expanding base of sci-
entific and technical knowledge aboutcryptography.The problems of information vulnerability, the legitimacy of the vari-ous national interests described above, and trends such as those outlined
in Box ES.2 point to the need for a concerted effort to protect vital infor-
mation assets of the United States.  Cryptography is one important ele-

ment of a comprehensive U.S. policy for better information security.The committee believes that U.S. national policy should be changedto support the broad use of cryptography in ways that take into account
competing U.S. needs and desires for individual privacy, international
economic competitiveness, law enforcement, national security, andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYworld leadership.  Because cryptography is an important tool for protect-
ing information and because it is very difficult for governments to con-
trol, the committee believes that widespread nongovernment use of cryp-
tography in the United States and abroad is inevitable in the long run.
Accordingly, the proper role of national cryptography policy is to facili-
tate a judicious transition between todayÕs world of high informationvulnerability and a future world of greater information security, while to
the extent possible meeting the legitimate needs of law enforcement and
information gathering for national security and foreign policy purposes.The committee found that current national cryptography policy isnot adequate to support the information security requirements of an
information society.  Indeed, current policy discourages the use of cryp-
tography, whether intentionally or not, and in so doing impedes the abil-
ity of the nation to use cryptographic tools that would help to remediate
certain important vulnerabilities.  National cryptography policy should

support three objectives:1.Broad availability of cryptography to all legitimate elements of
U.S. society;2.Continued economic growth and leadership of key U.S. industries
and businesses in an increasingly global economy, including but not lim-
ited to U.S. computer, software, and communications companies; and3.Public safety and protection against foreign and domestic threats.
Objectives 1 and 2 argue for a policy that places few governmentrestrictions on the use of cryptography and actively promotes the use of
cryptography on a broad front.  Objective 3 argues that some kind of

government policy role in the deployment and use of cryptography for
confidentiality may continue to be necessary for public safety and na-
tional security reasons.  These three objectives can be met within a frame-

work recognizing that on balance, the advantages of more widespreaduse of cryptography outweigh the disadvantages.The recommendations below address several critical policy areas.  In
the interests of brevity, only short rationales for the recommendations are
given here.  The reader is urged to read Chapter 8 of the report for essen-
tial qualifications, conditions, and explanations.A FRAMEWORK FOR NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICYThe framework for national cryptography policy should provide co-herent structure and reduce uncertainty for potential vendors and for
nongovernment and government users of cryptography in ways that

policy does not do today.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7Recommendation 1:  No law should bar the manufacture, sale, or use of
any form of encryption within the United States.  Specifically, a legisla-
tive ban on the use of unescrowed encryption would raise both technical
and legal or constitutional issues.  Technically, many methods are avail-

able to circumvent such a ban; legally, constitutional issues, especially
those related to free speech, would be almost certain to arise, issues that
are not trivial to resolve.  Recommendation 1 is made to reinforce this

particular aspect of the AdministrationÕs cryptography policy.Recommendation 2:  National cryptography policy should be devel-
oped by the executive and legislative branches on the basis of open
public discussion and governed by the rule of law.  Only a national
discussion of the issues involved in national cryptography policy can
result in the broadly acceptable social consensus that is necessary for any
policy in this area to succeed.  A consensus derived from such delibera-

tions, backed by explicit legislation when necessary, will lead to greater
degrees of public acceptance and trust, a more certain planning environ-
ment, and better connections between policy makers and the private sec-
tor on which the nationÕs economy and social fabric rest.Recommendation 3:  National cryptography policy affecting the devel-
opment and use of commercial cryptography should be more closely
aligned with market forces.  As cryptography has assumed greater im-
portance to nongovernment interests, national cryptography policy has
become increasingly disconnected from market reality and the needs of
parties in the private sector.  Experience with technology deployment

suggests that reliance on market forces is generally the most effective way
to promote the widespread use of a new technology.  Since the committee

believes that widespread deployment and use of cryptography are in the
national interest, it believes that national cryptography policy should align
itself with user needs and market forces to the maximum feasible extent.
Accordingly, national cryptography policy should emphasize the free-
dom of domestic users to determine cryptographic functionality, protec-
tion, and implementations according to their security needs as they see
fit; encourage the adoption of cryptographic standards by the federal
government and private parties that are consistent with prevailing indus-
try practice; and support the use of algorithms, product designs, and
product implementations that are open to public scrutiny.EXPORT CONTROLSFor many years, the United States has controlled the export of crypto-graphic technologies, products, and related technical information as mu-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYnitions (on the U.S. Munitions List administered by the State Depart-ment).  However, the current export control regime for cryptography is

an increasing impediment to the information security efforts of U.S. firms
competing and operating in world markets, developing strategic alliances
internationally, and forming closer ties with foreign customers and sup-
pliers.  Export controls also have had the effect of reducing the domestic

availability of products with strong encryption capabilities.  Looking to

the future, both U.S. and foreign companies have the technical capability
to integrate high-quality cryptographic features into their products and
services.  U.S. export controls may stimulate the growth of significant

foreign competition for U.S. vendors to the detriment of both U.S. na-
tional security interests and U.S. business and industry.Some relaxation of todayÕs export controls on cryptography is war-ranted.  Relaxation would create an environment in which U.S. and multi-

national firms and individuals could use the same security products in
the United States and abroad, thereby supporting better information se-
curity for U.S. firms operating internationally.  It would also increase the

availability of good cryptography products in the United States.  Finally,

it would help to solidify U.S. leadership in a field critical to national
security and economic competitiveness.At the same time, cryptography is inherently dual-use in character,with important applications to both civilian and military purposes.  Be-

cause cryptography is a particularly critical military application for which
few technical alternatives are available, retention of some export controls
on cryptography will mitigate the loss to U.S. national security interests
in the short term, allow the United States to evaluate the impact of relax-
ation on national security interests before making further changes, and
Òbuy timeÓ for U.S. national security authorities to adjust to a new techni-
cal reality.Recommendation 4:  Export controls on cryptography should be pro-

gressively relaxed but not eliminated.Recommendation 4.1ÑProducts providing confidentiality at a levelthat meets most general commercial requirements should be easily ex-
portable.1  Today, products with encryption capabilities that incorpo-
rate the 56-bit DES algorithm provide this level of confidentiality and1For purposes of Recommendation 4.1, a product that is Òeasily exportableÓ will auto-
matically qualify for treatment and consideration (i.e., commodity jurisdiction, or CJ) under
the Commerce Control List (CCL).  Automatic qualification refers to the same procedure
under which software products using RC2 or RC4 algorithms for confidentiality with 40-bitkey sizes currently qualify for the CCL.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9should be easily exportable.  As a condition of export, vendors of prod-
ucts covered under this Recommendation 4.1 (and 4.2 below) would be
required to provide to the U.S. government full technical specifications of
their product and reasonable technical assistance upon request in order to
assist the U.S. government in understanding the productÕs internal opera-tions.Recommendation 4.2ÑProducts providing stronger confidentialityshould be exportable on an expedited basis to a list of approved compa-
nies if the proposed product user is willing to provide access to de-
crypted information upon legally authorized request.  Firms on the list
would agree to abide by a set of requirements described in Chapter 8 that
would help to ensure the ability of the U.S. government to obtain the
plaintext of encrypted information upon presentation of a proper law
enforcement request.  (Plaintext is the information that was initially en-

crypted.)Recommendation 4.3ÑThe U.S. government should streamline andincrease the transparency of the export licensing process for cryptogra-
phy.  Greater efforts in this area would reduce uncertainty regarding
rules, time lines, and the criteria used in making decisions about the
exportability of particular products.  Chapter 8 describes specific possible

steps that might be taken.ADJUSTING TO NEW TECHNICAL REALITIESAs noted above, cryptography is helpful to some dimensions of lawenforcement and national security and harmful to others.  The committee

accepts that the onset of an information age is likely to create many new
challenges for public safety, among them the greater use of cryptography
by criminal elements of society.  If law enforcement authorities are unable

to gain access to the encrypted communications and stored information of
criminals, some criminal investigations and prosecutions will be signifi-
cantly impaired.  For these reasons, specific steps should be taken to

mitigate these difficulties.  In the realm of national security, new capabili-

ties are needed to better cope with the challenges that cryptography pre-
sents.Since 1993, the approach of the U.S. government to these problemshas been an aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption (see Chapter 5)
as a pillar of the technical foundation for national cryptography policy,
primarily in response to the law enforcement concerns described above.
Initiatives promoted by the U.S. government include the Escrowed En-
cryption Standard (a voluntary Federal Information Processing StandardCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYfor secure voice telephony), the Capstone/Fortezza initiative that pro-vides escrowed encryption capabilities for secure data storage and com-
munications, and a recent proposal to liberalize export controls on certain
encryption products if the keys are Òproperly escrowed.ÓThe committee understands the AdministrationÕs rationale for pro-moting escrowed encryption but believes that escrowed encryption
should be only one part of an overall strategy for dealing with the prob-
lems that encryption poses for law enforcement and national security.
The committeeÕs view of an appropriate overall strategy is described be-low, and escrowed encryption is the focus of Recommendation 5.3.Recommendation 5:  The U.S. government should take steps to assist

law enforcement and national security to adjust to new technical reali-
ties of the information age.  Over the past 50 years, both law enforcementand national security authorities have had to cope with a variety of chang-
ing technological circumstances.  For the most part, they have coped with

these changes quite well.  Today, however, 
Òbusiness as usualÓ will not
suffice to bring agencies responsible for law enforcement and national
security into the information age.  At the same time, both law enforce-

ment and national security have demonstrated considerable adaptability
to new environments; this record of adaptability provides considerable
confidence that they can adapt to a future of digital communications and
stored data as well.The specific subrecommendations that follow attempt to build on thisrecord.  They are intended to support law enforcement and national secu-

rity missions in their totalityÑfor law enforcement, in both crime preven-tion and crime prosecution and investigation; and for national security, in
both the defense of nationally critical information systems and the collec-
tion of intelligence information.Recommendation 5.1ÑThe U.S. government should actively en-courage the use of cryptography in nonconfidentiality applications such
as user authentication and integrity checks.  These applications are par-
ticularly important in addressing vulnerabilities of nationally critical in-
formation systems and networks.  Furthermore, these applications of cryp-

tography are important crime-fighting measures.  To date, national

cryptography policy has not fully supported such nonconfidentiality uses.
Some actions have been taken in this area, but these actions have some-
times conflicted with government concerns about confidentiality.  As im-
portantly, government has expressed considerably more concern in the
public debate regarding the deleterious impact of widespread cryptogra-
phy used for confidentiality than over the deleterious impact of not de-
ploying cryptographic capabilities for user authentication and data integ-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11rity.  Chapter 8 provides a number of illustrative examples to demon-
strate what specific actions government can take to promote
nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography.Recommendation 5.2ÑThe U.S. government should promote thesecurity of the telecommunications networks more actively.  At a mini-
mum, the U.S. government should promote the link encryption of cel-
lular communications2 and the improvement of security at telephone
switches.  Such steps would not diminish government access for lawfully
authorized wiretaps through the requirements imposed on carriers today
to cooperate with law enforcement in such matters.  Furthermore, by

addressing public demands for greater security in voice communications
that are widely known to be nonsecure through the telecommunications
service providers, these measures would also reduce the demand for (and
thus the availability of) devices used to provide end-to-end encryption of
voice communications.  Without a ready supply of such devices, a crimi-

nal user would have to go to considerable trouble to obtain a device that
could thwart a lawfully authorized wiretap.Recommendation 5.3ÑTo better understand how escrowed encryp-tion might operate, the U.S. government should explore escrowed en-
cryption for its own uses.  To address the critical international dimen-

sions of escrowed communications, the U.S. government should work
with other nations on this topic.  Escrowed encryption has both benefitsand risks.  The benefits for law enforcement and national security are that

when escrowed encryption is properly implemented and widely de-
ployed, law enforcement and national security authorities will be able to
obtain access to escrow-encrypted data in specific instances when autho-
rized by law.  Escrowed encryption also enables end users to recover

encrypted stored data to which access has been inadvertently lost.  The

risk to end users is that escrowed encryption provides a potentially lower
degree of confidentiality because it is specifically designed to permit ex-
ceptional access by parties not originally intended to have access to the
encrypted data.Aggressive government promotion of escrowed encryption is not ap-propriate at this time for several reasons: the lack of operational experi-2ÒLink encryptionÓ refers to the practice of encrypting information being communicated
in such a way that it is encrypted only in between the node from which it is sent and thenode where it is received; while the information is at the nodes themselves, it isunencrypted.  In the context of link encryption for cellular communications, a cellular call

would be encrypted between the mobile handset and the ground station.  When carried on
the landlines of the telephone network, the call would be unencrypted.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYence with how a large-scale infrastructure for escrowed encryption wouldwork; the lack of demonstrated evidence that escrowed encryption will
solve the most serious problems that law enforcement authorities face;
the likely harmful impact on the natural market development of applica-
tions made possible by new information services and technologies; and
the uncertainty of the market response to such aggressive promotion.  At
the same time, many policy benefits can be gained by an operational
exploration of escrowed encryption by the U.S. government for govern-
ment applications; such exploration would enable the U.S. government to
develop the base of experience on which to build a more aggressive pro-
motion of escrowed encryption should circumstances develop in such a
way that encrypted communications come to pose a significant problem
for law enforcement.Recommendation 5.4ÑCongress should seriously consider legisla-tion that would impose criminal penalties on the use of encrypted com-
munications in interstate commerce with the intent to commit a federal
crime.  The purpose of such a statute would be to discourage the use of
cryptography for illegitimate purposes, thus focusing the weight of the
criminal justice system on individuals who were in fact guilty of criminal
activity rather than on law-abiding citizens and criminals alike.  Any

statute in this area should be drawn narrowly.Recommendation 5.5ÑHigh priority should be given to research,development, and deployment of additional technical capabilities for
law enforcement and national security for use in coping with new tech-
nological challenges.  Such R&D should be undertaken during the time
that it will take for cryptography to become truly ubiquitous.  These new
capabilities are almost certain to have a greater impact on future informa-
tion collection efforts than will aggressive attempts to promote escrowed
encryption to a resistant market.THE POLICY RELATIONSHIP BETWEENINFORMATION SECURITY AND CRYPTOGRAPHYAlthough this report is concerned primarily with national cryptogra-phy policy, any such policy is only one component of a national informa-
tion security policy.  Without a forward-looking and comprehensive na-

tional information security policy, changes in national cryptography
policy may have little operational impact on U.S. information security.Recommendation 6:  The U.S. government should develop a mecha-

nism to promote information security in the private sector.  As is widely
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13acknowledged, the U.S. government is not well organized to meet thechallenges presented by an information society, and no government
agency has the responsibility to promote information security in the pri-
vate sector.  Absent a coordinated approach to promoting information

security, the needs of many stakeholders may well be given inadequate
attention and notice; those who are pursuing enhanced information secu-
rity and those who have a need for legal access to stored or communi-
cated information must both be included in a robust process for manag-
ing the often-competing issues and interests that will inevitably arise over
time.  Government has an important role in actively promoting the secu-

rity of information systems and networks critical to the nationÕs welfare(e.g., the banking and financial system, the public switched telecommuni-
cations network, the air traffic control system, the electric power grid).  In

other sectors of the economy, the role of the U.S. government should be
limited to providing information and expertise.  Chapter 8 provides some

illustrative examples of what the government might do to promote infor-
mation security in the private sector.CONCLUSIONThe committee believes that its recommendations will lead to en-hanced confidentiality and protection of information for individuals and
companies, thereby reducing economic and financial crimes and economic
espionage from both domestic and foreign sources.  In addition, they will

result in improved security and assurance for the information systems
and networks used by the nationÑa more secure national informationinfrastructure.  While the recommendations will in these ways contribute

to the prevention of crime and enhance national security, the committee
recognizes that the spread of cryptography will increase the burden of
those in government charged with carrying out certain specific law en-
forcement and intelligence activities.  It believes that widespread com-

mercial and private use of cryptography in the United States and abroad
is inevitable in the long run and that its advantages, on balance, outweigh
its disadvantages.  Thus, the committee concluded that the overall inter-

ests of the government and the nation would best be served by a policy
that fosters a judicious transition toward the broad use of cryptography.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15A Road Map Through This Report
15This report responds to a request made in the Defense AuthorizationAct of FY 1994 by the U.S. Congress for the National Research Council to
conduct a comprehensive study of national cryptography policy, a subject
that has generated considerable controversy in the past few years.This report is organized into three parts.  Part I frames the policy
issues.  Chapter 1 outlines the problem of growing information vulner-

ability and the need for technology and policy to mitigate this problem.
Chapter 2 describes possible roles for cryptography in reducing informa-
tion vulnerability and places cryptography into context as one element of
an overall approach to ensuring information security.  Chapter 3 dis-

cusses needs for access to encrypted information and related public policy
issues, specifically those related to information gathering for law enforce-
ment and national security purposes.Part II of this report describes the instruments and goals of currentU.S. cryptography policy and some of the issues raised by current policy.
Chapter 4 is concerned primarily with export controls on cryptography, a
powerful tool that has long been used in support of national security
objectives but whose legitimacy has come under increasing fire in the last
several years.  Chapter 5 addresses escrowed encryption, an approach
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYaggressively promoted by the federal government as a technique for bal-ancing national needs for information security with those of law enforce-
ment and national security for information gathering.  Chapter 6 dis-

cusses other dimensions of national cryptography policy, including the
Digital Telephony Act of 1995 (also known as the Communications Assis-
tance for Law Enforcement Act) and a variety of other levers used in
national cryptography policy that do not often receive much attention in
the debate.Part III has two goalsÑenlarging the space of possible policy optionsand offering findings and recommendations.  Chapter 7 discusses a vari-

ety of options for cryptography policy, some of which have been sug-
gested or mentioned in different forums (e.g., in public and/or private
input received by the committee, or by various members of the commit-
tee).  These policy options include alternative export control regimes for

cryptography and alternatives for providing exceptional access capabili-
ties when necessary.  In addition, Chapter 7 addresses several issues re-

lated to or affected by cryptography that will appear on the horizon in the
foreseeable future.  Chapter 8 describes the committee
Õs findings andrecommendations.A set of appendixes provides more detail where needed.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I 
IS INTENDED TO EXPLICATE the fundamental issues underlying national
cryptography policy.  Chapter 1 outlines basic elements of a critical problem

facing the nationÑthe increasing vulnerability of information, a commodity that
has become essential to national well-being and future opportunity.  This vulner-

ability results from a number of trends, including the explosive growth of digital
communications and data storage, the increasingly international dimensions of
business, and the growing dependence of the nation on a number of critical
information systems and networks.  Chapter 2 describes how cryptography can

play an important role in reducing the information vulnerability of the nation, of
businesses, and of private individuals.  Chapter 2 also places cryptography into

context, as one element of an overall approach to information security, as a
product that responds to factors related to both supply and demand, and as a
technology whose large-scale use requires a supporting infrastructure.  Chapter 3

discusses public policy issues raised by the need for access to encrypted informa-
tion.  The prospect of near-absolute confidentialty of informationÑa prospect

enabled by modern cryptographyÑis reassuring to some and quite disturbing to
others.  Important public policy issues are raised by law enforcement authorities,

who regard the ability to obtain information surreptitiously but legally as essen-
tial to their crime-fighting abilities, and by national security authorities, who
place a high value on the ability to monitor the communications of potential
adversaries.  Even private individuals, who might wish to encrypt records se-

curely, may face the need to recover their data as though they were outsiders if
they have forgotten how to gain ÒlegitimateÓ access; the same is true for busi-
nesses in many situations.PART
 IFraming the Policy Issues17Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.191Growing Vulnerability in the
Information AgeChapter 1 frames a fundamental problem facing the United StatestodayÑthe need to protect against the growing vulnerability of informa-
tion to unauthorized access and/or change as the nation makes the tran-
sition from an industrial age to an information age.  SocietyÕs reliance on

a changing panoply of information technologies and technology-enabled
services, the increasingly global nature of commerce and business, and
the ongoing desire to protect traditional freedoms as well as to ensure
that government remains capable of fulfilling its responsibilities to the
nation all suggest that future needs for information security will be large.
These factors make clear the need for a broadly acceptable national cryp-
tography policy that will help to secure vital national interests.1.1  THE TECHNOLOGY CONTEXT OF THE
INFORMATION AGEThe information age is enabled by computing and communicationstechnologies (collectively known as information technologies) whose
rapid evolution is almost taken for granted today.  Computing and com-

munications systems appear in virtually every sector of the economy and
increasingly in homes and other locations.  These systems focus economic

and social activity on informationÑgathering, analyzing, storing, pre-
senting, and disseminating information in text, numerical, audio, image,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYand video formatsÑas a product itself or as a complement to physical ortangible products.1TodayÕs increasingly sophisticated information technologies cover awide range of technical progress:¥  Microprocessors and workstations are increasingly important to the
computing infrastructure of companies and the nation.  Further increases

in speed and computational power today come from parallel or distrib-
uted processing with many microcomputers and processors rather than
faster supercomputers.¥  Special-purpose electronic hardware is becoming easier to develop.
Thus, it may make good sense to build specialized hardware optimized
for performance, speed, or security with respect to particular tasks; such
specialized hardware will in general be better adapted to these purposes
than general-purpose machines applied to the same tasks.¥  Media for transporting digital information are rapidly becoming
faster (e.g., fiber optics instead of coaxial cables), more flexible (e.g., the
spread of wireless communications media), and less expensive (e.g., the
spread of CD-ROMs as a vehicle for distributing digital information).
Thus, it becomes feasible to rely on the electronic transmission of larger
and larger volumes of information and on the storage of such volumes on
ever-smaller physical objects.¥  Convergence of technologies for communications and for comput-
ing.  Today, the primary difference between communications and com-

puting is the distance traversed by data flows:  in communications, the

traversed distance is measured in miles (e.g., two people talking to each
other), while in computing the traversed distance is measured in microns
(e.g., between two subcomponents on a single integrated circuit).  A simi-

lar convergence affects companies in communications and in comput-
ingÑtheir boundaries are blurring, their scopes are changing, and theirproduction processes overlap increasingly.¥  Software is increasingly carrying the burden of providing function-ality in information technology.  In general, software is what gives hard-

ware its functional capabilities, and different software running on the
same hardware can change the functionality of that hardware entirely.
Since software is intangible, it can be deployed widely on a very short1Citations to a variety of press accounts can be found in Computer Science and Telecom-munications Board (CSTB), National Research Council, Information Technology and Manufac-turing:  A Research Agenda,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1993; CSTB, 
Informa-tion Technology in the Service Society:  A Twenty-First Century Lever,
 1993; CSTB, 
Realizing theInformation Future:  The Internet and Beyond,
 1994; CSTB, 
Keeping the Computer and Communica-tions Industry Competitive:  Convergence of Computing, Communications, and Entertainment,
 1995;
and CSTB, The Unpredictable Certainty:  Information Infrastructure Through 2000,
 1996.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE21BOX 1.1Communications and Computing Devicesand the Role of SoftwareCommunications and computing devices can be dedicated to a single purpose ormay serve multiple purposes.  Dedicated single-purpose devices are usually (though

not always) hardware devices whose functionality cannot be easily altered.  Exam-
ples include unprogrammable pocket calculators, traditional telephones, walkie-talk-ies, pagers, fax machines, and ordinary telephone answering machines.A multipurpose device is one whose functionality can be altered by the end user.In some instances, a hardware device may be ÒreprogrammedÓ to perform differentfunctions simply by the physical replacement of a single chip by another chip or by
the addition of a new circuit board.  Open bus architectures and standard hardwareinterfaces such as the PC card are intended to facilitate multipurpose functionality.Despite such interfaces and architectures for hardware, software is the primarymeans for implementing multipurpose functionality in a hardware device.  With
software, physical replacement of a hardware component is unnecessaryÑa newsoftware program is simply loaded and executed.  Examples include personal com-

puters (which do word processing or mathematical calculations, depending on whatsoftware the user chooses to run), programmable calculators (which solve differentproblems, depending on the programming given to them), and even many modern
telephones (which can be programmed to execute functions such as speed dialing).In these instances, the software is the medium in which the expectations of the userare embedded.Today, the lines between hardware and software are blurring.  For example, some
ÒhardwareÓ devices are controlled by programs stored in semi-permanent read-onlymemory.  ÒRead-only memoryÓ (ROM) originally referred to memory for storing in-
structions and data that could never be changed, but this characteristic made ROM-controlled devices less flexible.  Thus, the electronics industry responded with Òread-

onlyÓ memory whose contents take special effort to change (such as exposing thememory chip to a burst of ultraviolet light or sending only a particular signal to aparticular pin on the chip).  The flexibility and cheapness of todayÕs electronic devic-

es make them ubiquitous.  Most homes now have dozens of microprocessors in
coffee makers, TVs, refrigerators, and virtually anything that has a control panel.time scale compared to that of hardware.  Box 1.1 contains more discus-
sion of this point.As these examples suggest, information technologies are ever moreaffordable and ubiquitous.  In all sectors of the economy, they drive de-

mand for information systems; such demand will continue to be strong
and experience significant growth rates.  High-bandwidth and/or wire-

less media are becoming more and more common.  Interest in and use of

the Internet and similar public networks will continue to grow rapidly.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY1.2  TRANSITION TO AN INFORMATION SOCIETYÑ
INCREASING INTERCONNECTIONS AND INTERDEPENDENCEAs the availability and use of computer-based systems grow, so, too,does their interconnection.  The result is a shared infrastructure of infor-

mation, computing, and communications resources that facilitates col-
laboration at a distance, geographic dispersal of operations, and sharing
of data.  With the benefits of a shared infrastructure also come costs.

Changes in the technology base have created more vulnerabilities, as well
as the potential to contain them.  For example, easier access for users in

general implies easier access for unauthorized users.The design, mode of use, and nature of a shared infrastructure createvulnerabilities for all users.  For national institutions such as banking,

new risks arise as the result of greater public exposure through such
interconnections.  For example, a criminal who penetrates one bank inter-

connected to the worldÕs banking system can steal much larger amountsof money than are stored at that one bank.  (Box 1.2 describes a recent

electronic bank robbery.)  Reducing vulnerability to breaches of security

will depend on the ability to identify and authenticate people, systems,
and processes and to assure with high confidence that information is not
improperly manipulated, corrupted, or destroyed.Although society is entering an era abounding with new capabilities,many societal practices today remain similar to those of the 1960s and
1970s, when computing was dominated by large, centralized mainframe
computers.  In the 1980s and 1990s, they have not evolved to reflect the

introduction of personal computers, portable computing, and increas-
ingly ubiquitous communications networks.  Thus, people continue to

relinquish control over substantial amounts of personal information
through credit card transactions, proliferating uses of Social Security num-
bers, and participation in frequent-buyer programs with airlines and
stores.  Organizations implement trivial or no protection for proprietary

data and critical systems, trusting policies to protect portable storage
media or relying on simple passwords to protect information.These practices have endured against a backdrop of relatively modestlevels of commercial and individual risk; for example, the liability of a
credit card owner for credit card fraud perpetrated by another party is
limited by law to $50.  Yet most computer and communications hardware

and software systems are subject to a wide range of vulnerabilities, as
described in Box 1.3.  Moreover, information on how to exploit such vul-

nerabilities is often easy to obtain.  As a result, a large amount of informa-

tion that people say they would like to protect is in fact available through
entirely legal channels (e.g., purchasing a credit report on an individual)
or in places that can be accessed improperly through technical attacks
requiring relatively modest effort.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE23BOX 1.2An Attempted Electronic Theft from CiticorpElectronic money transfers are among the most closely guarded activities in bank-ing.  In 1994, an international group of criminals penetrated Citicorp
Õs computerizedelectronic transfer system and moved about $12 million from legitimate customer
accounts to their own accounts in banks around the world.  According to Citicorp,
this is the first time its computerized cash-management system has been breached.Corporate customers access the system directly to transfer funds for making invest-
ments, paying bills, and extending loans, among other purposes.  The Citicorp sys-
tem moves about $500 billion worldwide each day.  Authority to access the system
is verified with a cryptographic code that only the customer knows.The case began in June 1994, when Vladimir Levin of St. Petersburg, Russia,allegedly accessed Citicorp computers in New York through the international tele-phone network, posing as one of CiticorpÕs customers.  He moved some customer
funds to a bank account in Finland, where an accomplice withdrew the money inperson.  In the next few months, Levin moved various Citicorp customers
Õ funds to
accomplicesÕ personal or business accounts in banks in St. Petersburg, San Fran-
cisco, Tel Aviv, Rotterdam, and Switzerland.Accomplices had withdrawn a total of about $400,000 by August 1994.  By thattime, bank officials and their customers were on alert.  Citicorp detected subsequent

transfers quickly enough to warn the banks into which funds were moved to freezethe destination accounts.  (Bank officials noted that they could have blocked some of
these transfers, but they permitted and covertly monitored them as part of the effort to
identify the perpetrators.)  Other perpetrators were arrested in Tel Aviv and Rotter-
dam; they revealed that they were working with someone in St. Petersburg.  An
examination of telephone company records in St. Petersburg showed that Citicorpcomputers had been accessed through a telephone line at AO Saturn, a softwarecompany.  A person arrested after attempting to make a withdrawal from a frozen

account in San Francisco subsequently identified Levin, who was an AO Saturnemployee. Russia has no extradition treaty with the United States; however, Levintraveled to Britain in March 1995 and was arrested there.  As of September 1995,

proceedings to extradite him for trial in the United States were in progress.Levin allegedly penetrated Citicorp computers using customersÕ user identifica-
tions and passwords.  In each case, Levin electronically impersonated a legitimate

customer, such as a bank or an investment capital firm.  Some investigators suspect
that an accomplice inside Citicorp provided Levin with necessary information; other-wise, it is unclear how he could have succeeded in accessing customer accounts.
He is believed to have penetrated CiticorpÕs computers 40 times in all.  Citicorp says
it has upgraded its systemÕs security to prevent future break-ins.SOURCES:  William Carley and Timothy O
ÕBrien, ÒCyber Caper: How CiticorpSystem Was Raided and Funds Moved Around World,Ó Wall Street Journal,September 12, 1995, p. A1; Saul Hansell, ÒA $10 Million Lesson in the Risksof Electronic Banking,Ó New York Times, August 19, 1995, p. 31.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 1.3Vulnerabilities in Information Systems and NetworksInformation systems and networks can be subject to four generic vulnerabilities:1.  Eavesdropping or data browsing.  By surreptitiously obtaining the confidential
data of a company or by browsing a sensitive file stored on a computer to which onehas obtained improper access, an adversary could be in a position to undercut a
company bid, learn company trade secrets (e.g., knowledge developed through pro-prietary company research) that would eliminate a competitive advantage of thecompany, or obtain the companyÕs client list in order to steal customers.  Moreover,damage can occur independent of the use of stealthÑmany companies would bedamaged if their sensitive data were disclosed, even if they knew that such a disclo-sure had occurred.2.  Clandestine alteration of data.  By altering a company
Õs data clandestinely, anadversary could destroy the confidence of the companyÕs customers in the company,disrupt internal operations of the company, or subject the company to shareholder
litigation.3.  Spoofing.  By illicitly posing as a company, an adversary could place false
orders for services, make unauthorized commitments to customers, defraud clients,
and cause no end of public relations difficulties for the company.  Similarly, an
adversary might pose as a legitimate customer, and a companyÑwith an interest inbeing responsive to user preferences to remain anonymous under a variety of cir-
cumstancesÑcould then find itself handicapped in seeking proper confirmation ofthe customerÕs identity.4.  Denial of service.  By denying access to electronic services, an adversary
could shut down company operations, especially time-critical ones.  On a national
scale, critical infrastructures controlled by electronic networks (e.g., the air trafficcontrol system, the electrical power grid) involving many systems linked to each
other are particularly sensitive.Today, the rising level of familiarity with computer-based systems iscombining with an explosion of experimentation with information and
communications infrastructure in industry, education, health care, gov-
ernment, and personal settings to motivate new uses of and societal ex-
pectations about the evolving infrastructure.  A key feature of the new

environment is connection or exchange: organizations are connecting in-
ternal private facilities to external public ones; they are using public net-
works to create virtual private networks, and they are allowing outsiders
such as potential and actual customers, suppliers, and business allies to
access their systems directly.  One vision of a world of electronic com-

merce and what it means for interconnection is described in Box 1.4.Whereas a traditional national security perspective might call forkeeping people out of sensitive stores of information or communications
networks, national economic and social activity increasingly involves theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE25BOX 1.4Electronic Commerce and the Implications for InterconnectivityA number of reports have addressed the potential nature and impact of electroniccommerce.1  Out of such reports, several common elements can be distilled:
¥  The interconnection of geographically dispersed units into a 
ÒvirtualÓ company.
¥  The linking of customers, vendors, and suppliers through videoconferencing,
electronic data interchange, and electronic networks.¥  The creation of temporary or more permanent strategic alliances for business
purposes.¥A vast increase in the on-line availability of information and information prod-ucts, both free and for a fee, that are useful to individuals and organizations.¥The electronic transaction of retail business, beginning with todayÕs toll-freecatalog shopping and extending to electronic network applications that enable cus-
tomers to:Ñapply for bank loans;Ñorder tangible merchandise (e.g., groceries) for later physical delivery;Ñorder intangible merchandise (e.g., music, movies) for electronic delivery;Ñobtain information and electronic documents (e.g., official documents such asdriverÕs licenses and birth certificates).¥  The creation of a genuinely worldwide marketplace that matches buyers to
sellers largely without intermediaries.¥  New business opportunities for small entrepreneurs that could sell low-value
products to the large numbers of potential customers that an electronic marketplacemight reach.In general, visions of electronic commerce writ large attempt to leverage thecompetitive edge that information technologies can provide for commercial enter-
prises.  Originally used exclusively to facilitate internal communications, informa-
tion technology is now used by corporations to connect directly with their suppliersand business partners.2  In the future, corporate networks will extend all the way to
customers, enabling improvements in customer service and more direct channels forcustomer feedback.  Furthermore, information technologies will facilitate the forma-
tion of ad hoc strategic alliances among diverse enterprises and even among compet-
itors on a short time scale, driven by changes in business conditions that demandprompt action.  This entire set of activities is already well under way.
1See, for example, Cross-Industry Working Team, Electronic Cash, Tokens,and Payments in the National Information Infrastructure, Corporation for Na-tional Research Initiatives, 1895 Preston White Drive, Suite 100, Reston, Vir-ginia 22091-5434 (Internet: info-xiwt@cnri.reston.va.us; Tel: 703/620-8990),
1994; Office of Technology Assessment, Electronic Enterprises: Looking to theFuture, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., July 1994.2For example, in manufacturing, collaborative information technologies canhelp to improve the quality of designs and reduce the cost and time needed torevise designs; product designers will be able to create a ÒvirtualÓ product,
make extensive computer simulations of its behavior without supplying all ofcontinuedCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 1.4continuedits details, and ÒshowÓ it to the customer for rapid feedback.  Networks will
enable the entire manufacturing enterprise to be integrated all along the sup-ply chain, from design shops to truck fleets that deliver the finished products.(See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research
Council, Information Technology and Manufacturing:  A Research Agenda
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995.)In the delivery of services, the more effective use and transmission of infor-mation have had dramatic effects.  Today
Õs air transportation system wouldnot exist without rapid and reliable information flows regarding air trafficcontrol, sales, marketing, maintenance, safety, and logistics planning.  Retail-

ers and wholesalers depend on the rapid collection and analysis of sales datato plan purchasing and marketing activities, to offer more differentiated ser-vices to customers, and to reduce operational costs.  The insurance industry

depends on rapid and reliable information flows to its sales force and tocustomize policies and manage risks.  (See Computer Science and Telecom-
munications Board, National Research Council, Information Technology in theService Society:  A Twenty-First Century Lever, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., 1994.)BOX 1.5Tensions Between Security and OpennessBusinesses have long been concerned about the tension between openness andsecurity.  An environment that is open to everyone is not secure, while an environ-

ment that is closed to everyone is highly secure but not useful.  A number of trends
in business today tend to exacerbate this conflict.  For example:
¥Modern competitive strategies emphasize openness to interactions with po-tential customers and suppliers.  For example, such strategies would demand that a
bank present itself as willing to do business with anyone, everywhere, and at any
time.  However, such strategies also offer potential adversaries a greater chance of
success, because increasing ease of access often facilitates the penetration of securityprotections.¥Many businesses today emphasize decentralized management that pushesdecision-making authority toward the customer and away from the corporate hierar-chy.  Yet security often has been (and is) approached from a centralized perspective.

(For example, access controls are necessarily hierarchical (and thus centralized) ifthey are to be maintained uniformly.)¥Many businesses rely increasingly on highly mobile individuals.  When key
employees were tied to one physical location, it made sense to base security onphysical presence, e.g., to have a user present a photo ID card to an operator at thecentral corporate computer center.  Today, mobile computing and communications

are common, with not even a physical wire to ensure that the person claiming to bean authorized user is accessing a computer from an authorized location or to preventpassive eavesdropping on unencrypted transmissions with a radio scanner.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE27exact opposite: inviting people from around the world to come inÑwithvarying degrees of recognition that all who come in may not be benevo-
lent. Box 1.5 describes some of the tensions between security and open-
ness.  Such a change in expectations and perspective is unfolding in a

context in which controls on system access have typically been deficient,
beginning with weak operating system security.  The distributed and

internetworked communications systems that are emerging raise ques-
tions about protecting information regardless of the path traveled (end-
to-end security), as close to the source and destination as possible.The international dimensions of business and the growing impor-tance of competitiveness in the global marketplace complicate the picture
further.  Although 
ÒmultinationalsÓ have long been a feature of the U.S.
economy, the inherently international nature of communications networks
and the growing capabilities for distributing and accessing information
worldwide are helping many activities and institutions to transcend na-
tional boundaries.  (See Box 1.6.)
At the same time, export markets are at least as important as domesticU.S. markets for a growing number of goods and service producers, in-
cluding producers of information technology products as well as a grow-
ing variety of high- and low-technology products.  The various aspects of

globalizationÑidentifying product and merchandising needs that varyby country; establishing and maintaining employment, customer, sup-
plier, and distribution relationships by country; coordinating activities
that may be dispersed among countries but result in products delivered
to several countries; and so onÑplace new demands on U.S.-based andU.S.-owned information, communication, organizational, and personal
resources and systems.1.3  COPING WITH INFORMATION VULNERABILITY
Solutions to cope with the vulnerabilities described above requireboth appropriate technology and user behavior and are as varied as the
needs of individual users and organizations.  Cryptography
Ña technol-ogy described more fully in Chapter 2 and Appendix CÑis an importantelement of many solutions to information vulnerability that can be used
in a number of different ways.  National cryptography policy
Ñthe focusof this reportÑconcerns how and to what extent government affects thedevelopment, deployment, and use of this important technology.  To date,

public discussion of national cryptography policy has focused on one
particular application of cryptography, namely its use in protecting the
confidentiality of information and communications.Accordingly, consideration of national cryptography policy must takeinto account two fundamental issues:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 1.6International Dimensions of Business and Commerce TodayU.S. firms increasingly operate in a global environment, obtaining goods andservices from companies worldwide, participating in global virtual corporations, and
working as part of international strategic alliances.  One key dimension of increasing
globalization has been the dismantling of barriers to trade and investment.  In the
past 40 years, tariffs among developed countries have been reduced by more than
two-thirds.  After the Uruguay Round reductions are phased in, tariffs in these coun-tries will be under 4%, with 43% of current trade free of any customs duties.While tariffs of developing countries are at higher levels, they have recently be-gun to decline substantially.  After the Uruguay Round, tariffs in these countries willaverage 12.3% by agreement and will be even lower as a result of unilateral reduc-tions.  In response to the reductions in trade barriers, trade has grown rapidly.  From

1950 to 1993, U.S. and world trade grew at an average compound rate of 10%annually.Investment has also grown rapidly in recent years, stimulated by the removal ofrestrictions and by international rules that provide assurances to investors againstdiscriminatory or arbitrary treatment.  U.S. foreign direct investment also has grown
at almost 10% annually during the past 20 years and now totals about half a trillion
dollars.  Foreign direct investment in the United States has risen even faster over thesame periodÑat almost 19% annuallyÑand now also totals almost $500 billion.The expansion of international trade and investment has resulted in a much moreintegrated and interdependent world economy.  For the United States, this has meant
a much greater dependence on the outside world.  More than a quarter of the U.S.
gross domestic product is now accounted for by trade in goods and services and
returns on foreign investment.  Over 11 million jobs are now directly or indirectly
related to our merchandise trade.Because the U.S. economy is mature, the maintenance of a satisfactory rate ofeconomic growth requires that the United States compete vigorously for internation-al markets, especially in the faster growing regions of the world.  Many sectors of our
economy are now highly dependent on export markets.  This is particularly the case
for, but is not limited to, high-technology goods, as indicated in Table 1.1.A second international dimension is the enormous growth in recent years of multi-national enterprises.  Such firms operate across national boundaries, frequently in

multiple countries.  According to the 1993 World Investment Report of the United
TABLE 1.1  Dependence of U.S. Business Sectors on Export MarketsExports as a PercentageArea of Exportof U.S. Output
Electronic computing and parts52
Semiconductors and related devices47
Magnetic and optical recording media40
(includes software products)SOURCE: U.S. Department of Commerce, Commerce News, August 9, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE29Nations, transnational corporations (TNCs) with varying degrees of integration ac-count for about a third of the worldÕs private sector productive assets.The number of TNCs has more than tripled in the last 20 years.  At the outset of
this decade, about 37,000 U.S. firms had a controlling equity interest in some170,000 foreign affiliates.  This does not include nonequity relationships, such as
management contracts, subcontracting, franchising, or strategic alliances.  There are

some 300 TNCs based in the United States and almost 15,000 foreign affiliates, ofwhich some 10,000 are nonbank enterprises.The strategies employed by TNCs vary among firms.  They may be based on trade
in goods and services alone or, more often, involve more complex patterns of inte-grated production, outsourcing, and marketing.  One measure of the extent of inte-
gration by U.S. firms is illustrated by the U.S. Census Bureau, which reported that in
1994, 46% of U.S. imports and 32% of U.S. exports were between related firms.  Of
U.S. exports to Canada and Mexico, 44% were between related parties; for the Euro-pean Union and Japan, the share was 37%.With respect to imports, the shares of related-party transactions were 75.5% forJapan, 47.2% for the European Union, 44.6% for Canada, and 69.2% for Mexico.Among those sectors with the highest levels of interparty trade are data processing
equipment, including computers, and parts and telecommunications equipment,ranging from 50% to 90%.¥If the public information and communications infrastructure con-tinues to evolve with very weak security throughout, reflecting both de-
ployed technology and user behavior, the benefits from cryptography for
confidentiality will be significantly less than they might otherwise be.¥The vulnerabilities implied by weak security overall affect the abil-ity of specific mechanisms such as cryptography to protect not only con-
fidentiality but also the integrity of information and systems and the
availability of systems for use when sought by their users.  Simply pro-

tecting (e.g., encrypting) sensitive information from disclosure can still
leave the rest of a system open to attacks that can undermine the encryp-
tion (e.g., the lack of access controls that could prevent the insertion of
malicious software) or destroy the sensitive information.Cryptography thus must be considered in a wider context.  It is not apanacea, but it is extremely important to ensuring security and can be
used to counter several vulnerabilities.Recognition of the need for system and infrastructure security and de-mand for solutions are growing.  Although demand for solutions has yet to

become widespread, the trend is away from a marketplace in which the
federal government2 was the only meaningful customer.  Growing reliance
2The more general statement is that the market historically involved national govern-ments in several countries as the principal customers.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYon a shared information and communications infrastructure means that allindividuals and organizations should be, and the committee believes will
become, the dominant customers for better security.  That observation is

inherent in the concept of infrastructure as something on which people rely.What may be less obvious is that as visions of ubiquitous access andinterconnection are increasingly realized, individual, organizational, and
governmental needs may become aligned.  Such an alignment would

mark a major change from the past.  Again, sharing of a common infra-

structure is the cause: everyone, individual or organization, public or
private sector, is a user.  As significantly, all of these parties face a multi-
tude of threats to the security of information (Box 1.7).  Consideration of

the nationÕs massive dependence on the public switched telecommunica-tions network, which is one of many components of the information and
communications infrastructure, provides insight into the larger set of
challenges posed by a more complex infrastructure (Box 1.8).To illustrate the broad panorama of stakeholder interests in whichnational cryptography policy is formulated, the next several sections ex-
amine different aspects of society from the standpoint of needs for infor-
mation security.1.4  THE BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE
For purposes of this report, the relationship of U.S. businesses to theinformation society has two main elements.  One element is that of protect-

ing information important to the success of U.S. businesses in a global mar-
ketplace.  The second element is ensuring the nation
Õs continuing ability toexploit U.S. strengths in information technology on a worldwide basis.1.4.1  Protecting Important Business Information
A wide range of U.S. companies operating internationally are threat-ened by foreign information-collection efforts.  The National Counterintelli-

gence Center (NACIC) reports that Òthe U.S. industries that have been thetargets in most cases of economic espionage and other foreign collection
activities include biotechnology; aerospace; telecommunications; computer
hardware/software, advanced transportation and engine technology; ad-
vanced materials and coatings; energy research; defense and armaments
technology; manufacturing processes; and semiconductors.Ó3  Foreign col-
3National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Col-lection and Industrial Espionage, Washington, D.C., July 1995, p. 15.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE31lectors target proprietary business information such as bid, contract, cus-tomer, and strategy information, as well as corporate financial and trade
data.Of all of the information vulnerabilities facing U.S. companies inter-nationally (see Box 1.7), electronic vulnerabilities appear to be the most
significant.  For example, the NACIC concluded that 
Òspecialized techni-cal operations (including computer intrusions, telecommunications tar-
geting and intercept, and private-sector encryption weaknesses) account
for the largest portion of economic and industrial information lost by U.S.
corporations.Ó  The NACIC noted,
Because they are so easily accessed and intercepted, corporate telecom-municationsÑparticularly international telecommunicationsÑprovide ahighly vulnerable and lucrative source for anyone interested in obtain-
ing trade secrets or competitive information.  Because of the increased
usage of these links for bulk computer data transmission and electronicmail, intelligence collectors find telecommunications intercepts cost-
effective. For example, foreign intelligence collectors intercept facsimiletransmissions through government-owned telephone companies, andthe stakes are largeÑapproximately half of all overseas telecommunica-tions are facsimile transmissions. Innovative ÒhackersÓ connected to
computers containing competitive information evade the controls andaccess companiesÕ information. In addition, many American companies
have begun using electronic data interchange, a system of transferring
corporate bidding, invoice, and pricing data electronically overseas.Many foreign government and corporate intelligence collectors find thisinformation invaluable.4Why is electronic information so vulnerable?  The primary reason is
that it is computer readable and thus much more vulnerable to automated
search than are intercepted voice or postal mail transmissions.  Once the

information is collected (e.g., through an existing wiretap or a protocol
analyzer on an Internet router), it is relatively simple for computers to
search streams of electronic information for word combinations of inter-
est (e.g., ÒIBM,Ó Òresearch,Ó and 
ÒsuperconductivityÓ in the same mes-
sage).  As the cost of computing drops, the cost of performing such
4From the National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Eco-nomic Collection and Industrial Espionage, July 1995.  Further, intelligence collections by for-
eign powers are facilitated when a hostile government interested in eavesdropping controlsthe physical environment in which a U.S. company may be operating.  For example, the

U.S. company may be in a nation in which the telecommunications system is under thedirect control of the government.  When a potentially hostile government controls the terri-tory on which a company must operate, many more compromises are possible.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 1.7Threat Sources¥  Foreign national agencies (including intelligence services).  Foreign intelli-
gence operations target key U.S. businesses.  For example, two former directors of
the French intelligence service have confirmed publicly that the French intelligence
service collects economic intelligence information, including classified governmentinformation and information related to or associated with specific companies of in-terest.1  Foreign intelligence agencies may break into facilities such as the foreign
offices of a U.S. company or the hotel suite of a U.S. executive and copy computerfiles from within that facility (e.g., from a laptop computer in a hotel room, or adesktop computer connected to a network in an office).2  Having attained such
access, they can also insert malicious code that will enable future information theft.¥  Disgruntled or disloyal employees that work Òfrom the inside.Ó  Such parties
may collude with outside agents.  Threats involving insiders are particularly perni-

cious because insiders are trusted with critical information that is not available tooutsiders.  Such information is generally necessary to understand the meaning of
various data flows that may have been intercepted, even when those data flows are
received in the clear.¥  Network hackers and electronic vandals that are having fun or making political
statements through the destruction of intellectual property without the intent of theft.
Information terrorists may threaten to bring down an information network unlesscertain demands are met; extortionists may threaten to bring down an informationnetwork unless a ransom is paid.  Disgruntled customers seeking revenge on a com-
pany also fall into this category.¥  Thieves attempting to steal money or resources from businesses.  Such individ-
uals may be working for themselves or acting as part of a larger conspiracy (e.g., inassociation with organized crime).  The spreading of electronic commerce will in-
crease the opportunities for new and different types of fraud, as illustrated by the
large increase in fraud seen as the result of increased electronic filing to the InternalRevenue Service.  Even worse, customers traditionally regarded as the first line of
defense against fraud (because they check their statements and alert the merchants or
banks involved to problems) may become adversaries as they seek to deny a signa-ture on a check or alter the amount of a transaction.It is difficult to know the prevalence of such threats, because many companies donot discuss for the record specific incidents of information theft.  In some cases, they
fear stockholder ire and losses in customer confidence over security breaches; in
others, they are afraid of inspiring Òcopy-catÓ attacks or revealing security weakness-
es.  In still other cases, they simply do not know that they have been the victim of
such theft.  Finally, only a patchwork of state laws apply to the theft of trade secrets

and the like (and not all states have such laws).  There is no federal statute that
protects trade secrets or that addresses commercial information theft, and federalauthorities probing the theft of commercial information must rely on proving viola-
tions of other statutes, such as wire and mail fraud laws, interstate transport of stolenproperty, conspiracy, or computer fraud and abuse laws; as a result, documentationof what would be a federal offense if such a law were present is necessarily spotty.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE33For all of these reasons, what is known on the public record about economic lossesfrom information theft almost certainly understates the true extent of the problem.1Two former directors of the DGSE (the French intelligence service),have publicly stated that one of the DGSEÕs top priorities was to collecteconomic intelligence.  During a September 1991 NBC news program,
Pierre Marion, former DGSE Director, revealed that he had initiated anespionage program against US businesses for the purpose of keeping
France internationally competitive.  Marion justified these actions on
the grounds that the United States and France, although political andmilitary allies, are economic and technological competitors.  During an

interview in March 1993, then DGSE Director Charles Silberzahn statedthat political espionage was no longer a real priority for France but thatFrance was interested in economic intelligence, Òa field which is crucialto the worldÕs evolution.Ó  Silberzahn advised that the French had some
success in economic intelligence but stated that much work is stillneeded because of the growing global economy.  Silberzahn advised

during a subsequent interview that theft of classified information, aswell as information about large corporations, was a long-term FrenchGovernment policy.  These statements were seemingly corroborated by

a DGSE targeting document prepared in late 1989 and leaked anony-mously to the US Government and the press in May 1993.  It alleged
that French intelligence had targeted numerous US Government agen-
cies and corporations to collect economic and industrial information.Industry leaders such as Boeing, General Dynamics, Hughes Aircraft,Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas, and Martin Marietta all were on the list.
Heading the US Government listing was the Office of the US TradeRepresentative.The above unclassified paragraph can be found in the secret version ofAnnual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and IndustrialEspionage, National Counterintelligence Center, Washington, D.C., July 1995.2According to a report from the National Communications System, countriesthat currently have significant intelligence operations against the United Statesfor national security and/or economic purposes include Russia, the PeopleÕsRepublic of China, Cuba, France, Taiwan, South Korea, India, Pakistan, Israel,Syria, Iran, Iraq, and Libya.  ÒAll of the intelligence organizations listed [above]have the capability to target telecommunications and information systems for
information or clandestine attacks.  The potential for exploitation of such
systems may be significantly larger.Ó  See National Communications System
(NCS), The Electronic Intrusion Threat to National Security and EmergencyPreparedness Telecommunications:  An Awareness Document
, 2nd ed., NCS,Alexandria, Va., December 5, 1994, pp. 2-20.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 1.8Vulnerability of the Public Switched Telecommunications NetworkThe nationÕs single most critical national-level component of information infra-structure vulnerable to compromise is the public switched telecommunications net-
work (PSTN).  The PSTN provides information transport services for geographically
dispersed and national assets such as the banking system and financial markets,1 and
the air traffic control system.2  Even the traditional military
3 is highly dependent on
the PSTN.  Parties connected to the PSTN are therefore vulnerable to failure of the
PSTN itself and to attacks transmitted over the PSTN.The fundamental characteristic of the PSTN from the standpoint of informationvulnerability is that it is a highly interconnected network of heterogeneously con-trolled and operated computer-based switching stations.  Network connectivity im-
plies that an attackerÑwhich might range from a foreign government to a teen-agedhackerÑcan in principle connect to any network site (including sites of critical im-portance for the entire network) from any other network site (which may be geo-graphically remote and even outside the United States).4  The sites of critical impor-tance for the PSTN are the switching nodes that channel the vast majority oftelecommunications traffic in the United States.  Access to these critical nodes, and
to other switching facilities, is supposed to be limited to authorized personnel, but in
practice these nodes are often vulnerable to penetration.  Once in place on a critical
node, hostile and unauthorized users are in a position to disrupt the entire network.The systemic vulnerabilities of the PSTN are the result of many factors.  One is the
increasing accessibility of network software to third parties other than the commoncarriers, resulting from the Federal Communications Commission requirement thatthe PSTN support open, equal access for third-party providers of enhanced servicesas well as for the common carriers; such accessibility offers intruders many opportu-nities to capture user information, monitor traffic, and remotely manipulate the net-
work.  A second reason is that service providers are allowing customers more directaccess to network elements, in order to offer customer-definable services such as callforwarding.  A third reason is that advanced services made possible by Signaling

System 7 are dependent on a common, out-of-band signaling system for control ofcalls through a separate packet-switched data network that adds to network vulner-ability.5  Finally, space-based PSTN components (i.e.,  satellites) have few control
centers, are susceptible to electronic attack, and generally do not encrypt their com-mand channels, making the systems vulnerable to hackers copying their commandsand disrupting service.6  These conditions imply that the PSTN is a system that would
benefit from better protection of system integrity and availability.Threats to the PSTN affect all national institutions whose ability to function fullyand properly depends on being able to communicate, be it through telephony, data
transmission, video, or all of these.  Indeed, many data networks operated 
ÒprivatelyÓby large national corporations or national institutions such as those described aboveare private only in the sense that access is supposed to be limited to corporate pur-
poses; in fact, national institutions or corporations generally use all forms of commu-nications, including those physically carried by the PSTN.7  However, the physical
and computational infrastructure of these networks is in general owned by the tele-
communications service provider, and this infrastructure is part of the larger PSTNinfrastructure.  Thus, like the Internet, the 
ÒprivateÓ data network of a national corpo-
ration is in general not physically independent of the PSTN.  Similarly, it is depen-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE35dence on the PSTN that has led to failures in the air traffic control system and impor-tant financial markets:¥  In January 1991, the accidental severing of an AT&T fiber-optic cable in New-
ark, New Jersey, led to the disruption of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air
traffic control communications in the Boston-Washington corridor and the shutdownof the New York Mercantile Exchange and several commodities exchanges.  In May1991, the severing of a fiber-optic cable led to the shutdown of four of the FAAÕs 20major air traffic control centers with Òmassive operational impact.Ó8¥  The 1991 failure of a PSTN component in New York caused the loss of connec-
tivity between a major securities house and the Securities Industry Automation Cor-
poration, resulting in an inability to settle the dayÕs trades over the network.9Examples of small-scale activities by the computer ÒundergroundÓ against the
PSTN demonstrate capabilities that, if coupled to an intent to wage serious informa-tion warfare against the United States, pose a serious threat to the U.S. informationinfrastructure:¥  In 1990, several members of the Legion of Doom
Õs Atlanta branch werecharged with penetrating and disrupting telecommunications network elements.
They were accused of planting Òtime bombÓ programs in network elements in Den-
ver, Atlanta, and New Jersey; these were designed to shut down major switchinghubs but were defused by telephone carriers before causing damage.10¥  Members of a group known as MOD were indicted on July 8, 1992, on 11
accounts.  It is significant that they appear to have worked as a team.  Among their
alleged activities were developing and unleashing Òprogrammed attacksÓ (see be-
low) on telephone company computers and accessing telephone company comput-ers to create new circuits and add services with no billing records.11¥  Reported (but not well documented) is a growing incidence of 
Òprogrammedattacks.Ó12  These have been detected in several networks and rely on customized
software targeting specific types of computers or network elements.  They are rarely

destructive, but rather seek to add or modify services.  ÒThe capability illustrated bythis category of attacks has not fully matured.  However, if a coordinated attack using
these types of tools were directed at the PSTN with a goal of disrupting national
security/emergency preparedness (NS/EP) telecommunications, the result could besignificant.Ó13  (The same point probably applies to the goal of disrupting other kinds
of telecommunications beyond those used for NS/EP.)A number of reports and studies14 have called attention to the vulnerability of
components of the national telecommunications infrastructure.1These private networks for banking include Fedwire (operated by the Fed-eral Reserve banks), the Clearinghouse for Interbank Payment Systems (CHIPS;
operated by New York Clearinghouse, an association of money center banks),the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT; aninternational messaging system that carries instructions for wire transfers be-
tween pairs of correspondent banks), and the Automated Clearing House (ACH)continuedCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 1.8 continuedsystems for domestic transfers, typically used for routine smaller purchasesand payments.  In the 1980s, several U.S. banks aggressively developed global
networks with packet switches, routers, and so on, to interconnect their localand wide area networks; or, they used third-party service providers to inter-
connect.  In the 1990s, there are signs that U.S. international banks are mov-
ing to greater use of carrier-provided or hybrid networks because of the avail-ability of virtual private networks from carriers.  Carrier-provided networks are

more efficient than networks built on top of dedicated leased lines, becausethey can allocate demand dynamically among multiple customers.2The air traffic control system uses leased lines to connect regional air trafficcontrol centers.3Over 95% of U.S. military and intelligence community voice and data com-munications are carried over facilities owned by public carriers.  (See Joint

Security Commission, Redefining Security: A Report to the Secretary of De-fense and the Director of Central Intelligence, February 28, 1994, Chapter 8.)Of course, the 95% figure includes some noncritical military communications;
however, only 30% of the telecommunications networks that would be usedduring wartime operate in the classified environment (and are presumablymore secure), while the other 70% are based on the use of unclassified facili-
ties of public carriers.  See Richard Powers, 
Information Warfare:  A CSI
Special Report, Computer Security Institute, Washington, D.C., Fall 1995.4Clifford Stoll, The CuckooÕs Egg, Pocket Books, New York, 1989.5National Research Council, Growing Vulnerability of the Public SwitchedNetworks: Implications for National Security and Emergency Preparedness (NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., 1989), p. 36; Reliability and Vulnerability
Working Group, Telecommunications Policy Committee, Information Infrastructure
Task Force, Reliability and Vulnerability of the NII: Capability Assessments,from the National Communications System home page at http://164.117.147.223/nc-ia/html.6Reliability and Vulnerability Working Group, Telecommunications PolicyCommittee, Information Infrastructure Task Force, Reliability and Vulnerabilityof the NII: Capability Assessments, from the National Communications Systemhome page at http://164.117.147.223/nc-ia/html.7Both shared circuits and private networks are expected to grow dramaticallyin the next several years.  See, for example, Michael Csenger, 
ÒPrivate LinesDead? DonÕt Buy Those Flowers Just Yet,Ó Network World, May 1, 1995, p. 1.8Software Engineering Notes, Volume 17, January 1992, as cited in Peter G.Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1995, p. 17.9See Office of Technology Assessment, U.S. Congress, U.S. Banks and Inter-national TelecommunicationsÑBackground Paper, OTA-BP-TCT-100, U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., September 1992, pp. 32-33.10National Communications System (NCS), The Electronic Intrusion Threat toNational Security and Emergency Preparedness Telecommunications:  An AwarenessDocument, 2nd ed., NCS, Alexandria, Va., December 5, 1994, p. 2-5.11NCS, The Electronic Intrusion Threat to National Security and EmergencyPreparedness Telecommunications, 1994, pp. 2-8 to 2-9.12NCS, The Electronic Intrusion Threat to National Security and EmergencyPreparedness Telecommunications, 1994, p. 2-6.13NCS, The Electronic Intrusion Threat to National Security and EmergencyPreparedness Telecommunications, 1994, p. 2-6.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE3714Joint Security Commission, Redefining Security: A Report to the Secretaryof Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence, Washington, D.C., Febru-ary 28, 1994; National Research Council, Growing Vulnerability of the PublicSwitched Networks: Implications for National Security and Emergency Pre-paredness, 1989; NCS, The Electronic Intrusion Threat to National Securityand Emergency Preparedness Telecommunications, 1994; Reliability and Vul-nerability Working Group, Telecommunications Policy Committee, Informa-tion Infrastructure Task Force, Reliability and Vulnerability of the NII: Capabil-ity Assessments, from the National Communications System home page athttp://164.117.147.223/nc-ia/html.searches drops.5  The threat posed by automated search, coupled with the
sensitivity of certain communications that are critical for nongovernment
users, is at the root of nongovernment demand for security.6Note that solutions for coping with information-age vulnerabilitiesmay well create new responsibilities for businesses.  For example, busi-

nesses may have to ensure that the security measures they take are appro-
priate for the information they are protecting, and/or that the informa-
tion they are protecting remains available for authorized use.  Failure to

discharge these responsibilities properly may result in a set of liabilities
that these businesses currently do not face.5As a rough rule of thumb, Martin Hellman estimates that 10 billion (1010) words can besearched for $1.  This estimate is based on an experiment in which Hellman used the Unix
utility program ÒfgrepÓ to search a 1 million (10
6) character file for a specific string of 10characters known to be at the end of the file and nowhere else.  It took the NeXT worksta-
tion on which this experiment was run approximately 1 second to find these last 10 charac-ters. Since there are approximately 105 seconds in a day and 10
3 days (about 3 years) in the
useful life of the workstation, it can search roughly 1013 over its life.  Since such a worksta-
tion is worth on the order of $1,000 today, this works out to 1010 words searched for $1.
(With the use of specialized hardware, this cost could be reduced significantly.  For ex-

ample, in the 1976 Book IV of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Report, R.L.Garwin describes the use of Òmatch registersÓ to efficiently implement queries against a
database; see Frank Church et al., U.S. Congress, Senate Select Committee to Study Govern-mental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, U.S. Government Printing Office,Washington, D.C., 1976, Volume 4.)6Other noncomputer-based technology for the clandestine gathering of information iswidely available on the retail market.  In recent years, concern over the ready availability of
such equipment has grown.  See, for example, Ross E. Milloy, 
ÒSpying Toys for Adults orSupplies for Crimes?,Ó New York Times, August 28, 1995, p. A10; Pam Belluck, ÒA Shadowover the Spy-Shop Business,Ó New York Times, September 22, 1995, p. B3; and James C.McKinley, Jr., ÒU.S. Agents Raid Stores in 24 Cities to Seize Spy Gear,Ó New York Times,April 6, 1995, p. A1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYAppendix I of this report elaborates issues of information vulnerabil-ity in the context of key industries such as banking and financial services,
health care, manufacturing, the petroleum industry, pharmaceuticals, the
entertainment industry, and government.1.4.2  Ensuring the Nation
Õs Ability to ExploitGlobal MarketsWith the increasing globalization of business operations, informationtechnology plays a key role in maintaining the competitive strengths of
U.S. business.  In particular, U.S. businesses have proven adept at exploit-

ing information and information technologies to create new market niches
and expand old ones.  This pattern has deep roots.  For example, begin-

ning in the 1960s, American Airlines pioneered in computerized reserva-
tions systems and extended use of the information captured and stored in
such systems, generating an entire new business that is more profitable
than air transport services.  More recently, creative uses of information

technology have advanced U.S. leadership in the production of entertain-
ment products (e.g., movies and videos, recorded music, on-line services)
for the world.U.S. innovation in using information technology reflects in part theeconomic vitality that makes new technology affordable.  It also reflects

proximity to the research and production communities that supply key
information technology products, communities with which a variety of
U.S. industries have successfully exchanged talent, communicated their
needs as customers, and collaborated in the innovation process.  In other

words, it is not an accident that innovation in both use and production of
information technology has blossomed in the United States.The business advantages enjoyed by U.S. companies that use infor-mation technology are one important reason that the health of U.S. com-
puter, telecommunications, and information industries is important to
the economy as a whole.  A second important reason is the simple fact

that the U.S. information technology sector (the set of industries that sup-
ply information technology goods and services) is the worldÕs strongest.7The industry has an impressive record of product innovation; key U.S.7For example, a staff study by the U.S. International Trade Commission found that 8 ofthe worldÕs top 10 applications software vendors, 7 of the worldÕs top 10 systems softwarevendors, the top 5 systems integration firms, and 8 of the top 10 custom programming firmsare U.S. firms; the top 9 global outsourcing firms have headquarters in the United States.
See Office of Industries, U.S. International Trade Commission, Global Competitiveness of theU.S. Computer Software and Service Industries, Staff Research Study #21, Washington, D.C.,June 1995, Chapter 5.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE39products are de facto world standards; U.S. marketing and distributioncapabilities for software products are unparalleled; and U.S. companies
have considerable strengths in the manufacture of specialized semicon-
ductor technologies and other key components.  A strong information

technology sector makes a significant contribution to the U.S. balance of
payments and is responsible for large numbers of high-paying jobs.  These

strengths establish a firm foundation for continued growth in sales for
U.S. information technology products and services as countries world-
wide assimilate these technologies into their economies.Finally, because of its technological leadership the United Statesshould be better positioned to extend that lead, even if the specific ben-
efits that may result are not known in advance.  The head start in learning

how to use information technology provides a high baseline on which
U.S. individuals and organizations can build.The committee believes that information technology is one of a fewhigh-technology areas (others might include aerospace and electronics)
that play a special role in the economic health of the nation, and that
leadership in this area is one important factor underlying U.S. economic
strength in the world today.8  To the extent that this belief is valid, the
economic dimension of national security and perhaps even traditional
national security itself may well depend critically on a few key industries
that are significant to military capabilities, the industrial base, and the
overall economic health of the nation.  Policy that acts against the health

and global viability of these industries or that damages the ability of the
private sector to exploit new markets and identify niches globally thus
deserves the most careful scrutiny.Because it is inevitable that other countries will expand their installedinformation technology bases and develop their own innovations and8The committee acknowledges that there is a wide range of judgment among responsibleeconomists on this matter.  Some argue that the economy is so diverse that the fate of a
single industry or even a small set of industries has a relatively small effect on broader
economic trends.  Others argue that certain industries are important enough to warrant
subsidy or industrial policy to promote their interests.  The committee discussed this spe-
cific issue to a considerable extent and found a middle ground between these two ex-
tremesÑthat information technology is one important industry among others, and that thehealth and well-being of that industry are important to the nation.  This position is also
supported by the U.S. government, which notes that telecommunications and computer
hardware/software are among a number of industries that are of Òstrategic interest to theUnited States . . . because they produce classified products for the government, producedual use technology used in both the public and private sectors, and are responsible for
leading-edge technologies critical to maintaining U.S. economic securityÓ (National Coun-
terintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and IndustrialEspionage, Washington, D.C., July 1995, p. 15).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYentrepreneurial strengths, U.S. leadership is not automatic.  Already, evi-
dence of such development is available, as these nations build on the
falling costs of underlying technologies (e.g., microprocessors, aggregate
communications bandwidth) and worldwide growth in relevant skills.
The past three decades of information technology history provide enough
examples of both successful first movers and strategic missteps to suggest
that U.S. leadership can be either reinforced or undercut: leadership is an
asset, and it is sensitive to both public policy and private action.Public and private factors affecting the competitive health of U.S.information technology producers are most tightly coupled in the arena
of foreign trade.9  U.S. producers place high priority on ease of access to
foreign markets.  That access reflects policies imposed by U.S. and foreign

governments, including governmental controls on what can be exported
to whom.  Export controls affect foreign trade in a variety of hardware,

software, and communications systems.10  They are the subject of chronic
complaints from industry, to which government officials often respond
by pointing to other, industry-centered explanations (e.g., deficiencies in
product design or merchandising) for observed levels of foreign sales and
market shares.  Chapter 4 addresses export controls in the context of

cryptography and national cryptography policy.1.5  INDIVIDUAL AND PERSONAL INTERESTS IN PRIVACY
The emergence of the information age affects individuals as well asbusinesses and other organizations.  As numerous reports argue, the

nationÕs information infrastructure promises many opportunities for self-education, social exchange, recreation, personal business, cost-effective
delivery of social programs, and entrepreneurship.11  Yet the same tech-
9Of course, many intrafirm and intraindustry factors shape competitive strength, such asgood management, adequate financing, good fit between products and consumer prefer-ences, and so on.10See, for example, John Harvey et al., A Common-Sense Approach to High-Technology Ex-port Controls, Center for International Security and Arms Control, Stanford University,Stanford, Calif., March 1995; National Research Council, Finding Common Ground: U.S. Ex-port Controls in a Changed Global Environment, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,1991; Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council, Global Trends inComputer Technology and Their Impact on Export Control, National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C., 1988.11See, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), NationalResearch Council, The Unpredictable Certainty: Information Infrastructure Through 2000, Na-tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1996; CSTB, White Papers:  The Unpredictable Cer-
tainty, 1996; and CSTB, The Changing Nature of Telecommunications/Information Infrastructure,1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE41nologies that enable such benefits may also convey unwanted side effects.Some of those can be considered automated versions of problems seen in
the paper world; others are either larger in scale or different in kind.  For

individuals, the area relevant to this report is privacy and the protection
of personal information.  Increasing reliance on electronic commerce and

the use of networked communication for all manner of activities suggest
that more information about more people will be stored in network-acces-
sible systems and will be communicated more broadly and more often,
thus raising questions about the security of that information.Privacy is generally regarded as an important American value, a rightwhose assertion has not been limited to those Òwith something to hide.ÓIndeed, assertion of the right to privacy as a matter of principle (rather
than as an instrumental action) has figured prominently in U.S. political
and social history; it is not merely abstract or theoretical.In the context of an information age, an individualÕs privacy can beaffected on two levels: privacy in the context of personal transactions
(with businesses or other institutions and with other individuals), and
privacy vis-‹-vis governmental units.  Both levels are affected by the avail-
ability of tools, such as cryptography in the context of information and
communications systems, that can help to preserve privacy.  Today
Õs in-formation security technology, for example, makes it possible to maintain
or even raise the cost of collecting information about individuals.  It also

provides more mechanisms for government to help protect that informa-
tion.  The Clinton Administration has recognized concerns about the need

to guard individual privacy, incorporating them into the security and
privacy guidelines of its Information Infrastructure Task Force.12  These
guidelines represent an important step in the process of protecting indi-
vidual privacy.1.5.1  Privacy in an Information Economy
Today, the prospect of easier and more widespread collection and useof personal data as a byproduct of ordinary activities raises questions
about inappropriate activities by industry, nosy individuals, and/or
criminal elements in society.  Criminals may obtain sensitive financial

information to defraud individuals (credit card fraud, for example,
amounts to approximately $20 per card per year).  Insurance companies

may use health data collected on individuals to decide whether to pro-
vide or deny health insuranceÑputting concerns about business profit-12Information Infrastructure Task Force, National Information Infrastructure Security Is-sues Forum, NII Security: The Federal Role, Washington, D.C., June 5, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYability in possible conflict with individual and public health needs.  On
the other hand, much of the personal data in circulation is willingly di-
vulged by individuals for specific purposes; the difficulty is that once
shared, such information is available for additional uses.  Controlling the
further dissemination of personal data is a function both of procedures
for how information should be used and of technology (including but not
limited to cryptography) and procedures for restricting access to those
authorized.Given such considerations, individuals in an information age maywish to be able to:¥Keep specific information private.  Disclosure of information of a per-sonal nature that could be embarrassing if known, whether or not such
disclosure is legal, is regarded as an invasion of privacy by many people.
A letter to Ann Landers from a reader described his inadvertent eaves-
dropping on some very sensitive financial transactions being conducted
on a cordless telephone.13  A staff member of this study committee has
heard broadcasts of conversations that apparently emanate from a next-
door baby monitor whose existence has been forgotten.  Home banking

services using telephone lines or network connections and personal com-
puters will result in the flow on public networks of large amounts of
personal information regarding finances.  Even the ad copy in some of

todayÕs consumer catalogues contains references to information securitythreats.14¥Ensure that a party with whom they are transacting business is indeedthe party he or she claims to be.  Likewise, they may seek to authenticate
their own identity with confidence that such authentication will be ac-
cepted by other parties, and that anyone lacking such authentication will
be denied the ability to impersonate them.15  Such a capability is needed
13Ann Landers, ÒAnn Landers,Ó Washington Post, Creators Syndicate, October 20, 1995, p.D5.14For example, a catalogue from Comtrad Industries notes that Òburglars use ÔCode Grab-bersÕ to open electric garage doors and break into homes,
Ó defining 
Òcode grabbersÓ as
Òdevices that can record and play back the signal produced from your garage door remotecontrolÓ (Comtrad Industries catalogue, 1995, p. 20).  The Herrington catalogue advertises
the ÒEnigmaÓ phone scrambler by noting that 
Ò[a] recent Wall Street Journal article docu-
ments the increasing acceptance and prevalence of industrial espionageÓ and mentions as
an Òexample of the alarming intrusion of the federal government into citizensÕ private
livesÓ the fact that 
Òthe FBI petitioned Congress to further expand its wiretapping author-ityÓ (Herrington catalogue, Winter 1996, p. 13).  Note that both of these mail-order firms
cater to mainstream consumer sentiment.15For example, a journalist who had reported on the trafficking of illegally copied soft-ware on America Online was the victim of hackers who assumed his on-line identity,thereby intercepting his e-mail messages and otherwise impersonating him.  See Peter
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE43to transfer money among mutual funds with a telephone call or to mini-mize unauthorized use of credit card accounts.16  In an electronic domain
without face-to-face communications or recognizable indicators such as
voices and speech patterns (as used today in telephone calls), forgery of
identity becomes increasingly easy.¥Prevent the false repudiation of agreed-to transactions.  It is undesirable
for a party to a transaction to be able to repudiate (deny) his agreement to
the terms of the transaction.  For example, an individual may agree to pay

a certain price for a given product; he or she should not then be able to
deny having made that agreement (as he or she might be tempted to do
upon finding a lower price elsewhere).¥Communicate anonymously (i.e., carry out the opposite of authenti-
cated communication).  Individuals may wish to communicate anony-

mously to criticize the government or a supervisor, report illegal or un-
ethical activity without becoming further involved, or obtain assistance
for a problem that carries a social stigma.  In other instances, they may

simply wish to speak freely without fear of social reprisal or for the enter-
tainment value of assuming a new digital identity in cyberspace.¥Ensure the accuracy of data relevant to them.  Many institutions such
as banks, financial institutions, and hospitals keep records on individuals.
These individuals often have no personal control of the records, even
though the integrity of the data in these records can be of crucial signifi-
cance.  Occasional publicity attests to instances of the inaccuracy of such

data (e.g., credit records) and to the consequences for individuals.Practical safeguards for privacy such as those outlined above may bemore compelling than abstract or principled protection of a right to pri-
vacy.Lewis, ÒSecurity Is Lost in Cyberspace,Ó New York Times, February 22, 1995, p. D1.  Other
cases of Òstolen identitiesÓ have been reported in the press, and while these cases remain
relatively isolated, they are still a matter of public concern.  Thieves forge signatures and
impersonate the identities of law-abiding citizens to steal money from bank accounts and to
obtain credit cards in the name of those citizens; see Charles Hall, ÒA Personal Approach toStealing,Ó Washington Post, April 1, 1996, p. A1.16For example, a recent press article calls attention to security concerns raised by the easeof access to 401(k) retirement accounts (for which there is no cap on the liability incurred ifa third party with unauthorized access transfers funds improperly).  See Timothy
Middleton, ÒWill Thieves Crack Your Automated Nest Egg?,Ó New York Times, March 10,1996, Business Section, p. 10.  Another article describes a half-dozen easy-to-apply methodsthat can be used by criminals to undertake fraud.  See Albert Crenshaw, 
ÒCreative CreditCard Crooks Draw High-Tech Response,Ó Washington Post, August 6, 1995, Business Sec-tion, p. H1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY1.5.2  Privacy for Citizens
Public protection of privacy has been less active in the United Statesthan in other countries, but the topic is receiving increasing attention.  In

particular, it has become an issue in the political agenda of people and
organizations that have a wide range of concerns about the role and per-
formance of government at all levels; it is an issue that attracts advocates
from across the spectrum of political opinion.  The politicization of pri-

vacy may inhibit the orderly consideration of relevant policy, including
cryptography policy, because it revolves around the highly emotional
issue of trust in government.  The trust issue surfaced in the initial criti-

cisms of the Clipper chip initiative proposal in 1993 (Chapter 5) and con-
tinues to color discussion of privacy policy generally and cryptography
policy specifically.To many people, freedom of expression and association, protectionagainst undue governmental, commercial, or public intrusion into their
personal affairs, and fair treatment by various authorities are concerns
shaped by memories of highly publicized incidents in which such rights
were flouted.17  It can be argued that such incidents were detectable and
correctable precisely because they involved government units that were
obligated to be publicly accountableÑand indeed, these incidentsprompted new policies and procedures as well as greater public vigi-
lance.  It is also easy to dismiss them as isolated instances in a social

system that for the most part works well.  But where these episodes

involve government, many of those skeptical about government believe
that they demonstrate a capacity of government to violate civil liberties of17Some incidents that are often cited include the surveillance of political dissidents, suchas Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, and the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Commit-tee in the mid to late 1960s; the activities of the Nixon ÒplumbersÓ in the late 1960s, includ-
ing the harassment and surveillance of sitting and former government officials and journal-ists and their associates in the name of preventing leaks of sensitive national securityinformation; U.S. intelligence surveillance of the international cable and telephone commu-
nications of U.S. citizens from the early 1940s through the early 1970s in support of FBI andother domestic law enforcement agencies; and the creation of FBI dossiers on opponents ofthe Vietnam War in the mid-1960s.  The description of these events is taken largely from

Frank J. Donner, The Age of Surveillance, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1980 (surveillance ofpolitical dissidents, pp. 244-248; plumbers, pp. 248-252; FBI dossiers on antiwar protesters,pp. 252-256; NSA surveillance, pp. 276-277).  Donner
Õs book documents many of theseevents.  See also 
Final Report of the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operationswith Respect to Intelligence Activities, Book II, April 26, 1974, U.S. Government Printing Of-fice, Washington, D.C., p. 12.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE45Americans who are exercising their constitutional rights.18  This percep-
tion is compounded by attempts to justify past incidents as having been
required for purposes of national security.  Such an approach both limits

public scrutiny and vitiates policy-based protection of personal privacy.It is hard to determine with any kind of certainty the prevalence of thesentiments described in this section.  By some measures, over half of the

public is skeptical about government in general,19 but whether that skep-ticism translates into widespread public concern about government sur-
veillance is unclear.  The committee believes that most people acting as

private individuals feel that their electronic communications are secure
and do not generally consider it necessary to take special precautions
against threats to the confidentiality of those communications.  These

attitudes reflect the fact that most people, including many who are highly
knowledgeable about the risks, do not give much conscious thought to
these issues in their day-to-day activities.At the same time, the committee acknowledges the concerns of manylaw-abiding individuals about government surveillance.  It believes that

such concerns and the questions they raise about individual rights and
government responsibilities must be taken seriously.  It would be inap-

propriate to dismiss such individuals as paranoid or overly suspicious.
Moreover, even if only a minority is worried about government surveil-
lance, it is an important consideration, given the nationÕs history as a18For example, at the 4th Conference on Computers, Freedom, and Privacy in Chicago,Illinois, held in 1994, a government speaker asked the audience if they were more con-
cerned about government abuse and harassment or about criminal activity that might bedirected at them.  An overwhelming majority of the audience indicated greater concern
about the first possibility.  For recent accounts that give the flavor of concerns about malfea-

sance by law enforcement officials, see Ronald Smothers, ÒAtlanta Holds Six Policemen inCrackdown,Ó New York Times, September 7, 1995, p. 9; George James, ÒPolice Officer IsArrested on Burglary Charges in Sting Operation,Ó New York Times, September 7, 1995,p. B5; Kenneth B. Noble, ÒMany Complain of Bias in Los Angeles Police,Ó New York Times,September 4, 1995, p. 11; Kevin Sack, ÒRacism of a Rogue Officer Casts Suspicion on PoliceNationwide,Ó New York Times, September 4, 1995, p. 1; Gordon Witkin, ÒWhen the BadGuys Are Cops,Ó U.S. News & World Report, September 11, 1995, p. 20; Barry Tarlow, ÒDoingthe Fuhrman Shuffle,Ó Washington Post, August 27, 1995, p. C2; and David W. Dunlap,ÒF.B.I. Kept Watch on AIDS Group During Protest Years,Ó New York Times, May 16, 1995, p.B3.19For example, a national Harris poll in January 1994 asked ÒWhich type of invasions ofprivacy worry you the most in America todayÑactivities of government agencies or busi-nesses?Ó  Fifty-two percent said that government agencies were their greater worry, while
40% selected business.  See Center for Social and Legal Research, 
Privacy & American Busi-ness, Volume 1(3), Hackensack, N.J., 1994, p. 7.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYdemocracy,20 for determining whether and how access to and use of cryp-
tography may be considered a citizenÕs right (Chapter 7).1.6  SPECIAL NEEDS OF GOVERNMENT
Government encompasses many functions that generate or dependon information, and current efforts to reduce the scope and size of gov-
ernment depend heavily on information technology.  In many areas of

government, the information and information security needs resemble
those of industry (see Appendix I).  Government also has important re-

sponsibilities beyond those of industry, including those related to public
safety.  For two of the most important and least understood in detail, law

enforcement and national security, the need for strong information secu-
rity has long been recognized.Domestic law enforcement authorities in our society have two funda-mental responsibilities: preventing crime and prosecuting individuals
who have committed crimes.  Crimes committed and prosecuted are more

visible to the public than crimes prevented (see Chapter 3).The following areas relevant to law enforcement require high levelsof information security:¥  Prevention of information theft from businesses and individuals, consis-
tent with the transformation of economic and social activities outlined
above.¥  Tactical law enforcement communications
.  Law enforcement officials
working in the field need secure communications.  At present, police

scanners available at retail electronics stores can monitor wireless com-20Protecting communications from government surveillance is a time-honored techniquefor defending against tyranny.  A most poignant example is the U.S. insistence in 1945 that

the postwar Japanese constitution include protection against government surveillance ofthe communications of Japanese citizens.  In the aftermath of the Japanese surrender in
World War II, the United States drafted a constitution for Japan.  The initial U.S. draft

contained a provision saying that Ò[n]o censorship shall be maintained, nor shall the se-crecy of any means of communication be violated.Ó  The Japanese response to this provision
was a revised provision stating that Ò[t]he secrecy of letter and other means of communica-tion is guaranteed to all of the people, provided that necessary measures to be taken for themaintenance of public peace and order, shall be provided by law.Ó  General Douglas
MacArthur, who was supervising the drafting of the new Japanese constitution, insisted
that the original provision regarding communications secrecy and most other provisions ofthe original U.S. draft be maintained.  The Japanese agreed, this time requesting only minor
changes in the U.S. draft and accepting fully the original U.S. provision on communications
secrecy.  See Osamu Nishi, 
Ten Days Inside General Headquarters (GHQ): How the OriginalDraft of the Japanese Constitution Was Written in 1946, Seibundo Publishing Co. Ltd., Tokyo,1989.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE47munications channels used by police; criminals eavesdropping on suchcommunications can receive advance warning of police responding to
crimes being committed.¥  Efficient use by law enforcement officials of the large amounts of informa-
tion compiled on criminal activity.  Getting the most use from such informa-
tion implies that it be remotely accessible and not be improperly modified
(assuming its accuracy and proper context, a requirement that in itself
leads to much controversy21).¥  Reliable authentication of law enforcement officials.  Criminals have
been known to impersonate law enforcement officials for nefarious pur-
poses, and the information age presents additional opportunities.In the domain of national security, traditional missions involve pro-tection against military threats originating from other nation-states and
directed against the interests of the United States or its friends and allies.
These traditional missions require strong protection for vital information:¥  U.S. military forces require secure communications.  Without cryp-
tography and other information security technologies in the hands of
friendly forces, hostile forces can monitor the operational plans of friendly
forces to gain an advantage.22¥  Force planners must organize and coordinate flows of supplies,
personnel, and equipment.  Such logistical coordination involves data-

bases whose integrity and confidentiality as well as remote access must
be maintained.¥  Sensitive diplomatic communications between the United States
and its representatives or allies abroad, and/or between critical elements21See, for example, U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO), National Crime InformationCenter: Legislation Needed to Deter Misuse of Criminal Justice Information, GAO/T-GGD-93-41,GAO, Washington, D.C., 1993.22For example, the compromise of the BLACK code used by Allied military forces inWorld War II enabled German forces in Africa in 1942, led by General Erwin Rommel, todetermine the British order of battle (quantities, types, and locations of forces), estimateBritish supply and morale problems, and know the tactical plans of the British.  The com-

promise of one particular message enabled Rommel to thwart a critical British counterat-tack.  In July of that year, the British switched to a new code, thus denying Rommel an
important source of strategic intelligence.  Rommel was thus surprised at the Battle of

Alamein, widely regarded as a turning point in the conflict in the African theater.  See
David Kahn, The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing, MacMillan, New York, 1967, pp.472-477.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYof the U.S. government, must be protected as part of the successful con-duct of foreign affairs, even in peacetime.23In addition, the traditional missions of national security have ex-panded in recent years to include protection against terrorists24 and inter-
national criminals, especially drug cartels.25  Furthermore, recognition
has been growing that in an information age, economic security is part of
national security.More broadly, there is a practical convergence under way amongprotection of individual liberties, public safety, economic activity, and
military security.  For example, the nation is beginning to realize that

critical elements of the U.S. civilian infrastructureÑincluding the bankingsystem, the air traffic control system, and the electric power gridÑmustbe protected against the threats described above, as must the civilian
information infrastructure that supports the conduct of sensitive govern-
ment communications.  Because civilian infrastructure provides a signifi-
cant degree of functionality on which the military and defense sector
depends, traditional national security interests are at stake as well, and
concerns have grown about the implications of what has come to be
known as information warfare (Box 1.9).  More generally, the need for

more secure systems, updated security policies, and effective procedural
controls is taking on truly nationwide dimensions.1.7  RECAP
Chapter 1 underscores the need for attention to protecting vital U.S.interests and values in an information age characterized by a number of
trends:¥  The world economy is in the midst of a transition from an indus-
23An agreement on Palestinian self-rule was reached in September 1995.  According to
public reports, the parties involved, Yasir Arafat (leader of the Palestinian Liberation Orga-nization) and Shimon Peres (then Foreign Minister of Israel), depended heavily on thetelephone efforts of Dennis Ross, a U.S. negotiator, in mediating the negotiations that led to
the agreement.  Obviously, in such circumstances, the security of these telephone efforts
was critical.  See Steven Greenhouse, 
ÒTwist to Shuttle Diplomacy: U.S. Aide Mediated byPhone,Ó New York Times, September 25, 1995, p. 1.24Terrorist threats generally emanate from nongovernmental groups, though at timesinvolving the tacit or implicit (but publicly denied) support of sponsoring national govern-ments.  Furthermore, the United States is regarded by many parties as a particularly impor-

tant target for political reasons by virtue of its prominence in world affairs.  Thus, terroristsin confrontation with a U.S. ally may wish to make a statement by attacking the UnitedStates directly rather than its ally.25See, for example, Phil Williams, ÒTransnational Criminal Organizations and Interna-tional Security,Ó Survival, Volume 36(1), Spring 1994, pp. 96-113.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GROWING VULNERABILITY IN THE INFORMATION AGE49BOX 1.9Information WarfareÒInformation warfareÓ (IW) is a term used in many different ways.  Of most utility
for this report is the definition of IW as hostile action that targets the informationsystems and information infrastructure of an opponent (i.e., offensive actions thatattack an opponentÕs communications, weapon systems, command and control sys-tems, intelligence systems, information components of the civil and societal infra-structure such as the power grid and banking system) coupled with simultaneousactions seeking to protect U.S. and allied systems and infrastructure from such at-
tacks.  Other looser uses of the term IW include the following:
¥  The use of information and tactical intelligence to apply weapon systems more
effectively.  IW may be used in connection with information-based suppression of
enemy air defenses or ÒsmartÓ weapons using sensor data to minimize the volume of
ordnance needed to destroy a target.¥  The targeting of companies
Õ information systems for IW attacks.  As industrial
espionage spreads and/or international competitiveness drives multinational corpo-
rations into military-like escapades, the underlying notion of information-based prob-ing of and attack on a competitorÕs information secrets could take on a flavor ofintergovernment military or intelligence activities.¥  The fight against terrorism, organized crime, and even street crime, which
might be characterized as IW to the extent that information about these subjects isused to prosecute the battle.  This usage is not widespread, although it may develop
in the future.Usage of the term has shifted somewhat as federal agencies, notably the Depart-ment of Defense, struggle to fully appreciate this new domain of warfare (or low-
intensity conflict) and to create relevant policy and doctrine for it.  Conversely, there
is some discussion of the vulnerabilities of the U.S. civil information infrastructure tosuch offense.A broad range of activities can take place in information warfare:
¥  Physical destruction of information-handling facilities to destroy or degrade
functionality;¥  Denial of use of an opponent
Õs important information systems;¥  Degradation of effectiveness (e.g., accuracy, speed of response) of an oppo-
nentÕs information systems;¥  Insertion of spurious, incorrect, or otherwise misleading data into an oppo-
nentÕs information systems (e.g., to destroy or modify data, or to subvert softwareprocesses via improper data inputs);¥  Withdrawal of significant tactical or strategic data from an opponent
Õs informa-tion systems;¥  Insertion of malicious software into an opponent
Õs system to affect its intendedbehavior in various ways and, perhaps, to do so at a time controlled by the aggressor;and¥  Subversion of an opponent
Õs software and/or hardware installation to make itan in-place self-reporting mole for intelligence purposes.As an operational activity, information warfare clearly is related closely to, butyet is distinct from, intelligence functions that are largely analytical. IW is also relat-
ed to information security, since its techniques are pertinent both to prosecution ofoffensive IW and to protection for defensive IW.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtrial to an information age in which information products are extensivelybought and sold, information assets provide leverage in undertaking busi-
ness activities, and communications assume ever-greater significance in
the lives of ordinary citizens.  At the same time, national economies are

increasingly interlinked across national borders, with the result that inter-
national dimensions of public policy are important.¥  Trends in information technology suggest an ever-increasing pano-
ply of technologies and technology-enabled services characterized by high
degrees of heterogeneity, enormous computing power, and large data
storage and transmission capabilities.¥  Given the transition to a global information society and trends in
information technology, the future of individuals and businesses alike is
likely to be one in which information of all types plays a central role.
Electronic commerce in particular is likely to become a fundamental un-
derpinning of the information future.¥  Government has special needs for information security that arise
from its role in society, including the protection of classified information
and its responsibility for ensuring the integrity of information assets on
which the entire nation depends.Collectively, these trends suggest that future needs for informationsecurity will be large.  Threats to information security will emerge from a

variety of different sources, and they will affect the confidentiality and
integrity of data and the reliable authentication of users; these threats do
and will affect businesses, government, and private individuals.Chapter 2 describes how cryptography may help to address all ofthese problems.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.512Cryptography:Roles, Market, and Infrastructure
Cryptography is a technology that can play important roles in ad-dressing certain types of information vulnerability, although it is not suf-
ficient to deal with all threats to information security.  As a technology,

cryptography is embedded into products that are purchased by a large
number of users; thus, it is important to examine various aspects of the
market for cryptography.  Chapter 2 describes cryptography as a technol-

ogy used in products, as a product within a larger market context, and
with reference to the infrastructure needed to support its large-scale use.2.1  CRYPTOGRAPHY IN CONTEXT
Computer system security, and its extension network security, areintended to achieve many purposes.  Among them are safeguarding

physical assets from damage or destruction and ensuring that resources
such as computer time, network connections, and access to databases are
available only to individualsÑor to other systems or even software pro-
cessesÑauthorized to have them.1  Overall information security is depen-
dent on many factors, including various technical safeguards, trustwor-
thy and capable personnel, high degrees of physical security, competent
administrative oversight, and good operational procedures.  Of the avail-
1The term Òinformation securityÓ and shortened versions such as INFOSEC, COMPSEC,and NETSEC are also in use.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYable technical safeguards, cryptography has been one of the least utilizedto date.2In general, the many security safeguards in a system or network notonly fulfill their principal task but also act collectively to mutually protect
one another.  In particular, the protection or operational functionality that

can be afforded by the various cryptographic safeguards treated in this
report will inevitably require that the hardware or software in question be
embedded in a secure environment.  To do otherwise is to risk that the

cryptography might be circumvented, subverted, or misusedÑhenceleading to a weakening or collapse of its intended protection.As individual stand-alone computer systems have been incorporatedinto ever larger networks (e.g., local area networks, wide area networks,
the Internet), the requirements for cryptographic safeguards have also
increased.  For example, users of the earliest computer systems were al-

most always clustered in one place and could be personally recognized as
authorized individuals, and communications associated with a computer
system usually were contained within a single building.  Today, users of

computer systems can be connected with one another worldwide, through
the public switched telecommunications network, a local area network,
satellites, microwave towers, and radio transmitters.  Operationally, an

individual or a software process in one place can request service from a
system or a software process in a far distant place.  Connectivity among

systems is impromptu and occurs on demand; the Internet has demon-
strated how to achieve it.  Thus, it is now imperative for users and sys-

tems to identify themselves to one another with a high degree of certainty
and for distant systems to know with certainty what privileges for access-
ing databases or software processes a remote request brings.  Protection

that could once be obtained by geographic propinquity and personal rec-
ognition of users must now be provided electronically and with extremely
high levels of certainty.2.2  WHAT IS CRYPTOGRAPHY AND WHAT CAN IT DO?
The word ÒcryptographyÓ is derived from Greek words that mean
secret writing.  Historically, cryptography has been used to hide informa-
2Other safeguards, in particular software safeguards, are addressed in various standardtexts and reports.  See, for example, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
AnIntroduction to Computer Security, NIST Special Publication 800-12, Department of Com-merce, Washington, D.C., October 1995; Department of Defense, Trusted Computer System
Evaluation Criteria, August 15, 1983; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,National Research Council, Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Information Age,
 Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
53tion from access by unauthorized parties, especially during communica-tions when it would be most vulnerable to interception.  By preserving

the secrecy, or confidentiality, of information, cryptography has played a
very important role over the centuries in military and national affairs.3In the traditional application of cryptography for confidentiality, anoriginator (the first party) creates a message intended for a recipient (thesecond party), protects (encrypts) it by a cryptographic process, and trans-mits it as ciphertext.  The receiving party 
decrypts the received ciphertext
message to reveal its true content, the plaintext.  Anyone else (the 
thirdparty) who wishes undetected and unauthorized access to the messagemust penetrate (by cryptanalysis) the protection afforded by the crypto-graphic process.In the classical use of cryptography to protect communications, it isnecessary that both the originator and the recipient(s) have common
knowledge of the cryptographic process (the algorithm or 
cryptographicalgorithm) and that both share a secret common elementÑtypically, thekey or cryptographic key, which is a piece of information, not a material
object.  In the encryption process, the algorithm transforms the plaintext

into the ciphertext, using a particular key; the use of a different key results
in a different ciphertext.  In the decryption process, the algorithm trans-

forms the ciphertext into the plaintext, using the key that was used to
encrypt4 the original plaintext.  Such a scheme, in which both communi-
cating parties must have a common key, is now called symmetric cryptog-raphy or 
secret-key cryptography; it is the kind that has been used for centu-ries and written about widely.5  It has the property, usually an operational
disadvantage, of requiring a safe method of distributing keys to relevant
parties (key distribution or 
key management).It can be awkward to arrange for symmetric and secret keys to beavailable to all parties with whom one might wish to communicate, espe-
cially when the list of parties is large.  However, a scheme called 
asymmet-ric cryptography (or, equivalently, 
public-key cryptography), developed inthe mid-1970s, helps to mitigate many of these difficulties through the use3The classic work on the history of cryptography is David Kahn, The Codebreakers,MacMillan, New York, 1967.4This report uses the term ÒencryptÓ to describe the act of using an encryption algorithm
with a given key to transform one block of data, usually plaintext, into another block,
usually ciphertext.5Historical perspective is provided in David Kahn, Kahn on Codes, MacMillan, New York,1983; F.W. Winterbotham, The Ultra Secret, Harper & Row, New York, 1974; and RonaldLewin, Ultra Goes to War, Hutchinson & Co., London, 1978.  A classic reference on the
fundamentals of cryptography is Dorothy Denning, Cryptography and Data Security,Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1982.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYof different keys for encryption and decryption.6  Each participant actu-
ally has two keys.  The public key is published, is freely available to

anyone, and is used for encryption; the private key is held in secrecy by
the user and is used for decryption.7  Because the two keys are inverses,
knowledge of the public key enables the derivation of the private key in
theory.  However, in a well-designed public-key system, it is compu-

tationally infeasible in any reasonable length of time to derive the private
key from knowledge of the public key.A significant operational difference between symmetric and asym-metric cryptography is that with asymmetric cryptography anyone who
knows a given personÕs public key can send a secure message to thatperson.  With symmetric cryptography, only a selected set of people (those

who know the private key) can communicate.  While it is not mathemati-
cally provable, all known asymmetric cryptographic systems are slower
than their symmetric cryptographic counterparts, and the more public
nature of asymmetric systems lends credence to the belief that this will
always be true.  Generally, symmetric cryptography is used when a large

amount of data needs to be encrypted or when the encryption must be
done within a given time period; asymmetric cryptography is used for
short messages, for example, to protect key distribution for a symmetric
cryptographic system.Regardless of the particular approach taken, the applications of cryp-tography have gone beyond its historical roots as secret writing; today,
cryptography serves as a powerful tool in support of system security.
Cryptography can provide many useful capabilities:¥ConfidentialityÑthe characteristic that information is protected frombeing viewed in transit during communications and/or when stored in
an information system.  With cryptographically provided confidentiality,

encrypted information can fall into the hands of someone not authorized
to view it without being compromised.  It is almost entirely the confiden-

tiality aspect of cryptography that has posed public policy dilemmas.The other capabilities, described below, can be considered collectivelyas nonconfidentiality or 
collateral uses of cryptography:
6Gustavus J. Simmons (ed.), Contemporary Cryptology:  The Science of Information Integrity
,IEEE Press, Piscataway, N.J., 1992; Whitfield Diffie, ÒThe First Ten Years of Public-KeyCryptography,Ó Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 76, 1988, pp. 560-577.7The seminal paper on public-key cryptography is Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman,ÒNew Directions in Cryptography,Ó IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Volume IT-22,
1976, pp. 644-654.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
55¥AuthenticationÑcryptographically based assurance that an assertedidentity is valid for a given person (or computer system).  With such

assurance, it is difficult for an unauthorized party to impersonate an au-
thorized one.¥Integrity checkÑcryptographically based assurance that a messageor computer file has not been tampered with or altered.8  With such
assurance, it is difficult for an unauthorized party to alter data.¥Digital signatureÑcryptographically based assurance that a mes-sage or file was sent or created by a given person.  A digital signature

cryptographically binds the identity of a person with the contents of the
message or file, thus providing nonrepudiationÑthe inability to deny theauthenticity of the message or file.  The capability for nonrepudiation

results from encrypting the digest (or the message or file itself) with the
private key of the signer.  Anyone can verify the signature of the message

or file by decrypting the signature using the public key of the sender.
Since only the sender should know his or her own private key, assurance
is provided that the signature is valid and the sender cannot later repudi-
ate the message.  If a person divulges his or her private key to any other

party, that party can impersonate the person in all electronic transactions.¥Digital date/time stampÑcryptographically based assurance that amessage or file was sent or created at a given date and time.  Generally,

such assurance is provided by an authoritative organization that appends
a date/time stamp and digitally signs the message or file.These cryptographic capabilities can be used in complementary ways.For example, authentication is basic to controlling access to system or
network resources.  A person may use a password to authenticate his own

identity; only when the proper password has been entered will the sys-
tem allow the user to Òlog onÓ and obtain access to files, e-mail, and so
on.9  But passwords have many limitations as an access control measure
(e.g., people tell others their passwords or a password is learned via eaves-
dropping), and cryptographic authentication techniques can provide 8Digital signatures and integrity checks use a condensed form of a message or fileÑcalled a digestÑwhich is created by passing the message or file through a one-way hashfunction.  The digest is of fixed length and is independent of the size of the message or file.
The hash function is designed to make it highly unlikely that different messages (or files)
will yield the same digest, and to make it computationally very difficult to modify a mes-sage (or file) but retain the same digest.9An example more familiar to many is that the entry of an appropriate personal identifi-cation number into an automatic teller machine (ATM) gives the ATM user access to ac-count balances or cash.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYmuch better and more effective mechanisms for limiting system or re-source access to authorized parties.Access controls can be applied at many different points within a sys-tem.  For example, the use of a dial-in port on an information system or

network can require the use of cryptographic access controls to ensure
that only the proper parties can use the system or network at all.  Many

systems and networks accord privileges or access to resources depending
on the specific identity of a user; thus, a hospital information system may
grant physicians access that allows entering orders for patient treatment,
whereas laboratory technicians may not have such access.  Authentica-

tion mechanisms can also be used to generate an audit trail identifying
those who have accessed particular data, thus facilitating a search for
those known to have compromised confidential data.In the event that access controls are successfully bypassed, the use ofencryption on data stored and communicated in a system provides an
extra layer of protection.  Specifically, if an intruder is denied easy access
to stored files and communications, he may well find it much more diffi-
cult to understand the internal workings of the system and thus be less
capable of causing damage or reading the contents of encrypted inactive
data files that may hold sensitive information.  Of course, when an appli-
cation opens a data file for processing, that data is necessarily unencrypted
and is vulnerable to an intruder that might be present at that time.Authentication and access control can also help to protect the privacyof data stored on a system or network.  For example, a particular database

application storing data files in a specific format could allow its users to
view those files.  If the access control mechanisms are set up in such a way

that only certain parties can access that particular database application,
then access to the database files in question can be limited and the privacy
of data stored in those databases protected.  On the other hand, an unau-

thorized user may be able to obtain access to those files through a differ-
ent, uncontrolled application, or even through the operating system itself.
Thus, encryption of those files is necessary to protect them against such
Òback-doorÓ access.
10The various cryptographic capabilities described above may be usedwithin a system in order to accomplish a set of tasks.  For example, a
10The measure-countermeasure game can continue indefinitely.  In response to file en-
cryption, an intruder can insert into an operating system a Trojan horse program that waitsfor an authorized user to access the encrypted database.  Since the user is authorized, the
database will allow the decryption of the relevant file, and the intruder can simply Òpiggy-backÓ on that decryption.  Thus, those responsible for system security must provide a way
to check for Trojan horses, and so the battle goes round.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
57banking system may require confidentiality and integrity assurances onits communications links, authentication assurances for all major process-
ing functions, and integrity and authentication assurances for high-value
transactions.  On the other hand, merchants may need only digital signa-
tures and date/time stamps when dealing with external customers or
cooperating banks when establishing contracts.  Furthermore, depending

on the type of capability to be provided, the underlying cryptographic
algorithms may or may not be different.Finally, when considering what cryptography can do, it is worth mak-ing two practical observations.  First, the initial deployment of any tech-

nology often brings out unanticipated problems, simply because the prod-
ucts and artifacts embodying that technology have not had the benefit of
successive cycles of failure and repair.  Similarly, human procedures and
practices have not been tested against the demands of real-life experience.
Cryptography is unlikely to be any different, and so it is probable that
early large-scale deployments of cryptography will exhibit exploitable
vulnerabilities.11The second point is that against a determined opponent that is highlymotivated to gain unauthorized access to data, the use of cryptography
may well simply lead that opponent to exploit some other vulnerability in
the system or network on which the relevant data is communicated or
stored, and such an exploitation may well be successful.  But the use of

cryptography can help to raise the cost of gaining improper access to data
and may prevent a resource-poor opponent from being successful at all.More discussion of cryptography can be found in Appendix C.2.3  HOW CRYPTOGRAPHY FITS INTO THE
BIG SECURITY PICTUREIn the context of confidentiality, the essence of information security isa battle between information protectors and information interceptors.
ProtectorsÑwho may be motivated by ÒgoodÓ reasons (if they are legiti-
mate businesses) or ÒbadÓ reasons (if they are criminals)
Ñwish to restrictaccess to information to a group that they select.  Interceptors
Ñwho mayalso be motivated by ÒbadÓ reasons (if they are unethical business com-
petitors) or ÒgoodÓ reasons (if they are law enforcement agents investi-
gating serious crimes)Ñwish to obtain access to the information beingprotected whether or not they have the permission of the information
protectors.  It is this dilemma that is at the heart of the public policy

controversy and is addressed in greater detail in Chapter 3.11For a discussion of this point, see Ross Anderson, ÒWhy Cryptosystems Fail,Ó Commu-nications of the ACM, Volume 37(11), November 1994, pp. 32-40.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYFrom the perspective of the information interceptor, encryption isonly one of the problems to be faced.  In general, the complexity of today
Õsinformation systems poses many technical barriers (Section 2.3.1).  On the

other hand, the information interceptor may be able to exploit product
features or specialized techniques to gain access (Section 2.3.2).2.3.1  Factors Inhibiting Access to Information
12Compared to the task of tapping an analog telephone line, obtainingaccess to the content of a digital information stream can be quite difficult.
With analog ÒlisteningÓ (traditional telephony or radio interception), the
technical challenge is obtaining access to the communications channel.
When communications are digitized, gaining access to the channel is only
the first step: one must then unravel the digital format, a task that can be
computationally very complex.  Furthermore, the complexity of the digi-

tal format tends to increase over time, because more advanced informa-
tion technology generally implies increased functionality and a need for
more efficient use of available communications capacity.Increased complexity is reflected in particular in the interpretation ofthe digital stream that two systems might use to communicate with each
other or the format of a file that a system might use to store data.  Con-

sider, for example, one particular sequence of actions used to communi-
cate information.  The original application in the sending system might

have started with a plaintext message, and then compressed it (to make it
smaller); encrypted it (to conceal its meaning); and appended error-con-
trol bits to the compressed, encrypted message (to prevent errors from
creeping in during transmission).13  Thus, a party attempting to intercepta communication between the sender and the receiver could be faced
with a data stream that would represent the combined output of many
different operations that transform the data stream in some way.  The

interceptor would have to know the error-control scheme and the decom-
pression algorithms as well as the key and the algorithm used to encrypt
the message.When an interceptor moves onto the lines that carry bulk traffic, iso-12This section addresses technical factors that inhibit access to information.  But technicalmeasures are only one class of techniques that can be used to improve information security.
For example, statutory measures can help contribute to information security.  Laws that
impose criminal penalties for unauthorized access to computer systems have been used toprosecute intruders.  Such laws are intended to deter attacks on information systems, and

to the extent that individuals do not exhibit such behavior, system security is enhanced.13Error control is a technique used to detect errors in transmission and sometimes tocorrect them as well.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
59lating the bits associated with a particular communication of interest isitself quite difficult.14  A high-bandwidth line (e.g., a long-haul fiber-optic
cable) typically carries hundreds or thousands of different communica-
tions; any given message may be broken into distinct packets and inter-
mingled with other packets from other contemporaneously operating ap-
plications.15  The traffic on the line may be encrypted 
Òin bulkÓ by the line
provider, thus providing an additional layer of protection against the
interceptor.  Moreover, since a message traveling from point A to point B
may well be broken into packets that traverse different physical paths en
route, an interceptor at any given point between A and B may not even
see all of the packets pass by.Another factor inhibiting access to information is the use of technolo-gies that facilitate anonymous communications.  For the most part, inter-

cepted communications are worthless if the identity of the communicat-
ing parties is not known.  In telephony, call forwarding and pager

callbacks from pay telephones have sometimes frustrated the efforts of
law enforcement officials conducting wiretaps.  In data communications,

so-called anonymous remailers can strip out all identifying information
from an Internet e-mail message sent from person A to person B in such a
way that person B does not know the identity of person A.  Some remailers

even support return communications from person B to person A without
the need for person B to know the identity of person A.Access is made more difficult because an information protector canswitch communications from one medium to another very easily without
changing end-user equipment.  Some forms of media may be easily ac-

cessed by an interceptor (e.g., conventional radio), whereas other forms
may be much more challenging (e.g., fiber-optic cable, spread-spectrum
radio).  The proliferation of different media that can interoperate smoothly

even at the device level will continue to complicate the interceptorÕs at-tempts to gain access to communications.Finally, obtaining access also becomes more difficult as the number ofservice providers increases (Box 2.1).  In the days when AT&T held a
14This point is made independently in a report that came to the attention of the commit-tee as this report was going to press.  A staff study of the Permanent Select Committee on

Intelligence, U.S. House of Representatives, concluded that Òthe ability to filter through thehuge volumes of data and to extract the information from the layers of formatting, multi-plexing, compression, and transmission protocols applied to each message is the biggest
challenge of the future, [while] increasing amounts and sophistication of encryption addanother layer of complexityÓ  (IC21: Intelligence Community in the 21st Century, U.S. Govern-ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C., p. 121).15Paul Haskell and David G. Messerschmitt, ÒIn Favor of an Enhanced Network Interfacefor Multimedia Services,Ó submitted to 
IEEE Multimedia Magazine.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 2.1The Evolution of the Telecommunications IndustryPrior to 1984, the U.S. telecommunications industry was dominated by one pri-mary playerÑAT&T.  An elaborate regulatory structure had evolved in the preceding
decades to govern what had become an essential national service on which privatecitizens, government, and business had come to rely.By contrast, the watchword in telecommunications a mere decade later has be-come competition.  AT&T is still a major player in the field, but the regional Bell
operating companies (RBOCs), separated from AT&T as part of the divestiture deci-
sion of 1984, operate entirely independently, providing local services.  Indeed, the
current mood in Congress toward deregulation is already causing increasingly activecompetition and confrontation among all of the players involved, including cable TV
companies, cellular and mobile telephone companies, the long-distance telecom-munications companies (AT&T, MCI, Sprint, and hundreds of others), the RBOCsand other local exchange providers, TV and radio broadcast companies, entertain-
ment companies, and satellite communications companies.  Today, all of these play-
ers compete for a share of the telecommunications pie in the same geographic area;even railroads and gas companies (which own geographic rights of way along which
transmission lines can be laid) and power companies (which have wires going toevery house) have dreams of profiting from the telecommunications boom.  The
playing field is even further complicated by the fact of resellingÑinstitutions often
buy telecommunications services from ÒprimaryÓ providers in bulk to serve their ownneeds and resell the excess to other customers.In short, todayÕs telecommunications industry is highly heterogeneous and wide-ly deployed with multiple public and private service providers, and will becomemore so in the future.monopoly on voice communications and criminal communications couldgenerally be assumed to be carried on AT&T-operated lines, law enforce-
ment and national security authorities needed only one point of contact
with whom to work.  As the telecommunications industry becomes in-

creasingly heterogeneous, law enforcement authorities may well be un-
certain about what company to approach about implementing a wiretap
request.2.3.2  Factors Facilitating Access to Information
System or Product DesignUnauthorized access to protected information can inadvertently befacilitated by product or system features that are intended to provide
legitimate access but instead create unintentional loopholes or weaknesses
that can be exploited by an interceptor.  Such points of access may be
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
61deliberately incorporated into product or system designs, and they in-clude the following:¥Maintenance and monitoring ports.16  For example, many telephone
switches and computer systems have dial-in ports that are intended to
facilitate monitoring and remote maintenance and repair by off-site tech-
nicians.¥Master keys.  A product can have a single master key that allows its
possessor to decrypt all ciphertext produced by the product.¥Mechanisms for key escrow or key backup.  A third party, for example,
may store an extra copy of a private key or a master key.  Under appropri-

ate circumstances, the third party releases the key to the appropriate

individual(s), who is (are) then able to decrypt the ciphertext in question.
This subject is discussed at length in Chapter 5.¥Weak encryption defaults.  A product capable of providing very
strong encryption may be designed in such a way that users invoke those
capabilities only infrequently.  For example, encryption on a secure tele-

phone may be designed so that the use of encryption depends on the user
pressing a button at the start of a telephone call.  The requirement to press

a button to invoke encryption is an example of a weak default, because
the telephone could be designed so that encryption is invoked automati-
cally when a call is initiated; when weak defaults are designed into sys-
tems, many users will forget to press the button.Despite the good reasons for designing systems and products withthese various points of access (e.g., facilitating remote access through
maintenance ports to eliminate travel costs of system engineers), any such
point of access can be exploited by unauthorized individuals as well.Methods Facilitating Access to InformationSurreptitious access to communications can also be gained by meth-ods such as the following:¥Interception in the ether.  Many point-to-point communications make
use of a wireless (usually radio) link at some point in the process.  Since it

is impossible to ensure that a radio broadcast reaches only its intended
receiver(s), communications carried over wireless linksÑsuch as thoseinvolving cellular telephones and personal pagersÑare vulnerable to in-terception by unauthorized parties.16A port is a point of connection to a given information system to which another party(another system, an individual) can connect.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY¥Use of pen registers.  Telephone communications involve both the
content of a call and call-setup information such as numbers called, origi-
nating number, time and length of call, and so on.  Setup information is

often easily accessible, some of it even to end users.17¥Wiretapping.  To obtain the contents of a call carried exclusively bynonwireless means, the information carried on a circuit (actually, a rep-
lica of the information) is sent to a monitoring station.  A call can be

wiretapped when an eavesdropper picks up an extension on the same
line, hooks up a pair of alligator clips to the right set of terminals, or
obtains the cooperation of telephone company officials in monitoring a
given call at a chosen location.¥Exploitation of related data.  A great deal of useful information can be
obtained by examining in detail a digital stream that is associated with a
given communication.  For example, people have developed communica-

tions protocol analyzers that examine traffic as it flows by a given point
for passwords and other sensitive information.¥Reverse engineering (discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5).Decompilation or disassembly of software can yield deep understanding
of how that software works.  One implication is that any algorithm built

into software cannot be assumed to be secret for very long, since disas-
sembly of the software will inevitably reveal it to a technically trained
individual.¥Cryptanalysis (discussed in greater detail in Appendix C).  Crypt-
analysis is the task of recovering the plaintext corresponding to a given
ciphertext without knowledge of the decrypting key.  Successful crypt-

analysis can be the result of:Ñ Inadequately sized keys.  A product with encryption capabilities that
implements a strong cryptographic algorithm with an inadequately sized
key is vulnerable to a Òbrute-forceÓ attack.
18  Box 2.2 provides more detail.
ÑWeak encryption algorithms.  Some encryption algorithms have weak-
nesses that, if known to an attacker, require the testing of only a small
fraction of the keys that could in principle be the proper key.¥Product flaws.  Like weak encryption, certain design choices such as
limits on the maximum size of a password, the lack of a reasonable lower
bound on the size of a password, or use of a random number generator
that is not truly random may lead to a product that presents a work factor17ÒCaller ID,Ó a feature that identifies the number of the calling party, makes use of call-
setup information carried on the circuit.18A brute-force attack against an encryption algorithm is a computer-based test of allpossible keys for that algorithm undertaken in an effort to discover the key that actually hasbeen used.  Hence, the difficulty and time to complete such attacks increase markedly as the

key length grows (specifically, the time doubles for every bit added to the key length).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
63BOX 2.2Fundamentals of Cryptographic StrengthCryptographic strength depends on two factors: the size of the key and the math-ematical structure of the algorithm itself.  For well-designed symmetric cryptographic

systems, Òbrute-forceÓ exhaustive search
Ñtrying all possible keys with a given de-cryption algorithm until the (meaningful) plaintext appearsÑis the best publiclyknown cryptanalytic method.  For such systems the work factor (i.e., the time to

cryptanalyze) grows exponentially with key size.  Hence, with a sufficiently long
key, even an eavesdropper with very extensive computing resources would have totake a very long time (longer than the age of the universe) to test all possible combi-
nations.  Adding one binary digit (bit) to the length of a key doubles the length of time
it takes to undertake a brute-force attack while adding only a very small increment(or sometimes none at all) to the time it takes to encrypt the plaintext.How long is a ÒlongÓ key?  To decipher by brute force a message encrypted with
a 40-bit key requires 240 (approximately 10
12) tests.  If each test takes 10
-6 seconds
to conduct, 1 million seconds of testing time on a single computer are required to
conduct a brute-force attack, or about 11.5 days.  A 56-bit key increases this time by
a factor of 216, or 65,536; under the same assumptions, a brute-force attack on amessage encrypted with a 56-bit key would take over 2,000 years.Two important considerations mitigate the bleakness of this conclusion from theperspective of the interceptor.  One is that computers can be expected to grow more
powerful over time.  Speed increases in the underlying silicon technology have ex-

hibited a predictable pattern for the past 50 yearsÑcomputational speed doublesevery 18 months (MooreÕs law), equivalent to increasing by a factor of 10 every 5years.  Thus, if a single test takes 10-6 seconds today, in 15 years it can be expectedto take 10-9 seconds.  Additional speedup is possible using parallel processing.  Some
supercomputers use tens of thousands of microprocessors in parallel, and cryptana-
lytic problems are particularly well suited to parallel processing.  But even 1,000
processors working in parallel, each using the underlying silicon technology of 15years hence, would be able to decrypt a single 56-bit encrypted message in 18 hours.As for the exploitation of alternatives to brute-force search, all known asymmet-ric (i.e., public-key) cryptographic systems allow shortcuts to exhaustive search.  Be-
cause more information is public in such systems, it is also likely that shortcut attacks
will exist for any new systems invented.  Shortcut attacks also exist for poorly de-
signed symmetric systems.  Newly developed shortcut attacks constitute unforeseen
breakthroughs, and so by their very nature introduce an unpredictable Òwild cardÓinto the effort to set a reasonable key size. Because such attacks are applicable pri-marily to public-key systems, larger key sizes and larger safety margins are neededfor such systems than for symmetric cryptographic systems.  For example, factoring a

512-bit number by exhaustive search would take 2256 tests (since at least one factor
must be less than 2256); known shortcut attacks would allow such numbers to befactored in approximately 265 operations, a number on the order of that required to
undertake a brute-force exhaustive search of a message encrypted with a 64-bit sym-metric cryptographic system.  While symmetric 64-bit systems are considered rela-
tively safe, fear of future breakthroughs in cryptanalyzing public-key systems has led
many cryptographers to suggest a minimum key size of 1,024 bits for public-keysystems, thereby providing in key length a factor-of-two safety margin over the safetyafforded by 512-bit keys.More discussion of this topic can be found in Appendix C.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYfor an attacker that is much smaller than the theoretical strength impliedby the algorithm it uses.19¥Monitoring of electronic emissions.  Most electronic communications
devices emit electromagnetic radiation that is highly correlated with the
information carried or displayed on them.  For example, the contents of

an unshielded computer display or terminal can in principle be read from
a distance (estimates range from tens of meters to hundreds of meters) by
equipment specially designed to do so.  Coined by a U.S. government

program, TEMPEST is the name of a class of techniques to safeguard
against monitoring of emissions.¥Device penetration.  A software-controlled device can be penetratedin a number of ways.  For example, a virus may infect it, making a clan-

destine change.  A message or a file can be sent to an unwary recipient

who activates a hidden program when the message is read or the file is
opened; such a program, once active, can record the keystrokes of the
person at the keyboard, scan the mass storage media for sensitive data
and transmit it, or make clandestine alterations to stored data.¥Infrastructure penetration.  The infrastructure used to carry commu-
nications is often based on software-controlled devices such as routers.
Router software can be modified as described above to copy and forward
all (or selected) traffic to an unauthorized interceptor.The last two techniques can be categorized as invasive, because theyalter the operating environment in order to gather or modify information.
In a network environment, the most common mechanisms of invasive
attacks are called viruses and Trojan horses.  A virus gains access to a

system, hides within that system, and replicates itself to infect other sys-
tems.  A Trojan horse exploits a weakness from within a system.  Either

approach can result in intentional or unintentional denial of services for
the host system.20  Modern techniques for combining both techniques to
covertly exfiltrate data from a system are becoming increasingly powerful19ÓWork factorÓ is used in this report to mean a measure of the difficulty of undertaking
a brute-force test of all possible keys against a given ciphertext (and known algorithm).  A

40-bit work factor means that a brute-force attack must test at most 240 keys to be certain
that the corresponding plaintext message is retrieved.  In the literature, the term 
ÒworkfactorÓ is also used to mean the ratio of work needed for brute-force cryptanalysis of an
encrypted message to the work needed to encrypt that message.20On November 2, 1988, Robert T. Morris, Jr., released a ÒwormÓ program that spread
itself throughout the Internet over the course of the next day.  At trial, Morris maintained

that he had not intended to cause the effects that had resulted, a belief held by many in theInternet community.  Morris was convicted on a felony count of unauthorized access.  See
Peter G. Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995, p. 133.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
65and difficult to detect.21  Such attacks will gain in popularity as networksbecome more highly interconnected.2.4  THE MARKET FOR CRYPTOGRAPHY
Cryptography is a product as well as a technology.  Products offering
cryptographic capabilities can be divided into two general classes:¥Security-specific or 
stand-alone products that are generally add-on
items (often hardware, but sometimes software) and often require that
users perform an operationally separate action to invoke the encryption
capabilities.  Examples include an add-on hardware board that encrypts

messages or a program that accepts a plaintext file as input and generates
a ciphertext file as output.¥Integrated (often 
Ògeneral-purposeÓ) products in which crypto-graphic functions have been incorporated into some software or hard-
ware application package as part of its overall functionality.  An inte-

grated product is designed to provide a capability that is useful in its own
right, as well as encryption capabilities that a user may or may not use.
Examples include a modem with on-board encryption or a word proces-
sor with an option for protecting (encrypting) files with passwords.2221The popular World Wide Web provides an environment in which an intruder can act tosteal data.  For example, an industrial spy wishing to obtain data stored on the information
network of a large aerospace company can set up a Web page containing information of
interest to engineers at the aerospace company (e.g., information on foreign aerospace busi-ness contracts in the making), thereby making the page an attractive site for those engineersto visit through the Web.  Once an engineer from the company has visited the spy
Õs Webpage, a channel is set up by which the Web page can send back a Trojan horse (TH) pro-gram for execution on the workstation being used to look at the page.  The TH can be
passed as part of any executable program (Java and Postscript provide two such vehicles)
that otherwise does useful things but on the side collects data resident on that workstation(and any other computers to which it might be connected).  Once the data is obtained, it can
be sent back to the spyÕs Web page during the same session, or e-mailed back, or sentduring the next session used to connect to that Web page.  Furthermore, because contacts
with a Web page by design provide the specific address from which the contact is coming,the TH can be sent only to the aerospace company (and to no one else), thus reducing the
likelihood that anyone else will stumble upon it.  Furthermore, the Web page contact also
provides information about the workstation that is making the contact, thus permitting acustomized and specially debugged TH to be sent to that workstation.22From a system design perspective, it is reasonable to assert that word processing anddatabase applications do not have an intrinsic requirement for encryption capabilities andthat such capabilities could be better provided by the operating system on which these
applications operate.  But as a practical matter, operating systems often do not provide such
capabilities, and so vendors have significant incentives to provide encryption capabilitiesthat are useful to customers who want better security.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYIn addition, an integrated product may provide sockets or hooks touser-supplied modules or components that offer additional cryptographic
functionality.  An example is a software product that can call upon a user-

supplied package that performs certain types of file manipulation such as
encryption or file compression.  Cryptographic sockets are discussed in

Chapter 7 as cryptographic applications programming interfaces.A product with cryptographic capabilities can be designed to providedata confidentiality, data integrity, and user authentication in any combi-
nation; a given commercial cryptographic product may implement func-
tionality for any or all of these capabilities.  For example, a PC card may

integrate cryptographic functionality for secure authentication and for
encryption onto the same piece of hardware, even though the user may
choose to invoke these functions independently.  A groupware program

for remote collaboration may implement cryptography for confidentiality
(by encrypting messages sent between users) and cryptography for data
integrity and user authentication (by appending a digital signature to all
messages sent between users).  Further, this program may be implemented

in a way that these features can operate independently (either, both, or
neither may be operative at the same time).Because cryptography is usable only when it is incorporated into aproduct, whether integrated or security-specific, issues of supply and
demand affect the use of cryptography.  The remainder of this section

addresses both demand and supply perspectives on the cryptography
market.2.4.1  The Demand Side of the Cryptography Market
Chapter 1 discussed vulnerabilities that put the information assets ofbusinesses and individuals at risk.  But despite the presence of such risks,

many organizations do not undertake adequate information security ef-
forts, whether those efforts involve cryptography or any other tool.  This

section explores some of the reasons for this behavior.Lack of Security Awareness (and/or Need)Most people who use electronic communications behave as thoughthey regard their electronic communications as confidential.  Even though

they may know in some sense that their communications are vulnerable
to compromise, they fail to take precautions to prevent breaches in com-
munications security.  Even criminals aware that they may be the subjects

of wiretaps have been overheard by law enforcement officials to say,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
67ÒThis call is probably being wiretapped, but . . . ,Ó after which they go on
to discuss incriminating topics.23The impetus for thinking seriously about security is usually an eventthat is widely publicized and significant in impact.24  An example of
responding to publicized problems is the recent demand for encryption of
cellular telephone communications.  In the past several years, the public

has been made aware of a number of instances in which traffic carried
over cellular telephones was monitored by unauthorized parties (Appen-
dix J). In addition, cellular telephone companies have suffered enormous
financial losses as the result of Òcloning,Ó an illegal practice in which the
unencrypted ID numbers of cellular telephones are recorded off the air
and placed into cloned units, thereby allowing the owner of the cloned
unit to masquerade as the legitimate user.25  Even though many users
today are aware of such practices and have altered their behavior some-
what (e.g., by avoiding discussion of sensitive information over cellular
telephone lines), more secure systems such as GSM (the European stan-
dard for mobile telephones) have gained only a minimal foothold in the
U.S. market.A second area in which people have become more sensitive to theneed for information security is in international commerce.  Many inter-

national business users are concerned that their international business
communications are being monitored, and indeed such concerns moti-
vate a considerable amount of todayÕs demand for secure communica-tions.It is true that the content of the vast majority of telephone communi-cations in the United States (e.g., making a dinner date, taking an ordi-23A case in point is that the officers charged in the Rodney King beating used theirelectronic communications system as though it were a private telephone line, even though
they had been warned that all traffic over that system was recorded.  In 1992, Rodney King
was beaten by members of the Los Angeles Police Department.  A number of transcripts of
police radio conversations describing the incident were introduced as evidence at the trial.
Had they been fully cognizant at the moment of the fact that all conversations were beingrecorded as a matter of department policy, the police officers in question most likely wouldnot have said what they did (personal communication, Sara Kiesler, Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity, 1993).24It is widely believed that only a few percent of computer break-ins are detected.  See,
for example, Jane Bird, ÒHunting Down the Hackers,Ó Management Today, July, 1994, p. 64(reports that 1% of attacks are detected); Bob Brewin, ÒInfo Warfare Goes on Attack,Ó Fed-eral Computer Week, Volume 9(31), October 23, 1995, p. 1 (reports 2% detection); and GaryAnthes, ÒHackers Try New Tacks,Ó ComputerWorld, January 30, 1995, p. 12 (reports 5%detection).25See, for example, Bryan Miller, ÒWeb of Cellular Phone Fraud Widens,Ó New York Times,July 20, 1995, p. C1; and George James, Ò3 Men Accused of Stealing Cellular Phone IDNumbers,Ó New York Times, October 19, 1995, p. B3.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYnary business call) and data communications (e.g., transferring a file fromone computer to another, sending an e-mail message) is simply not valu-
able enough to attract the interest of most eavesdroppers.  Moreover,

most communications links for point-to-point communications in the
United States are hard wired (e.g., fiber-optic cable) rather than wireless
(e.g., microwave); hard-wired links are much more secure than wireless
links.26  In some instances, compromises of information security do not
directly damage the interests of the persons involved.  For example, an

individual whose credit card number is improperly used by another party
(who may have stolen his wallet or eavesdropped on a conversation) is
protected by a legal cap on the liability for which he is responsible.Other Barriers Influencing Demand for CryptographyEven when a user is aware that communications security is threat-ened and wishes to take action to forestall the threat, a number of practi-
cal considerations can affect the decision to use cryptographic protection.
These considerations include the following:¥Lack of critical mass.  A secure telephone is not of much use if only
one person has it.  Ensuring that communications are secure requires

collective actionÑsome critical mass of interoperable devices is necessaryin order to stimulate demand for secure communications.  To date, such a

critical mass has not yet been achieved.¥Uncertainties over government policy.  Policy often has an impact on
demand.  A number of government policy decisions on cryptography

have introduced uncertainty, fear, and doubt into the marketplace and
have made it difficult for potential users to plan for the future.  Seeing the

controversy surrounding policy in this area, potential vendors are reluc-
tant to bring to market products that support security, and potential users
are reluctant to consider products for security that may become obsolete
in the future in an unstable legal and regulatory environment.¥Lack of a supporting infrastructure.  The mere availability of devices
is not necessarily sufficient.  For some applications such as secure inter-

personal communications, a national or international infrastructure for
managing and exchanging keys could be necessary.  Without such an
26A major U.S. manufacturer reported to the committee that in the late 1980s, it wasalerted by the U.S. government that its microwave communications were vulnerable.  In

response, this manufacturer took steps to increase the capacity of its terrestrial communica-tions links, thereby reducing its dependence on microwave communications.   A similar
situation was faced by IBM in the 1970s.  See William Broad, 
ÒEvading the Soviet Ear atGlen Cove,Ó Science, Volume 217(3), 1982, pp. 910-911.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
69infrastructure, encryption may remain a niche feature that is usable onlythrough ad hoc methods replicating some of the functions that an infra-
structure would provide and for which demand would thus be limited.
Section 2.5 describes some infrastructure issues in greater detail.¥High cost.  To date, hardware-based cryptographic security has
been relatively expensive, in part because of the high cost of stand-alone
products made in relatively small numbers.  A user that initially deploys

a system without security features and subsequently wants to add them
can be faced with a very high cost barrier, and consequently there is a
limited market for add-on security products.On the other hand, the marginal cost of implementing cryptographiccapabilities in software at the outset is rapidly becoming a minor part of
the overall cost, and so cryptographic capabilities are likely to appear in
all manner and types of integrated software products where there might
be a need.¥Reduced performance.  The implementation of cryptographic func-
tions often consumes computational resources (e.g., time, memory).  In

some cases, excessive consumption of resources makes encryption too
slow or forces the user to purchase additional memory.  For example, if

encrypting the communications link over which a conversation is carried
delays that conversation by more than a few tenths of a second, users may
well choose not to use the encryption capability.¥A generally insecure environment.  A given network or operating
system may be so inherently insecure that the addition of cryptographic
capabilities would do little to improve overall security.  Moreover, retro-

fitting security measures atop an inherently insecure system is generally
difficult.¥Usability.  A product
Õs usability is a critical factor in its marketacceptability. Products with encryption capabilities that are available for
use but are in fact unused do not increase information security.  Such

products may be purchased but not used for the encryption they provide
because such use is too inconvenient in practice, or they may not be pur-
chased at all because the capabilities they provide are not aligned well
with the needs of their users.  In general, the need to undertake even a

modest amount of extra work or to tolerate even a modest inconvenience
for cryptographic protection that is not directly related to the primary
function of the device is likely to discourage the use of such protection.27When cryptographic features are well integrated in a way that does not27For example, experience with current secure telephones such as the STU-III suggeststhat users of such phones may be tempted, because of the need to contact many people, touse them in a nonsecure mode more often than not.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYdemand case-by-case user intervention, i.e., when such capabilities can beinvoked transparently to the average user, demand may well increase.¥Lack of independent certification or evaluation of products.  Certification
of a productÕs quality is often sought by potential buyers who lack thetechnical expertise to evaluate product quality or who are trying to sup-
port certain required levels of security (e.g., as the result of bank regula-
tions).  Many potential users are also unable to detect failures in the

operation of such products.28  With one exception discussed in Chapter 6,
independent certification for products with integrated encryption capa-
bilities is not available, leading to market uncertainty about such prod-
ucts.¥Electronic commerce.  An environment in which secure communica-
tions were an essential requirement would do much to increase the de-
mand for cryptographic security.29  However, the demand for secure com-
munications is currently nascent.¥Uncertainties arising from intellectual property issues.  Many of the
algorithms that are useful in cryptography (especially public-key cryp-
tography) are protected by patents.  Some vendors are confused by the

fear, uncertainty, and doubt caused by existing legal arguments among
patent holders.  Moreover, even when a patent on a particular algorithm

is undisputed, many users may resist its use because they do not wish to
pay the royalties.30¥Lack of interoperability and standards.  For cryptographic devices to
be useful, they must be interoperable.  In some instances, the implementa-

tion of cryptography can affect the compatibility of systems that may
have interoperated even though they did not conform strictly to
interoperability standards.  In other instances, the specific cryptographic

algorithm used is yet another function that must be standardized in order
for two products to interoperate.  Nevertheless, an algorithm is only one

piece of a cryptographic device, and so two devices that implement the28Even users who do buy security products may still be unsatisfied with them.  For
example, in two consecutive surveys in 1993 and 1994, a group of users reported spendingmore and being less satisfied with the security products they were buying.  See Dave Powell,

ÒAnnual Infosecurity Industry Survey,Ó Infosecurity News, March/April, 1995, pp. 20-27.29AT&T plans to take a nontechnological approach to solving some of the security prob-lems associated with retail Internet commerce.  AT&T has announced that it will insure its

credit card customers against unauthorized charges, as long as those customers were usingAT&TÕs service to connect to the Internet.  This action was taken on the theory that the real
issue for consumers is the fear of unauthorized charges, rather than fears that confidential
data per se would be compromised.  See Thomas Weber, 
ÒAT&T Will Insure Its CardCustomers on Its Web Service,Ó Wall Street Journal, February 7, 1996, p. B5.30See, for example, James Bennett, ÒThe Key to Universal Encryption,Ó Strategic Invest-ment, December 20, 1995, pp. 12-13.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
71same cryptographic algorithm may still not interoperate.31  Only when
two devices conform fully to a single interoperability standard (e.g., a stan-
dard that would specify how keys are to be exchanged, the formatting of
the various data streams, the algorithms to be used for encryption and
decryption, and so on) can they be expected to interoperate seamlessly.An approach gaining favor among product developers is protocolnegotiation,32 which calls for two devices or products to mutually negoti-
ate the protocol that they will use to exchange information.  For example,

the calling device may query the receiving device to determine the right
protocol to use.  Such an approach frees a device from having to conform
to a single standard and also facilitates the upgrading of standards in a
backward-compatible manner.¥The heterogeneity of the communications infrastructure.  Communica-
tions are ubiquitous, but they are implemented through a patchwork of
systems and technologies and communications protocols rather than ac-
cording to a single integrated design.  In some instances, they do not

conform completely to the standards that would enable full inter-
operability.  In other instances, interoperability is achieved by intermedi-
ate conversion from one data format to another. The result can be that
transmission of encrypted data across interfaces interferes with achieving
connectivity among disparate systems.  Under these circumstances, users
31Consider the Data Encryption Standard (DES) as an example.  DES is a symmetric
encryption algorithm, first published in 1975 by the U.S. government, that specifies a unique
and well-defined transformation when given a specific 56-bit key and a block of text, butthe various details of operation within which DES is implemented can lead to incompat-ibilities with other systems that include DES, with stand-alone devices incorporating DES,
and even with software-implemented DES.Specifically, how the information is prepared prior to being encrypted (e.g., how it isblocked into chunks) and after the encryption (how the encrypted data is modulated on the
communications line) will affect the interoperability of communications devices that mayboth use DES.  In addition, key management may not be identical for DES-based devices
developed independently.  DES-based systems for file encryption generally require a user-

generated password to generate the appropriate 56-bit DES key, but since the DES standarddoes not specify how this aspect of key management is to be performed, the same passwordused on two independently developed DES-based systems may not result in the same 56-bit
key.  For these and similar reasons, independently developed DES-based systems cannot
necessarily be expected to interoperate.32Transmitting a digital bit stream requires that the hardware carrying that stream beable to interpret it.  Interpretation means that regardless of the content of the communica-
tions (e.g., voice, pictures), the hardware must know what part of the bit stream representsinformation useful to the ultimate receiver and what part represents information useful to
the carrier.  A communications protocol is an agreed-upon convention about how to inter-
pret any given bit stream and includes the specification of any encryption algorithm thatmay be used as part of that protocol.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYmay be faced with a choice of using unencrypted communications or notbeing able to communicate with a particular other party at all.332.4.2  The Supply Side of the Cryptography Market
The supply of products with encryption capabilities is inherently re-lated to the demand for them.  Cryptographic products result from deci-

sions made by potential vendors and users as well as standards deter-
mined by industry and/or government.  Use depends on availability as

well as other important factors such as user motivation, relevant learning
curves, and other nontechnical issues.  As a general rule, the availability

of products to users depends on decisions made by vendors to build or
not to build them, and all of the considerations faced by vendors of all
types of products are relevant to products with encryption capabilities.In addition to user demand, vendors need to consider the followingissues before deciding to develop and market a product with encryption
capabilities:¥Accessibility of the basic knowledge underlying cryptography.  Given
that various books, technical articles, and government standards on the
subject of cryptography have been published widely over the past 20
years, the basic knowledge needed to design and implement crypto-

graphic systems that can frustrate the best attempts of anyone (including
government intelligence agencies) to penetrate them is available to gov-
ernment and nongovernment agencies and parties both here and abroad.
For example, because a complete description of DES is available world-
wide, it is relatively easy for anyone to develop and implement an en-
cryption system that involves multiple uses of DES to achieve much stron-
ger security than that provided by DES alone.¥The skill to implement basic knowledge of cryptography.  A product
with encryption capabilities involves much more than a cryptographic
algorithm.  An algorithm must be implemented in a system, and many

design decisions affect the quality of a product even if its algorithm is
mathematically sound.  Indeed, efforts by multiple parties to develop

products with encryption capabilities based on the same algorithm could
result in a variety of manufactured products with varying levels of qual-
ity and resistance to attack.33An analogous example is the fact that two Internet users may find it very difficult to usee-mail to transport a binary file between them, because the e-mail systems on either endmay well implement standards for handling binary files differently, even though they may
conform to all relevant standards for carrying ASCII text.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
73For example, although cryptographic protocols are not part and par-cel of a cryptographic algorithm per se, these protocols specify how criti-
cal aspects of a product will operate.  Thus, weaknesses in cryptographic

protocolsÑsuch as a key generation protocol specifying how to generateand exchange a specific encryption key for a given message to be passed
between two parties or a key distribution protocol specifying how keys
are to be distributed to users of a given productÑcan compromise theconfidentiality that a real product actually provides, even though the
cryptographic algorithm and its implementation are flawless.34¥The skill to integrate the cryptography into a usable product.  Even a
product that implements a strong cryptographic algorithm in a compe-
tent manner is not valuable if the product is unusable in other ways.  For

integrated products with encryption capabilities, the noncryptographic
functions of the product are central, because the primary purpose of an
integrated product is to provide some useful capability to the user (e.g.,
word processing, database management, communications) that does notinvolve cryptography per se; if cryptography interferes with this primary
functionality, it detracts from the productÕs value.In this area, U.S. software vendors and system integrators have dis-tinct strengths,35 even though engineering talent and cryptographic ex-
pertise are not limited to the United States.  For example, foreign vendors

do not market integrated products with encryption capabilities that are
sold as mass-market software, whereas many such U.S. products are avail-
able.36¥The cost of developing, maintaining, and upgrading an economically vi-able product with encryption capabilities.  The technical aspects of good en-
cryption are increasingly well understood.  As a result, the incremental
34An incident that demonstrates the importance of the nonalgorithm aspects of a productis the failure of the key-generation process for the Netscape Navigator Web browser that
was discovered in 1995; a faulty random number generation used in the generation of keyswould enable an intruder exploiting this flaw to limit a brute-force search to a much smallernumber of keys than would generally be required by the 40-bit key length used in this
product.  See John Markoff, 
ÒSecurity Flaw Is Discovered in Software Used in Shopping,ÓNew York Times, September 19, 1995, p. A1.  A detailed discussion of protocol failures can be
found in Gustavus Simmons, ÒCryptanalysis and Protocol Failures,Ó Communications of theACM, Volume 37(11), 1994, pp. 56-65.
35Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Keepingthe U.S. Computer Industry Competitive:  Systems Integration, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 1992.36For example, the Department of Commerce and the National Security Agency found nogeneral-purpose software products with encryption capability from non-U.S. manufactur-
ers.  See Department of Commerce and National Security Agency, 
A Study of the Interna-tional Market for Computer Software with Encryption, released January 11, 1996, p. III-9.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYcost of designing a software product so that it can provide cryptographicfunctionality to end users is relatively small.  As cost barriers to the inclu-

sion of cryptographic functionality are reduced dramatically, the long-
term likelihood increases that most products that process digital informa-
tion will include some kinds of cryptographic functionality.¥The suitability of hardware vs. software as a medium in which to
implement a product with encryption capabilities.  The duplication and

distribution costs for software are very low compared to those for hard-
ware, and yet, trade secrets embedded in proprietary hardware are easier
to keep than those included in software.  Moreover, software crypto-

graphic functions are more easily disabled.¥Nonmarket considerations and export controls.  Vendors may with-
hold or alter their products at government request.  For example, a well-

documented instance is the fact that AT&T voluntarily deferred the intro-
duction of its 3600 Secure Telephone Unit (STU) at the behest of
government (see Appendix E on the history of current cryptography
policy and Chapter 6 on government influence).  Export controls also

affect decisions to make products available even for domestic use, as
described in Chapter 4.2.5  INFRASTRUCTURE FOR WIDESPREAD
USE OF CRYPTOGRAPHYThe widespread use of cryptography requires a support infrastruc-ture that can service organizational or individual user needs with regard
to cryptographic keys.2.5.1  Key Management Infrastructure
In general, to enable use of cryptography across an enterprise, theremust be a mechanism that:¥Periodically supplies all participating locations with keys (typi-cally designated for use during a given calendar or time periodÑthecrypto-period) for either stored materials or communications; or¥Permits any given location to generate keys for itself as needed(e.g., to protect stored files); or¥Can securely generate and transmit keys among communicatingparties (e.g., for data transmissions, telephone conversations).In the most general case, any given mechanism will have to performall three functions.  With symmetric systems, the movement of keys from

place to place obviously must be done securely and with a level of protec-
tion adequate to counter the threats of concern to the using parties.  What-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
75ever the distribution system, it clearly must protect the keys with appro-priate safeguards and must be prepared to identify and authenticate the
source.  The overall task of securely assuring the availability of keys for

symmetric applications is often called key management.If all secure communications take place within the same corporationor among locations under a common line of authority, key management is
an internal or possibly a joint obligation.  For parties that communicate

occasionally or across organizational boundaries, mutual arrangements
must be formulated for managing keys.  One possibility might be a sepa-

rate trusted entity whose line of business could be to supply keys of
specified length and format, on demand and for a fee.With asymmetric systems, the private keys are usually self-gener-ated, but they may also be generated from a central source, such as a
corporate security office.  In all cases, however, the handling of private

keys is the same for symmetric and asymmetric systems; they must be
guarded with the highest levels of security.  Although public keys need

not be kept secret, their integrity and association with a given user are
extremely important and should also be supported with extremely robust
measures.The costs of a key management infrastructure for national use are notknown at this time.  One benchmark figure is that the cost of the Defense

Department infrastructure needed to generate and distribute keys for ap-
proximately 320,000 STU-III telephone users is somewhere in the range of
$10 million to $13 million per year.372.5.2  Certificate Infrastructures
The association between key information (such as the name of a per-son and the related public key) and an individual or organization is an
extremely important aspect of a cryptographic system.  That is, it is unde-

sirable for one person to be able to impersonate another.  To guard against

impersonation, two general types of solutions have emerged: an organi-
zation-centric approach consisting of certificate authorities and a user-cen-
tric approach consisting of a web of trust.A certificate authority serves to validate information that is associ-ated with a known individual or organization.  Certificate authorities can

exist within a single organization, across multiple related organizations,
or across society in general.  Any number of certificate authorities can

coexist, and they may or may not have agreements for cross-certification,37William Crowell, Deputy Director, National Security Agency, personal communication,April 1996.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYwhereby if one authority certifies a given person, then another authoritywill accept that certification within its own structure.  Certificate author-

ity hierarchies are defined in the Internet RFCs 1421-1424, the X.509 stan-
dard, and other emerging commercial standards, such as that proposed
by MasterCard/Visa.  A number of private certificate authorities, such as

VeriSign, have also begun operation to service secure mass-market soft-
ware products, such as the Netscape Navigator Web browser.Among personal acquaintances validation of public keys can bepassed along from person to person or organization to organization, thus
creating a web of trust in which the entire ensemble is considered to be
trusted based on many individual instances of trust.  Such a chain of trust

can be established between immediate parties, or from one party to a
second to establish the credentials of a third.  This approach has been

made popular by the Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) software product; all
users maintain their own Òkey-ring,Ó which holds the public keys of ev-
eryone with whom they want to communicate.Importantly, it should be noted that both the certificate authorityapproach and the web of trust approach replicate the pattern of trust that
already exists among participating parties in societal and business activi-
ties.  In a sense, the certificate infrastructure for cryptography simply

formalizes and makes explicit what society and its institutions are already
accustomed to.At some point, banks, corporations, and other organizations alreadygenerally trusted by society will start to issue certificates.  At that time,

individuals especially may begin to feel more comfortable about the cryp-
tographic undergirding of societyÕs electronic infrastructure, at whichpoint the webs of trust can be expected to evolve according to individual
choices and market forces.  However, it should be noted that different

certificates will be used for different functions, and it is unlikely that a
single universal certificate infrastructure will satisfy all societal and busi-
ness needs.  For example, because an infrastructure designed to support

electronic commerce and banking may do no more than identify valid
purchasers, it may not be useful for providing interpersonal communica-
tion or corporate access control.Certificate authorities already exist within some businesses, especiallythose that have moved vigorously into an electronic way of life.  Gener-

ally, there is no sense of a need for a legal framework to establish relation-
ships among organizations, each of which operates its own certificate
function.  Arrangements exist for them to cross-certify one another; in

general, the individual(s) authorizing the arrangement will be a senior
officer of the corporation, and the decision will be based on the existence
of other legal agreements already in place, notably, contracts that define
the relationships and obligations among organizations.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHY:  ROLES, MARKET, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
77For the general business world in which any individual or organiza-tion wishes to conduct a transaction with any other individual or organi-
zation, such as the sale of a house, a formal certificate infrastructure has
yet to be created.  There is not even one to support just a digital signature

application within government.  Hence, it remains to be seen how, in the

general case, individuals and organizations will make the transition to an
electronic society.Certificate authorities currently operate within the framework of con-tractual law.  That is, if some problem arises as the result of improper

actions on the part of the certification authority, its subscribers will have
to pursue a civil complaint.  As certificate authorities grow in size and

service a greater part of society, it will probably be necessary to regulate
their actions under law, much like those of any major societal institu-
tions.38  It is interesting to observe that the legal and operational environ-
ment that will have to exist for certificate organizations involves the same
set of issues that are pertinent to escrow organizations (as discussed in
Chapter 5).2.6  RECAP
Cryptography provides important capabilities that can help deal withthe vulnerabilities of electronic information.  Cryptography can help to

assure the integrity of data, to authenticate the identity of specific parties,
to prevent individuals from plausibly denying that they have signed
something, and to preserve the confidentiality of information that may
have improperly come into the possession of unauthorized parties.  At

the same time, cryptography is not a silver bullet, and many technical and
human factors other than cryptography can improve or detract from in-
formation security.  In order to preserve information security, attention

must be given to all of these factors.  Moreover, people can use cryptogra-

phy only to the extent that it is incorporated into real products and sys-
tems; unimplemented cryptographic algorithms cannot contribute to in-
formation security.  Many factors other than raw mathematical knowledge

contribute to the supply of and demand for products with cryptographic
functionality.  Most importantly, the following aspects influence the de-

mand for cryptographic functions in products:¥Critical mass in the marketplace,38Shimshon Berkovits et al., Public Key Infrastructure Study:  Final Report,
 National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Md., April 1994.  Performed under con-
tract to MITRE Corporation, this study is summarized in Appendix H.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY¥Government policy,¥Supporting infrastructure,¥Cost,¥Performance,¥Overall security environment,¥Usability,¥Quality certification and evaluation, and¥Interoperability standards.Finally, any large-scale use of cryptography, with or without keyescrow (discussed later in Chapter 5), depends on the existence of a sub-
stantial supporting infrastructure, the deployment of which raises a dif-
ferent set of problems and issues.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.793Needs for Access to Encrypted
InformationInformation protected for confidentiality (i.e., encrypted information)is stored or communicated for later use by certain parties with the autho-
rization of the original protector.  However, it may happen for various

legitimate and lawfully authorized reasons that other parties may need to
recover this information as well.  This chapter discusses needs for access

to encrypted information under exceptional circumstances for legitimate
and lawfully authorized purposes from the perspectives of businesses,
individuals, law enforcement, and national security.  Businesses and indi-

viduals may want access to encrypted data or communications for their
own purposes and thus may cooperate in using products to facilitate such
access, while law enforcement and national security authorities may want
access to the encrypted data or communications of criminals and parties
hostile to the United States.3.1  TERMINOLOGY
It is useful to conceptualize data communications and data storageusing the language of transactions.  For example, one individual may

telephone another; the participants in the transaction are usually referred
to as the calling party and the called party.  Or, a person makes a pur-

chase; the participants are called the buyer and seller. Or, a sender mails
something to the recipient.  Adopting this construct, consider communi-

cations in which the first party (Party A) sends a message and the second
party (Party B) receives it. ÒPartyÓ does not necessarily imply a person; aCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYÒpartyÓ can be a computer system, a communication system, a software
process.  In the case of data storage, Party A stores the data, while Party B

retrieves it.  Note that Party A and Party B can be the same party (as is the

case when an individual stores a file for his or her own later use).Under some circumstances, a third party may be authorized for ac-cess to data stored or being communicated.  For example, law enforce-

ment authorities may be granted legal authorization to obtain surrepti-
tious access to a telephone conversation or a stored data file or record
without the knowledge of Parties A or B.  The employer of Party A may

have the legal right to read all data files for which Party A is responsible
or to monitor all communications in which Party A participates.  Party A

might inadvertently lose access to a data file and wish to recover that
access.In cases when the data involved is unencrypted, the proceduresneeded to obtain access can be as simple as identifying the relevant file
name or as complex as seeking a court order for legal authorization.  But

when the data involved is encrypted, the procedures needed to obtain
access will require the possession of certain critical pieces of information,
such as the relevant cryptographic keys.Third-party access has many twists and turns.  When it is necessary
for clarity of exposition or meaning, this report uses the phrase Òexcep-tional accessÓ to stress that the situation is not one that was included
within the intended bounds of the original transaction, but is an unusual
subsequent event.  Exceptional access refers to situations in which an

authorized party needs and can obtain the plaintext of encrypted data (for
storage or communications).  The word 
ÒexceptionalÓ is used in contrast
to the word ÒroutineÓ and connotes something unusual about the circum-
stances under which access is required.Exceptional access can be divided into three generic categories:¥Government exceptional access refers to the case in which govern-
ment has a need for access to information under specific circumstances
authorized by law.  For example, a person might store data files that law

enforcement authorities need to prosecute or investigate a crime.  Alter-

natively, two people may be communicating with each other in the plan-
ning or commission of a serious crime.  Government exceptional access

thus refers to the governmentÕs need to obtain the relevant informationunder circumstances authorized by law, and requires a court order (for
access to voice or data communications) or a subpoena or search warrant
(for access to stored records).  Government exceptional access is the focus

of Section 3.2.  The related signals intelligence need is discussed in

Section 3.3.¥Employer (or corporate) exceptional access refers to the case in which
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION81an employer (i.e., the corporate employer) has the legal right to access toinformation encrypted by an employee.  If an employee who has en-

crypted a file is indisposed on a certain day, for example, the company
may need exceptional access to the contents of the file.  Alternatively, an

employee may engage in communications whose content the company
may have a legitimate need to know (e.g., the employee may be leaking
proprietary information).  Employer exceptional access would then refer

to the companyÕs requirement to obtain the key necessary to obtain thecontents of the file or communications, and may require the intervention
of another institutional entity.  Employer or corporate exceptional access

is the focus of Section 3.5.¥End-user exceptional access refers to the case in which the parties
primarily intended to have access to plaintext have lost the means to
obtain such access.  For example, a single user may have stored a file for

later retrieval, but encrypted it to ensure that no other party would have
access to it while it was in storage.  However, the user might also lose or

forget the key used to encrypt that file.  End-user exceptional access refers

to such a userÕs requirement to obtain the proper key, and may requirethat the individual who has lost a key prove his identify to a party hold-
ing the backup key and verify his authorization to obtain a duplicate copy
of his key.  End-user exceptional access is also discussed in Section 3.5.
The need for exceptional access when the information stored or com-municated is encrypted has led to an examination of a concept generically
known as escrowed encryption (the subject of Chapter 5), which, loosely
speaking, uses agents other than the parties participating in the commu-
nication or data storage to hold copies of or otherwise have access to
relevant cryptographic keys Òin escrowÓ so that needs for end-user, cor-
porate, and government exceptional access can be met; these agents are
called escrow agents.3.2  LAW ENFORCEMENT:  INVESTIGATION
AND PROSECUTIONObtaining information (both evidence and intelligence) has always beena central element in the conduct of law enforcement investigations and
prosecutions.  Accordingly, criminals have always wished to protect the

information relevant to their activities from law enforcement authorities.3.2.1  The Value of Access to Information for Law Enforcement
Many criminals keep records related to their activities; such recordscan be critical to the investigation and prosecution of criminal activity.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 3.1Examples of the Utility of Wiretaping¥  The El Rukn Gang in Chicago, acting as a surrogate for the Libyan government
and in support of terrorism, planned to shoot down a commercial airliner within theUnited States using a stolen military weapon.  This act of terrorism was prevented

through the use of telephone wiretaps.¥  The 1988 ÒIll WindÓ public corruption and Defense Department fraud inves-tigation relied heavily on court-ordered telephone wiretaps. To date, this investiga-
tion has resulted in the conviction of 65 individuals and more than a quarter of abillion dollars in fines, restitutions, and recoveries.¥  Numerous drug trafficking and money laundering investigations, such as the
ÒPolar CapÓ and ÒPizza ConnectionÓ cases, utilized extensive telephone wiretaps inthe successful prosecution of large-scale national and international drug traffickingorganizations.  ÒPolar CapÓ resulted in the arrest of 33 subjects and the recovery of

$50 million in assets seized.  Additionally, in a 1992 Miami raid, which directly
resulted from wiretaps, agents confiscated 15,000 pounds of cocaine and arrested 22subjects.¥  The investigation of convicted spy Aldrich Ames relied heavily on wiretaps
ordered under Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act authority.¥  In a 1990 ÒSexual Exploitation of ChildrenÓ investigation, the FBI relied heavi-
ly on wiretaps to prevent violent individuals from abducting, torturing, and murder-ing a child in order to make a Òsnuff murderÓ film.SOURCE:  Federal Bureau of Investigation.
For example, criminals engaged in white-collar crimes such as fraud oftenleave paper trails that detail fraudulent activities; drug dealers often keep
accounting records of clients, drop-offs, supplies, and income.  Recon-

struction of these paper trails is often a critical element in building a case
against these individuals.  The search-and-seizure authority of law en-

forcement to obtain paper records is used in a large fraction of criminal
cases.As for communications, law enforcement officials believe that wire-tapping is a crucial source of information that could not be obtained in
any other way or obtained only at high risk (Box 3.1).  For example, the

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has testified that[w]ithout law enforcementÕs ability to effectively execute court ordersfor electronic surveillance, the country would be unable to protect itselfagainst foreign threats, terrorism, espionage, violent crime, drug traf-
ficking, kidnapping, and other crimes.  We may be unable to intercept a
terrorist before he sets off a devastating bomb; unable to thwart a for-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION83eign spy before he can steal secrets that endanger the entire country; andunable to arrest drug traffickers smuggling in huge amounts of drugsthat will cause widespread violence and death.  Court-approved elec-

tronic surveillance is of immense value, and often is the only way toprevent or solve the most serious crimes facing todayÕs society.1Criminals often discuss their past criminal activity and plans for fu-ture criminal activity with other parties.  Obtaining 
Òinside informationÓon such activities is often a central element of building a case against the
perpetrators.  A defendant who describes in his own words how he com-
mitted a crime or the extent to which he was involved in it gives prosecu-
tors a powerful weapon that juries tend to perceive as fair.2Other methods of obtaining Òinside informationÓ have significant
risks associated with them:¥Informants are often used to provide inside information.  How-
ever, the credibility of informants is often challenged in court, either be-
cause the informants have shady records themselves or because they may
have made a deal with prosecutors by agreeing to serve as informants in
return for more lenient treatment.3  By contrast, challenges to evidence
obtained through wiretaps are based far more frequently on their admis-
sibility in court rather than their intrinsic credibility.  Informants may also

be difficult to find when a criminal group is small in size.¥Surreptitiously planted listening devices are also used to obtaininside information.  However, they generally obtain only one side of a

conversation (use of a speaker-phone presents an exception).  Further,

since listening devices require the use of an agent to plant them, installa-
tion of such devices is both highly intrusive (arguably more so than wire-
tapping) for the subject of the device and risky for the planting agent.
Requests for the use of such devices are subject to the same judicial over-
sight and review as wiretaps.1Statement of James K. Kallstrom, Special Agent in Charge, Special Operations Division,New York Field Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, on ÒSecurity Issues in Comput-ers and Communications,Ó before the Subcommittee on Technology, Environment, and
Aviation of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representa-tives, May 3, 1994.2For example, see Edward Walsh, ÒReynolds Guilty on All Counts,Ó Washington Post,August 23, 1995, p. 1.3See, for example, Sharon Walsh, ÒWhistle-Blower Quandary: Will Testimony Fly?,Ó Wash-ington Post, August 23, 1995, p. F3; Richard Perez-Pena, ÒAn InformerÕs Double Life:  BlowsCome from 2 Sides,Ó New York Times, October 15, 1995, p. 35; Joseph P. Fried, ÒUndermin-ing a Bomb-Trial Witness,Ó New York Times, April 9, 1995, p. 42; and Stephen Labaton, ÒThePrice Can Be High for Talk ThatÕs Cheap,Ó New York Times, Week in Review, April 2, 1995,p. 3.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYThis discussion is not intended to suggest that wiretaps are a perfectsource of information and always useful to law enforcement.  An impor-

tant difficulty in using wiretaps is that context is often difficult for listen-
ers to establish when they are monitoring a telephone conversation that
assumes shared knowledge between the communicators.4Because of the legal framework regulating wiretaps, and the fact thatcommunications are by definition transient whereas records endure, wire-
tapping is used in far fewer criminal cases than is seizure of records.
Although the potential problems of denying law enforcement access to
communications has been the focus of most of the public debate, encryp-
tion of data files in a way that denies law enforcement authorities access
to data files relevant to criminal activity arguably presents a much larger
threat to their capabilities.3.2.2  The Legal Framework Governing Surveillance
An evolving legal framework governs the authority of governmentauthorities to undertake surveillance of communications that take place
within the United States or that involve U.S. persons.  Surveillance within

the United States is authorized only for certain legislatively specified pur-
poses: the enforcement of certain criminal statutes and the collection of
foreign intelligence.  A more extended description of this framework (with

footnoted references) is contained in Appendix D.Domestic Communications Surveillancefor Domestic Law Enforcement PurposesCommunications surveillance can involve surveillance for trafficanalysis and/or surveillance for content; these separate activities are gov-
erned by different laws and regulations.  Traffic analysis, a technique that

establishes patterns of connections and communications, is performed
with the aid of pen registers that record the numbers dialed from a target
telephone, and trap-and-trace devices that identify the numbers of tele-
phones from which calls are placed to the target telephone.  Orders for the
4Indeed, in some instances, wiretap evidence has been used to exculpate defendants.  See,
for example, Peter Marks, ÒWhen the Best Defense Is the ProsecutionÕs Own Tapes,Ó NewYork Times, June 30, 1995, p. D20.  According to Roger Shuy, professor of linguistics at
Georgetown University, there are many difficulties in ascribing meaning to particular utter-ances that may be captured on tape recordings of conversations.  See Roger Shuy, 
LanguageCrimes, Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, Mass., 1993.  Shuy
Õs book is mostly focused ontapes made by ÒwiresÓ carried by informants or 
ÒbugsÓ placed near a subject, but the basic
principle is the same.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION85use of these devices may be requested by any federal attorney and grantedby any federal district judge or magistrate, and are granted on a more or
less pro forma basis.Surveillance of communications for content for purposes of domesticlaw enforcement is governed by Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections 2510-2521,
concerning Òwire and electronic communications interceptions and inter-ception of all communications,Ó generally known as Title III.  These sec-
tions of the U.S. Code govern the use of listening devices (usually known
as ÒbugsÓ); wiretaps of communications involving human speech (calledÒoral communicationsÓ in Title III) carried over a wire or wire-like cable,
including optical fiber; and other forms of electronically transmitted com-
munication, including various forms of data, text, and video that may be
communicated between or among people as well as computers or com-
munications devices.  Under Title III, only certain federal crimes may be

investigated (e.g., murder, kidnapping, child molestation, racketeering,
narcotics offenses) through the interception of oral communications.  In

addition, 37 states have passed laws that are similar to Title III, but they
include such additional restrictions as allowing only a fixed number of
interceptions per year (Connecticut) or only for drug-related crimes (Cali-
fornia).  State wiretaps account for the majority of wiretaps in the United

States.Surveillance of oral communications governed under Title III in gen-eral requires a court order (i.e., a warrant) granted at the discretion of a
judge.5  Because electronic surveillance of oral communications is both
inherently intrusive and clandestine, the standards for granting a warrant
for such surveillance are more stringent than those required by the Fourth
Amendment.  These additional requirements are specified in Title III and
are enforced by criminal and civil penalties applicable to law enforcement
officials or private citizens, and by a statutory exclusionary rule that vio-
lations of the central features of requirements may lead to suppression of
evidence in a later trial, even if such evidence meets the relevant Fourth
Amendment test.Because of the resources required, the administrative requirementsfor the application procedure, and the legal requirement that investiga-
tors exhaust other means of obtaining information, wiretaps are not often
used. Approximately 1,000 orders (both federal and state) are authorized
yearly (a number small compared to the number of felonies investigated,5Emergency intercepts may be performed without a warrant in certain circumstances,such as physical danger to a person or conspiracy against the national security.  There has

been Òvirtually no useÓ of the emergency provision, and its constitutionality has not been
tested in court (Wayne R. LaFave and Jerold H. Israel, Criminal Procedure, West PublishingCompany, St. Paul, Minn., 1992, p. 254).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYeven if such felonies are limited to those specified in Title III as eligible forinvestigation with wiretaps).6  About 2,500 conversations are intercepted
per order, and the total number of conversations intercepted is a very
small fraction of the annual telephone traffic in the United States.Surveillance of nonvoice communications, including fax and elec-tronic communications, is also governed by Title III.7  The standard for
obtaining an intercept order for electronic communications is less strin-
gent than that for intercepting voice communications.  For example, any

federal felony may be investigated through electronic interception.  In

addition, the statutory exclusionary rule of Title III for oral and wire
communications does not apply to electronic communications.Despite the legal framework outlined above, it is nevertheless pos-sible that unauthorized or unlawful surveillance, whether undertaken by
rogue law enforcement officials or overzealous private investigators, oc-
curs.  Concerns over such activity are often expressed by critics of the

current Administration policy, and they focus on two scenarios:¥With current telephone technology, it is sometimes technically pos-sible for individuals (e.g., private investigators, criminals, rogue law en-
forcement personnel) to undertake wiretaps on their own initiative (e.g.,
by placing alligator clips on the proper terminals in the telephone box of
an apartment building).  Such wiretaps would subject the personnel in-

volved to Title III criminal penalties, but detection of such wiretaps might
well be difficult.  On the other hand, it is highly unlikely that such a

person could obtain the cooperation of major telephone service providers
without a valid warrant or court order, and so these wiretaps would have
to be conducted relatively close to the targetÕs telephone, and not in atelephone switching office.¥Information obtained through a wiretap in violation of Title III can6Some analysts critical of the U.S. government position on wiretaps have suggested thatthe actual distribution of crimes investigated under Title III intercept or surveillance orders
may be somewhat inconsistent with government claims of the high value of such orders.(See, for example, testimony of David B. Kopel, Cato Institute, ÒHearings on Wiretappingand Other Terrorism Proposals,Ó Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, May 24, 1995;
also available on-line at http://www.cato.org/ct5-24-5.html.)  For example, Table D.3 in
Appendix D indicates that no cases involving arson, explosives, or weapons were investi-gated using Title III wiretaps in 1988.  The majority of Title III orders have involved drug

and gambling crimes.7Note that when there is no reasonable expectation of privacy, law enforcement officialsare not required to undertake any special procedure to monitor such communications.  For

example, a law enforcement official participating in an on-line ÒchatÓ group is not requiredto identify himself as such, nor must he obtain any special permission at all to monitor thetraffic in question.  However, as a matter of policy, the FBI does not systematically monitor

electronic forums such as Internet relay chats.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION87be suppressed in court, but such evidence may still be useful in the courseof an investigation.  Specifically, such evidence may cue investigators

regarding specific areas that would be particularly fruitful to investigate,
and if the illegal wiretap is never discovered, a wiretap that provides no
court-admissible evidence may still prove pivotal to an investigation.8(Even if it is discovered, different judges apply the doctrine of discarding
Òthe fruit of the poisonous treeÓ with different amounts of rigor.)
The extent to which these and similar scenarios actually occur is hardto determine.  Information provided by the FBI to the committee indicates

a total of 187 incidents of various types (including indictments/com-
plaints and convictions/pretrial diversions) involving charges of illegal
electronic surveillance (whether subsequently confirmed or not) over the
past 5 fiscal years (1990 through 1994).9Domestic Communications Surveillance for Foreign Intelligence PurposesThe statute governing interception of electronic communications forpurposes of protecting national security is known as the Foreign Intelli-
gence Surveillance Act (FISA), which has been codified as Sections 1801 to
1811 in Title 18 of the U.S. Code.  Passed in 1978, FISA was an attempt to

balance Fourth Amendment rights against the constitutional responsibil-
ity of the executive branch to maintain national security.  FISA is relevant

only to communications occurring at least partly within the United States
(wholly, in the case of radio communications), although listening stations
used by investigating officers may be located elsewhere, and FISA surveil-
lance may be performed only against foreign powers or their agents.  Inter-

ception of communications, when the communications occur entirely out-
side the United States, whether or not the participants include U.S. persons,
is not governed by FISA, Title III, or any other statute.  However, when a

U.S. person is outside the United States, Executive Order 12333 governs
any communications intercepts targeted against such individuals.8Such concerns are raised by reports of police misconduct as described in Chapter 1.9The committee recognizes the existence of controversy over the question of whethersuch reports should be taken at face value.  For example, critics of the U.S. government who
believe that law enforcement authorities are capable of systematically abusing wiretap au-
thority argue that law enforcement authorities would not be expected to report figures thatreflected such abuse.  Alternatively, it is also possible that cases of improper wiretaps are in
fact more numerous than reported and have simply not come to the attention of the rel-
evant authorities.  The committee discussed such matters and concluded that it had no
reason to believe that the information it received on this subject from law enforcementauthorities was in any way misleading.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYThe basic framework of FISA is similar to that of Title III, with certainimportant differences, among which are the following:¥The purpose of FISA surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligenceinformation, defined in terms of U.S. national security, including defense
against attack, sabotage, terrorism, and clandestine intelligence activities,
among others.  The targeted communications need not relate to any crime

or be relevant as evidence in court proceedings.¥In most instances, a FISA surveillance application requires a war-rant based on probable cause that foreign intelligence information will be
collected.10  Surveillance of a U.S. person (defined as a U.S. citizen, U.S.
corporation or association, or legal resident alien) also requires probable
cause showing that the person is acting as a foreign agent.  Political and

other activities protected by the First Amendment may not serve as the
basis for treating a U.S. person as a foreign agent.¥Targets of FISA surveillance might never be notified that commu-nications have been intercepted.Since 1979, there have been an average of over 500 FISA orders peryear.  In 1992, 484 were issued.  Other information about FISA intercepts

is classified.3.2.3  The Nature of the Surveillance Needs of Law Enforcement
In cooperation with the National Technical Investigators Association,the FBI has articulated a set of requirements for its electronic surveillance
needs (Box 3.2).  Of course, access to surveillance that does not meet all of

these requirements is not necessarily useless.  For example, surveillance

that does not meet the transparency requirement may still be quite useful
in certain cases (e.g., if the subjects rationalize the lack of transparency as
Òstatic on the lineÓ).  The basic point is that these requirements constitutea set of continuous metrics by which the quality of a surveillance capabil-
ity can be assessed, rather than a list that defines what is or is not useful
surveillance.Of these requirements, the real-time requirement is perhaps the mostdemanding.  The FBI has noted that
10Surveillance may take place without a court order for up to 1 year if the AttorneyGeneral certifies that there is very little likelihood of intercepting communications involv-
ing U.S. persons and that the effort will target facilities used exclusively by foreign powers.Under limited circumstances, emergency surveillance may be performed before a warrantis obtained (Clifford S. Fishman, Wiretapping and Eavesdropping: Cumulative Supplement, ClarkBoardman Callaghan, Deerfield, Ill., November 1994, sections 361, 366).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION89BOX 3.2Law Enforcement Requirements for the Surveillance ofElectronic Communications¥  Prompt and expeditious access both to the contents of the electronic commu-
nications and ÒsetupÓ information necessary to identify the calling and called parties
¥  Real-time, full-time monitoring capability for intercepts.  Such capability is
particularly important in an operational context, in which conversations among ei-ther criminal conspirators (e.g., regarding a decision to take some terrorist action) or
criminals and innocent third parties (e.g., regarding a purchase order for explosivesfrom a legitimate dealer) may have immediate significance¥  Delivery of intercepted communications to specified monitoring facilities
¥  Transparent access to the communications, i.e., access that is undetectable to
all parties to the communications (except to the monitoring parties) and implementa-tion of safeguards to restrict access to intercept information¥  Verification that the intercepted communications are associated with the in-
tercept subject¥  Capabilities for some number of simultaneous intercepts to be determined
through a cooperative industry/law enforcement effort¥  Reliability of the services supporting the intercept at the same (or higher) level
of the reliability of the communication services provided to the intercept subject¥  A quality of service for the intercept that complies with the performance
standards of the service providersSOURCE:  Law Enforcement Requirements for the Surveillance of Electronic Com-
munications, Federal Bureau of Investigation in cooperation with the National Tech-
nical Investigators Association, June 1994.[s]ome encryption products put at risk efforts by federal, state and locallaw enforcement agencies to obtain the contents of intercepted commu-nications by precluding real-time decryption. Real-time decryption isoften essential so that law enforcement can rapidly respond to criminal
activity and, in many instances, prevent serious and life-threatening
criminal acts.1111Statement of James K. Kallstrom, Special Agent in Charge, Special Operations Division,New York Field Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, on ÒSecurity Issues in Comput-ers and Communications,Ó before the Subcommittee on Technology, Environment, and
Aviation of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representa-
tives, May 3, 1994.  An illustrative example is an instance in which the FBI was wiretapping
police officers who were allegedly guarding a drug shipment.  During that time, the FBI
overheard a conversation between the police chief and several other police officials that the
FBI believes indicated a plot to murder a certain individual who had previously filed apolice brutality complaint against the chief.  (However, the FBI was unable to decode the
police chiefÕs Òstreet slang and police jargonÓ in time to prevent the murder.)  See Paul
Keegan, ÒThe Thinnest Blue Line,Ó New York Times Magazine, March 31, 1996, pp. 32-35.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYReal-time surveillance is generally less important for crimes that areprosecuted or investigated than for crimes that are prevented because of
the time scales involved.  Prosecutions and investigations take place on

the time scales of days or more, whereas prevention may take place on the
time scale of hours.  In some instances, the longer time scale is relevant:

because Title III warrants can be issued only when Òprobable causeÓ ex-
ists that a crime has been committed, the actual criminal act is committed
before the warrant is issued, and thus prevention is no longer an issue.  In

other instances, information obtained under a valid Title III warrant is-
sued to investigate a specific criminal act can be used to prevent a subse-
quent criminal act, in which case the shorter time scale may be relevant.
The situation is similar under FISA, in which warrants need not necessar-
ily be obtained in connection with any criminal activity.  A good example

is terrorism cases, in which it is quite possible that real-time surveillance
could provide actionable information useful in thwarting an imminent
terrorist act.3.2.4  The Impact of Cryptography and New Media on Law
Enforcement (Stored and Communicated Data)Cryptography can affect information collection by law enforcementofficials in a number of ways.  However, for perspective, it is important to

keep in mind a broader contextÑnamely that advanced information tech-nologies (of which cryptography is only one element) have potential im-
pacts across many different dimensions of law enforcement; Box 3.3 pro-
vides some discussion of this point.Encrypted CommunicationsAs far as the committee has been able to determine, criminal use ofdigitally encrypted voice communications has not presented a significant
problem to law enforcement to date.12  On rare occasions, law enforce-
ment officials conducting a wiretap have encountered Òunknown signalsÓthat could be encrypted traffic or simply a data stream that was unrecog-
nizable to the intercept equipment.  (For example, a high-speed fax trans-

mission might be transported on a particular circuit; a monitoring agent12In this regard, it is important to distinguish between Òvoice scramblersÓ and encrypted
voice communications.  Voice scramblers are a relatively old and widely available technol-
ogy for concealing the contents of a voice communication; they transform the analog wave-
form of a voice and have nothing to do with encryption per se.  True encryption is a
transformation of digitally represented data.  Voice scramblers have been used by criminals
for many years, whereas devices for digital encryption remain rare.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION91might be unable to distinguish between the signal of the fax and an en-crypted voice signal with the equipment available to him.)The lack of criminal use of encryption in voice communications mostlikely reflects the lack of use of encryption by the general public.  More-

over, files are more easily encrypted than communications, simply be-
cause the use of encrypted communications presumes an equally sophis-
ticated partner, whereas only one individual must be knowledgeable to
encrypt files.  As a general rule, criminals are most likely to use what is

available to the general public, and the encryption available to and usable
by the public has to date been minimal.  At the same time, sophisticated

and wealthy criminals (e.g., those associated with drug cartels) are much
more likely to have access to and to use cryptography.13In data communications, one of the first publicized instances of lawenforcement use of a Title III intercept order to monitor a suspectÕs elec-tronic mail occurred in December 1995, when the customer of an on-line
service provider was the subject of surveillance during a criminal investi-
gation.14  E-mail is used for communications; a message is composed at
one host, sent over a communications link, and stored at another host.
Two opportunities exist to obtain the contents of an e-mail messageÑthefirst while the message is in transit over the communications link, and the
second while it is resident on the receiving host.  From a technical perspec-
tive, it is much easier to obtain the message from the receiving host, and
this is what happened in the December 1995 instance.  (Appendix D con-

tains more detail on how electronic communications are treated under Title
III.)Federal law enforcement authorities believe that encryption of com-munications (whether voice or data) will be a significant problem in the
future.  FBI Director Louis Freeh has argued that 
Òunless the issue ofencryption is resolved soon, criminal conversations over the telephone
and other communications devices will become indecipherable by law
enforcement.  This, as much as any issue, jeopardizes the public safety

and national security of this country.  Drug cartels, terrorists, and kidnap-

pers will use telephones and other communications media with impunity13For example, police raids in Colombia on offices of the Cali cartel resulted in the seizureof advanced communications devices, including radios that distort voices, videophones toprovide visual authentication of callersÕ identities, and devices for scrambling computer
modem transmissions.  The Colombian defense minister was quoted as saying that the CIAhad told him that the technological sophistication of the Cali cartel was about equal to thatof the KGB at the time of the Soviet UnionÕs collapse.  See James Brooke, 
ÒCrackdown HasCali Drug Cartel on the Run,Ó New York Times, June 27, 1995, p. A1.14See Gautam Naik, ÒU.S., Using E-Mail Tap, Charges Three with Operating Cellular-Fraud Ring,Ó Wall Street Journal, January 2, 1996, p. B16.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 3.3How Noncryptography Applications of Information TechnologyCould Benefit Law EnforcementAs acknowledged in the main text, encryption in ubiquitous use would createcertain difficulties for law enforcement.  Nevertheless, it is important to place into
context the overall impact on law enforcement of the digital information technolo-gies that enable encryption and other capabilities that are not the primary subject of
this report.  Chapter 2 suggested how encryption capabilities can be a positive forcefor more effective law enforcement (e.g., secure police communications).  But infor-
mation technology is increasingly ubiquitous and could appear in a variety of other
applications less obvious than encryption.  For example:
¥  Video technology has become increasingly inexpensive.  Thus, it is easy to
imagine police cruisers with video cameras that are activated upon request whenpolice are responding to an emergency call.  Monitoring those cameras at police

headquarters would provide a method for obtaining timely information regarding theneed of the responding officers for backup.  Equipping individual police officers with
even smaller video cameras attached to their uniforms and recording such transmis-
sions would provide objective evidence to corroborate (or refute) an officerÕs de-scription of what he saw at a crime scene.¥  The number of users of cellular telephones and wide-area wireless communi-
cations services will grow rapidly.  As such technologies enable private citizens to
act as responsible eyes and ears that observe and report emergencies in progress, lawenforcement officials will be able to respond more quickly.  (See, for example, Cha-na Schoenberger, ÒThe Pocket-Size Protector; Feeling Safe, not Stylish, with CellularPhones,Ó Washington Post, August 29, 1995, p. B5.)¥  Electronically mediated sting operations help to preserve cover stories of lawenforcement officials.  For example, the Cybersnare sting operation resulted in the
arrest of six individuals who allegedly stole cellular telephone numbers en masseknowing that their conversations are immune from our most valued in-vestigative technique.Ó15  In addition, the initial draft of the digital tele-
phony bill called for telephone service providers to deliver the plaintext
of any encrypted communications they carried, a provision that was
dropped in later drafts of the bill.1615See the Prepared Statement of Louis J. Freeh,  Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
for the Federal Drug Law Enforcement Hearing before the House Judiciary Committee,Subcommittee on Crime, U.S. House of Representatives, March 30, 1995.16The final bill provides that Òa telecommunications carrier shall not be responsible fordecrypting, or ensuring the governmentÕs ability to decrypt, any communication encryptedby a subscriber or customer, unless the encryption was provided by the carrier and thecarrier possesses the information necessary to decrypt the communication.ÓCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION93Encrypted Data FilesEncryption by criminals of computer-based records that relate to theircriminal activity is likely to pose a significant problem for law enforce-
ment in the future.  FBI Director Freeh has noted publicly
17 two instances
in which encrypted files have already posed a problem for law enforce-
ment authorities: a terrorist case in the Philippines involving a plan to
blow up a U.S. airliner as well as a plan to assassinate the Pope in late
1994,18 and the 
ÒInnocent ImagesÓ child pornography case of 1995 in
from major companies, resulting in millions of dollars of industry losses.  Cybersnare
was based on an underground bulletin board that appealed to cellular telephone and
credit card thieves.  Messages were posted offering for sale cellular telephone 
Òclon-ingÓ equipment and stolen cellular telephone numbers, and included contact tele-
phone numbers that were traced to the individuals in question.  (See Gautam Naik,

ÒSecret Service Agents Arrest Six Hackers in Cellular-Phone Sting in Cyberspace,ÓWall Street Journal, September 12, 1995, p. B6.)¥  The locations of automobiles over a metropolitan area could be tracked automat-
ically, either passively or actively.  An active technique might rely on a coded beacon
that would localize the position of the automobile on which it was mounted.  A passive
technique might rely on automatic scanning for license plates that were mounted on the
roofs of cars.  As an investigative technique, the ability to track the location of a particular
automobile over a period of time could be particularly important.Even today, information technology enables law enforcement officials to con-duct instant background checks for handgun purchases and arrest records when a
person is stopped for a traffic violation.  Retail merchants guard against fraud by
using information technology to check driving records when cars are rented andcredit checks for big purchases.  The Department of the Treasury uses sophisticated

information technology to detect suspicious patterns that might indicate large-scalemoney laundering by organized crime.All such possibilities involve important social as well as technical issues.  For
example, the first two examples featured above seem relatively benign, while the lasttwo raise serious entrapment and privacy issues.  Even the 
Òinstant backgroundchecksÓ of gun buyers have generated controversy.  The mention of these applica-
tions (potential and actual) is not meant as endorsement, recommendation, or evensuggestion; they do, however, place into better context the potentialities of informa-
tion technology in some overall sense to improve the capabilities of law enforcementwhile at the same time illustrating that concerns about excessive government powerare not limited to the issue of cryptography.17Speech of FBI Director Louis Freeh, before the International Cryptography Institute1995 conference, Washington, D.C., September 21, 1995.18A general discussion of this case is found in Phillip Shenon, ÒWorld Trade CenterSuspect Linked to Plan to Blow Up 2 Planes,Ó New York Times, March 26, 1995, p. 37.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY19A general discussion of the Innocent Images case is found in Kara Swisher, ÒOn-LineChild Pornography Charged as 12 Are Arrested,Ó Washington Post, September 14, 1995, p. 1.20One note on terminology: In the signals intelligence community, the term ÒaccessÓ is
used to refer to obtaining the desired signals, whether those signals are encrypted or not.
This use conflicts with the usage adopted in this report, in which ÒaccessÓ generally means
obtaining the information contained in a signal (or message or file).which encrypted images stood in the way of grand jury access proce-dures.19  Furthermore, Director Freeh told the committee that the use of
stored records in criminal prosecutions and investigations was much more
frequent than the use of wiretaps.The problem of encrypted data files is similar to the case in which acriminal keeps books or records in a code or a language that renders them
unusable to anyone elseÑin both instances, the cooperation of the crimi-nal (or someone else with access to the key) is necessary to decipher the
records.  The physical records as well as any recorded version of the key,
if such a record exists, are available through a number of standard legal
mechanisms, including physical search warrants and subpoenas.  On the

other hand, while the nature of the problem itself is the same in both
instances, the ease and convenience of electronic encryption, especially if
performed automatically, may increase the frequency with which encryp-
tion is encountered and/or the difficulties faced by law enforcement in
cryptanalyzing the material in question without the cooperation of the
criminal.Finally, the problem of exceptional access to stored encrypted infor-mation is more easily solved than the problem of exceptional access to
encrypted communications.  The reason is that for file decryption, the

time constraints are generally less stringent.  A file may have existed for

many days or weeks or even years, and the time within which decryption
is necessary (e.g., to build a criminal case) is measured on the time scale of
investigatory activities; by contrast, the relevant time scale in the case of
decrypting communications may be the time scale of operations, which
might be as short as minutes or hours.3.3  NATIONAL SECURITY AND SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE
20Cryptography is a two-edged sword for U.S. national security inter-ests.  Cryptography is important in maintaining the security of U.S. clas-

sified information (Appendix I), and the U.S. government has developed
its own cryptographic systems to meet these needs.  At the same time, the

use of cryptography by foreign adversaries also hinders U.S. acquisitionCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION95of communications intelligence.  This section discusses the latter.  (Ap-
pendix F contains a short primer on intelligence.)3.3.1  The Value of Signals Intelligence
21Signals intelligence (SIGINT) is a critically important arm of U.S.
intelligence, along with imagery intelligence (IMINT) and intelligence
information collected directly by people, i.e., human intelligence
(HUMINT).  SIGINT also provides timely tip-off and guidance to IMINT

and HUMINT collectors and is, in turn, tipped off by them.  As in the case

of law enforcement, the information contained in a communications chan-
nel treated by an opponent as secure is likely to be free of intentional
deception.The committee has received both classified and unclassified assess-ments of the current value of SIGINT and finds that the level of reporting
reflects a continuing capability to produce both tactical and strategic in-
formation on a wide range of topics of national intelligence interest.
SIGINT production is responding to the priorities established by Presi-
dential Decision Directive 35.  As publicly described by President Bill

Clinton in remarks made to the staff of the CIA and intelligence commu-
nity, the priorities are as follows:¥ÒFirst, the intelligence need of our military during an operation . . . ,¥Second, political, economic and military intelligence about coun-tries hostile to the United States.  We must also compile all-source infor-

mation on major political and economic powers with weapons of mass
destruction who are potentially hostile to us,¥Third, intelligence about specific trans-national threats to our secu-rity, such as weapons proliferation, terrorism, drug trafficking, organized
crime, illicit trade practices and environmental issues of great gravity.Ó22SIGINT is one valuable component of the overall U.S. intelligencecapability.  It makes important contributions to ensure an informed, alert,

and secure environment for U.S. war fighters and policy makers.21This report deals only with the communications intelligence (COMINT) aspects ofSIGINT; see Appendix F for a discussion of electronic intelligence (ELINT) and its relation-ship to COMINT.22Office of the Press Secretary, The White House, ÒRemarks by the President to Staff ofthe CIA and Intelligence Community,Ó Central Intelligence Agency, McLean, Va., July 14,
1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYSIGINT Support of Military OperationsSIGINT is important to both tactical and strategic intelligence.  Tacti-
cal intelligence provides operational support to forces in the field, whether
these forces are performing military missions or international law en-
forcement missions (e.g., as in drug eradication raids in Latin America
conducted in cooperation with local authorities).  The tactical dimensions

were most recently demonstrated in the Gulf War through a skillfully
orchestrated interaction of SIGINT, IMINT, and HUMINT that demon-
strated the unequaled power of U.S. intelligence.  SIGINT produced timely

command and control intelligence and specific signal information to sup-
port electronic warfare; IMINT provided precise locating information to
permit precision bombing, together with HUMINT; SIGINT and IMINT
provided the field commands with an unprecedented degree of battle-
field awareness.History also demonstrates many instances in which SIGINT hasproven decisive in the conduct of tactical military operations.  These in-

stances are more easily identified now because the passage of time has
made the information less sensitive.¥The American naval victory at the Battle of Midway and the destruc-tion of Japanese merchant shipping resulted, in part, from Admiral C.W.
NimitzÕs willingness to trust the SIGINT information he received from hisintelligence staff.  General George Marshall wrote that as a result of this

SIGINT information, Òwe were able to concentrate our limited forces tomeet [the Japanese] naval advance on Midway when otherwise we almost
certainly would have been some 3,000 miles out of place.Ó23¥The shoot-down in April 1943 of the commander-in-chief of theJapanese Navy, Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, was the direct result of a
signals intercept that provided his detailed itinerary for a visit to the
Japanese front lines.24¥The U.S. Navy was able to compromise the operational code usedby German U-boats in the Atlantic in 1944, with the result that large
numbers of such boats were sunk.25¥Allied intercepts of German army traffic were instrumental in thedefense of the Anzio perimeter in Italy in February 1944, a defense that
some analysts believe was a turning point in the Italian campaign; these
intercepts provided advance knowledge of the German timing, direction,23A good discussion of these topics is given in David Kahn, The Codebreakers, MacMillan,New York, 1967, pp. 561-573 (Midway) and pp. 593-594 (merchant shipping).24See Kahn, The Codebreakers, 1967, pp. 595-601.25Kahn, The Codebreakers, 1967, pp. 504-507.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION97and weight of assault, and enabled Allied generals to concentrate theirresources in the appropriate places.26While these examples are 50 years old, the nature of warfare is not sodifferent today as to invalidate the utility of successful SIGINT.  A pri-

mary difference between then and now is that the speed of warfare has
increased substantially, placing a higher premium on real-time or near-
real-time intercepts.  Since the end of World War II, SIGINT has provided

tactical support to every military operation involving U.S. forces.Other types of tactical intelligence to which SIGINT can contributeinclude indications and warning efforts (detecting an adversaryÕs prepa-rations to undertake armed hostilities); target identification, location, and
prioritization (what targets should be attacked, where they are, and how
important they are); damage assessment (how much damage an attacked
target sustained); and learning the enemyÕs rules of engagement (underwhat circumstances an adversary is allowed to engage friendly forces).SIGINT Support of Strategic IntelligenceStrategic (or national) intelligence is intended to provide analyticalsupport to senior policy makers rather than field commanders.  In this

role, strategic or national intelligence serves foreign policy, national secu-
rity, and national economic objectives.  Strategic intelligence focuses on

foreign political and economic events and trends, as well as on strategic
military concerns such as plans, doctrine, scientific and technical re-
sources, weapon system capabilities, and nuclear program development.
History also demonstrates the importance of SIGINT in a diplomatic,
counterintelligence, and foreign policy context:¥In the negotiations following World War I over a treaty to limit thetonnage of capital ships (the Washington Conference on Naval Arms Limi-
tations), the U.S. State Department was able to read Japanese diplomatic
traffic instructing its diplomats.  One particular decoded intercept pro-

vided the bottom line in the Japanese position, information that was use-
ful in gaining Japanese concessions.27¥Recently, Director of Central Intelligence John Deutch unveiled theso-called VENONA material, decrypted Soviet intelligence service mes-
sages of the mid-1940s that revealed Soviet espionage against the U.S.26See Ralph Bennett, Ultra and Mediterranean Strategy, William Morrow and Company,New York, 1989, pp. 265-269.27See Kahn, The Codebreakers, 1967, pp. 358-359.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYatomic program.28  Intelligence about the Cuban missile crisis has been
released.  Although primarily a story about U-2 photography, the role of

SIGINT is included as well.¥Decrypted intercepts of allied communications in the final monthsof World War II played a major role in assisting the United States to
achieve its goals at the conference called to decide on the United Nations
charter.  American policy makers knew the negotiating positions of nearly

all of the participating nations and thus were able to control the debate to
a considerable degree.29¥During the Cold War, SIGINT provided information about adver-sary military capabilities, weapons production, command and control,
force structure and operational planning, weapons testing, and activities
of missile forces and civil defense.In peacetime as in combat, each of the intelligence disciplines cancontribute critical information in support of national policy.  Former Di-

rector of Central Intelligence Admiral Stansfield Turner has pointed out
that Ò[e]lectronic intercepts may be even more useful [than human agents]in discerning intentions.  For instance, if a foreign official writes about

plans in a message and the United States intercepts it, or if he discusses it
and we record it with a listening device, those verbatim intercepts are
likely to be more reliable than second-hand reports from an agent.Ó30  Healso noted that Òas we increase emphasis on securing economic intelli-gence, we will have to spy on the more developed countriesÑour alliesand friends with whom we compete economicallyÑbut to whom we turnfirst for political and military assistance in a crisis. This means that rather
than instinctively reaching for human, on-site spying, the United States
will want to look to those impersonal technical systems, primarily satel-
lite photography and intercepts.Ó31Today, the United States conducts the largest SIGINT operation in theworld in support of information relevant to conventional military threats;
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; terrorism; enforcement28Center for Cryptologic History, National Security Agency, Introductory History ofVENONA and Guide to the Translations, Fort George G. Meade, Md., undated.  VENONA
material is also available from the Web site of the National Security Agency at http://
www.nsa.gov:8080/docs/venona/venona.html.29Stephen Schlesinger, ÒCryptanalysis for Peacetime: Codebreaking and the Birth andStructure of the United Nations,Ó Cryptologia, Volume 19(3), July 1995, pp. 217-235.30Stansfield Turner, ÒIntelligence for a New World Order,Ó Foreign Affairs, Fall 1991, pp.150-166.31Turner, ÒIntelligence for a New World Order,Ó 1991, pp. 150-166.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION99of international sanctions; protection of U.S. economic and trade interests;and political and economic developments abroad.¥U.S. intelligence has been used to uncover unfair trade practices(as determined by U.S. law and custom) of other nations whose industries
compete with U.S. businesses, and has helped the U.S. government to
ensure the preservation of a level economic playing field.  According to

the National Security Agency (NSA), the economic benefits of SIGINT
contributions to U.S. industry taken as a whole have totaled tens of bil-
lions of dollars over the last several years.¥In sanctions monitoring and enforcement, intelligence intercepts ofSerbian communications are reported to have been the first indication for
U.S. authorities that an F-16 pilot enforcing a no-fly zone over Serbia and
shot down in June 1995 was in fact alive,32 and an important element in
his rescue.  If the pilot had indeed been captured, U.S. options in Serbia

could have been greatly constrained.¥SIGINT that has been made public or that has been tacitly acknowl-edged includes information about the shoot-down of the Korean airliner
KAL 007 on September 1, 1983, and the bombing of La Belle Discotheque
in West Berlin ordered by Libya in April 1986.¥In foreign policy, accurate and timely intelligence has been, andremains, vital to U.S. efforts to avert conflicts between nations.¥In September 1988, President Ronald Reagan made the decision todisclose NSA decrypts of Iraqi military communications Òto prove that,despite their denials, Iraqi armed forces had used poison gas against the
Kurds.Ó33The information provided by SIGINT has helped to produce informa-tion on weapons proliferation, providing indications of violations of trea-
ties or embargo requirements.  SIGINT has collected information on inter-

national terrorism and foreign drug trafficking, thereby assisting in the
detection of drug shipments intended for delivery to the United States.
Similarly, such information will continue to be a source of important
economic intelligence.In conducting these intelligence-gathering operations, a wide varietyof sources may be targeted, including the communications of govern-
ments, nongovernment institutions, and individuals.  For example, bank-

ing is an international enterprise, and the U.S. government may need to32Daniel Williams, ÒÔIÕm Ready to Get the Hell Out of Here,ÕÓ Washington Post, July 9,1995, p. A1.33 Christopher Andrew, For the PresidentÕs Eyes Only, HarperCollins, New York, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYknow about flows of money for purposes of counterterrorism or sanctionsmonitoring.Although the value of SIGINT to military operations and to law en-forcement is generally unquestioned, senior decision makers have a wide
range of opinions on the value of strategic and/or political intelligence.
Some decision makers are voracious consumers of intelligence reports.
They believe that the reports they receive provide advance notice of an-
other partyÕs plans and intentions, and that their own decisions are betterfor having such information.  These decision makers find that almost no

amount of information is too much and that any given piece of informa-
tion has the potential to be helpful.To illustrate the value of SIGINT to some senior policy makers, it ishelpful to recall President ClintonÕs remarks to the intelligence commu-nity on July 14, 1995, at the CIA: he said that Òin recent months alone youwarned us when Iraq massed its troops against the Kuwaiti border. You
provided vital support to our peacekeeping and humanitarian missions
in Haiti and Rwanda. You helped to strike a blow at a Colombian drug
cartel. You uncovered bribes that would have cheated American compa-
nies out of billions of dollars.Ó  On a previous occasion, then-President
George Bush gave his evaluation of SIGINT when he said that Ò. . . overthe years IÕve come to appreciate more and more the full value of SIGINT.As President and Commander-in-Chief, I can assure you, signals intelli-
gence is a prime factor in the decision making process by which we chart
the course of this nationÕs foreign affairs.Ó34Some policy makers, generally less senior than the President, havestated that while intelligence reports are occasionally helpful, they do not
in general add much to their decision-making ability because they con-
tribute to information overload, are not sufficiently timely in the sense
that the information is revealed shortly in any event, lack necessary con-
text-setting information, or do not provide much information beyond that
available from open sources.  Even among the members of the committee

who have served in senior government positions, this range of opinion is
represented.35The perceived value of strategic SIGINT (as with many other types ofintelligence) depends largely on the judgment and position of the particu-34Public Papers of the Presidents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1991,as quoted by Andrew in For the PresidentÕs Eyes Only, 1995, p. 526.35For an open-source report on the value of intelligence as perceived by different policymakers, see David E. Sanger, ÒEmerging Role for the C.I.A.:  Economic Spy,
Ó New YorkTimes, October 15, 1995, p. 1; and David E. Sanger, ÒWhen Spies Look Out for the AlmightyBuck,Ó New York Times, October 22, 1995, p. 4.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION101lar individuals whom the intelligence community is serving.  These indi-
viduals change over time as administrations come and go, but intelli-
gence capabilities are built up over a time scale longer than the election
cycle.  The result is that the intelligence community gears itself to serve

those decision makers who will demand the most from it, and is loath to
surrender sources and/or capabilities that may prove useful to decision
makers.Since the benefits of strategic intelligence are so subjective, formalcost-benefit analysis cannot be used to justify a given level of support for
intelligence.  Rather, intelligence tends to be supported on a 
Òlevel-of-effortÓ basis, that is, a political judgment about what is 
Òreasonable,Ógiven other defense and nondefense pressures on the overall national
budget.3.3.2  The Impact of Cryptography on Signals Intelligence
Cryptography poses a threat to SIGINT for two separate but relatedreasons:¥Strong cryptography can prevent any given message from beingread or understood.  Strong cryptography used primarily by foreign gov-

ernments with the discipline to use those products on a regular and con-
sistent basis presents the United States with a formidable challenge.  Some

encrypted traffic regularly intercepted by the United States is simply un-
decipherable by any known means.¥Even weak cryptography, if practiced on a widespread basis byforeign governments or other entities, increases the cost of exploitation
dramatically.36  When most messages that are intercepted are unen-
crypted, the cost to determine whether an individual message is interest-
ing is quite low.  However, if most intercepted messages are encrypted,

each one has to be cryptanalyzed individually, because the interceptor
does not know if it is interesting or not.37According to Administration officials who testified to the committee,36This point is echoed in Susan Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts: Issues in U.S.Crypto Policy, 1994, p. 25.37For example, assume that 1 out of every 1,000 messages is interesting and that the costof intercepting a message is X and the cost of decrypting a message is Y.  Thus, each
interesting message is acquired at a cost of 1,000 X + Y.  However, if every message is

encrypted, the cost of each interesting message is 1,000 (X + Y), which is approximately1,000 Y larger.  In other words, the cryptanalyst must do 1,000 times more work for each
interesting message.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthe acquisition and proper use of cryptography by a foreign adversarycould impair the national security interests of the United States in a num-
ber of ways:¥Cryptography used by adversaries on a wide scale would signifi-cantly increase the cost and difficulty of intelligence gathering across the
full range of U.S. national security interests.¥Cryptography used by governments and foreign companies canincrease an adversaryÕs capability to conceal the development of missiledelivery systems and weapons of mass destruction.¥Cryptography can improve the ability of an adversary to maintainthe secrecy of its military operations to the detriment of U.S. or allied
military forces that might be similarly engaged.The above comments suggest that the deployment of strong cryptog-raphy that is widely used will diminish the capabilities of those respon-
sible for SIGINT.  Today, there is a noticeable trend toward better and

cheaper encryption that is steadily closing the window of exploitation of
unencrypted communications.  The growth of strong encryption will re-

duce the availability of such intelligence.  Using capabilities and tech-

niques developed during the Cold War, the SIGINT system will continue
its efforts to collect against countries and other entities newly hostile to
the United States.  Many governments and parties in those nations, how-

ever, will be potential customers for advanced cryptography as it be-
comes available on world markets.  In the absence of improved crypt-

analytic methods, cooperative arrangements with foreign governments,
and new ways of approaching the information collection problem, it is
likely that losses in traditional SIGINT capability would result in a dimin-
ished effectiveness of the U.S. intelligence community.3.4  SIMILARITIES IN AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FOREIGN
POLICY/NATIONAL SECURITY AND LAW ENFORCEMENTNEEDS FOR COMMUNICATIONS MONITORINGIt is instructive to consider the similarities in and differences betweennational security and law enforcement needs for communications moni-
toring.3.4.1  Similarities
¥Secrecy.  Both foreign policy and law enforcement authorities re-
gard surreptitiously intercepted communications as a more reliable source
than information produced through other means.  Surveillance targets
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION103usually believe (however falsely) that their communications are private;therefore, eavesdropping must be surreptitious and the secrecy of moni-
toring maintained.  Thus, the identity and/or nature of specific SIGINT

sources are generally very sensitive pieces of information, and are di-
vulged only for good cause.¥Timeliness.  For support of tactical operations, near-real-time infor-mation may be needed (e.g., when a crime or terrorist operation is immi-
nent, when hostile forces are about to be engaged).¥Resources available to targets.  Many parties targeted for electronic
surveillance for foreign policy reasons or by law enforcement authorities
lack the resources to develop their own security products, and are most
likely to use what they can purchase on the commercial market.¥Allocation of resources for collection.  The size of the budget allocated
to law enforcement and to the U.S. intelligence community is not unlim-
ited.  Available resources constrain both the amount of surveillance law

enforcement officials can undertake and the ability of the U.S. SIGINT
system to respond to the full range of national intelligence requirements
levied upon it.ÑElectronic surveillance, although in many cases critical, is only oneof the tools available to U.S. law enforcement.  Because it is manpower

intensive, it is a tool used sparingly; thus, it represents a relatively small
percentage of the total investment.  The average cost of a wiretap order is

$57,000 (see Appendix D) or approximately one-half of a full-time-equiva-
lent agent-year.ÑThe U.S. SIGINT system is a major contributor to the overall U.S.intelligence collection capability and represents a correspondingly large
percentage of the foreign intelligence budget.  Although large, the U.S.

system is by no means funded to Òvacuum cleanÓ the world
Õs communi-cations.  It is sized to gather the most potentially lucrative foreign signals
and targeted very selectively to collect and analyze only those communi-
cations most likely to yield information relating to high-priority intelli-
gence needs.¥Perceptions of the problem.  The volume of electronic traffic and the
use of encryption are both expected to grow, but how the growth of one
will compare to that of the other is unclear at present.  If the overall

growth in the volume of unencrypted electronic traffic lags the growth in
the use of cryptography, those conducting surveillance for law enforce-
ment or foreign policy reasons may perceive a loss in access because the
fraction of intercepts available to them will decrease, even if the absolute
amount of information intercepted has increased as the result of larger
volumes of information.  Of course, if the communicating parties take

special care to encrypt their sensitive communications, the absolute
amount of useful information intercepted may decrease as well.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY3.4.2  Differences
¥Protection of sources.  While the distinction is not hard and fast, lawenforcement authorities conducting an electronic surveillance are gener-
ally seeking specific items of evidence that relate to a criminal act and that
can be presented in open court, which implies that the source of such
information (i.e., the wiretap) will be revealed (and possibly challenged
for legal validity).  By contrast, national security authorities are usually

seeking a body of intelligence information over a longer period of time
and are therefore far more concerned with preserving the secrecy of
sources and methods.¥Definition of interests.  There is a consensus, expressed in law, about
the specific types of domestic crimes that may be investigated through the
use of wiretapping.  Even internationally, there is some degree of consen-

sus about what activities are criminal; the existence of this consensus
enables a considerable amount of law enforcement cooperation on a vari-
ety of matters.  National security interests are defined differently and are
subject to refinement in a changing world, and security interests often
vary from nation to nation.  However, a community of interest among

NATO allies and between the United States and the major nations of the
free world makes possible fruitful intelligence relationships, even though
the United States may at times target a nation that is both ally and com-
petitor.¥Volume of potentially relevant communications.  The volume of com-
munications of interest to law enforcement authorities is small compared
to the volume of interest to national security authorities.¥Legal framework.  Domestic law enforcement authorities are bound
by constitutional protections and legislation that limit their ability to con-
duct electronic surveillance.  National security authorities operate under

far fewer legal constraints in monitoring the communications of foreign
parties located outside the United States.¥Perceptions of vulnerability to surveillance.  Parties targeted by na-
tional security authorities are far more likely to take steps to protect their
communications than are most criminals.3.5  BUSINESS AND INDIVIDUAL NEEDS FOR EXCEPTIONAL
ACCESS TO PROTECTED INFORMATIONAs noted above in Section 3.1, an employer may need access to datathat has been encrypted by an employee.  Corporations that use cryptog-

raphy for confidentiality must always be concerned with the risk that
keys will be lost, corrupted, required in some emergency situation, or beCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION105otherwise unavailable, and they have a valid interest in defending theirinterests in the face of these eventualities.38Cryptography can present problems for companies attempting to sat-isfy their legitimate business interests in access to stored and communi-
cated information:¥Stored data.  For entirely legitimate business reasons, an employee
might encrypt business records, but due to circumstances such as vacation
or sick leave, the employer might need to read the contents of these records
without the employeeÕs immediate assistance.  Then again, an employee
might simply forget the relevant password to an encrypted file, or an em-
ployee might maliciously refuse to provide the key (e.g., if he has a grudge
against his employer), or might keep records that are related to improper
activities but encrypt them to keep them private; a business undertaking an
audit to uncover or investigate these activities might well need to read
these records without the assistance of the employee.  For example, in a

dispute over alleged wrongdoing of his superiors, a Washington, D.C.,
financial analyst changed the password on the cityÕs computer and refusedto share it.39  In another incident, the former chief financial officer of an
insurance company, Golden Eagle Group Ltd., installed a password known

only to himself and froze out operations.  He demanded a personal com-

puter that he claimed was his, his final paycheck, a letter of reference, and a
$100 feeÑpresumably for revealing the password.40  While technical fixes
for these problems are relatively easy, they do demonstrate the existence of
motivation to undertake such actions.  Furthermore, it is poor management

practice that allows a single employee to control critical data, but that issue

is beyond the scope of this study.¥Communications.  A number of corporations provided input to the
committee indicating that for entirely legitimate business reasons (e.g.,
for resolution of a dispute between the corporation and a customer), an
employer might need to learn about the content of an employeeÕs commu-nications.  Alternatively, an employee might use company communica-

tions facilities as a means for conducting improper activities (e.g., leaking
company-confidential information, stealing corporate assets, engaging in38While users may lose or corrupt keys used for user authentication, the proceduresneeded in this event are different than if the keys in question are for encryption.  For

example, a lost authentication key creates a need to revoke the key, so that another party that
comes into possession of the authentication key cannot impersonate the original owner.  Bycontrast, an encryption key that is lost creates a need to recover the key.
39Peter G. Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1995, p. 154.40Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p. 154.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYkickback or fraud schemes, inappropriately favoring one supplier overanother).  A business undertaking an audit to uncover or investigate these

activities might well need to monitor these communications without the
consent of the employee (Box 3.4)41 but would be unable to do so if the
communications were encrypted.  In other instances, a company might

wish to assist law enforcement officials in investigating information
crimes against it42 but would not be able to do so if it could not obtain
access to unsanctioned employee-encrypted files or communications.
Many, though certainly not all, businesses require prospective employees
to agree as a condition of employment that their communications are
subject to employer monitoring under various circumstances.43It is a generally held view among businesses that provisions for cor-porate exceptional access to stored data are more important than such
provisions for communications.44  For individuals, the distinction is even41For example, employees with Internet access may spend so much time on nonwork-related Internet activities that their productivity is impaired.  Concerns about such prob-
lems have led some companies to monitor the Internet activities of their employees, andspawned products that covertly monitor and record Internet use.  See Laurie Flynn, 
ÒFind-ing On-line Distractions, Employers Strive to Keep Workers in Line,Ó New York Times, No-vember 6, 1995, p. D5.42A number of examples of such cooperation can be found in Peter Schweizer, FriendlySpies, Atlantic Monthly Press, New York, 1993.43The legal ramifications of employer access to on-the-job communications of employeesare interesting, though outside the scope of this report.  For example, a company employee

may communicate with another company employee using cryptography that denies em-ployer access to the content of those communications; such use may be contrary to explicitcompany policy.  May an employee who has violated company policy in this manner be

discharged legally?  In general, employer access to on-the-job communications raises many
issues of ethics and privacy, even if such access is explicitly permitted by contract or policy.44This distinction becomes somewhat fuzzy when considering technologies such as e-mail that serve the purpose of communications but that also involve data storage.  Greater
clarity is possible if one distinguishes between the electronic bits of a message in transit(e.g., on a wire) and the same bits that are at rest (e.g., in a file).  With e-mail, the message is

sent and then stored; thus, e-mail can be regarded as a stored communication.  These
comments suggest that a need for exceptional access to e-mail is much more similar to thatfor storage than for communications, because it is much more likely that a need will arise to
read an e-mail message after it has been stored than while it is in transit.  A likely scenario
of exceptional access to e-mail is that a user may receive e-mail encrypted with a public keyfor which he no longer has the corresponding private key (that would enable him to de-
crypt incoming messages).  While this user could in principle contact the senders and in-
form them of a new public key, an alternative would be to develop a system that wouldpermit him to obtain exceptional access without requiring such actions.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION107BOX 3.4Examples of Business Needs for Exceptional Access toCommunications¥  A major Fortune 1000 corporation was the subject of various articles in the
relevant trade press.  These articles described conditions within the corporation (e.g.,
employee morale) that were based on information supplied by employees of thiscorporation acting in an unauthorized manner and contrary to company policy;
moreover, these articles were regarded by corporate management as being highlyembarrassing to the company.  The employees responsible were identified through a
review of tapes of all their telephone conversations in the period immediately pre-
ceding publication of the damaging articles, and were summarily dismissed.  As a
condition of employment, these employees had given their employer permission torecord their telephone calls.¥  Executives at a major Fortune 1000 corporation had made certain accommo-
dations in settling the accounts of a particular client that, while legal, materiallydistorted an accounting audit of the books of that client.  A review of the telephone

conversations in the relevant period indicated that these executives had done soknowingly, and they were dismissed.  As a condition of employment, these execu-
tives had given their employer permission to record their telephone calls.¥  Attempting to resolve a dispute about the specific terms of a contract to sell oil
at a particular price, a multinational oil company needed to obtain all relevantrecords.  Given the fact that oil prices fluctuate significantly on a minute-by-minute

basis, most such trades are conducted and agreed to by telephone.  All such calls are
recorded, in accordance with contracts signed by traders as a condition of employ-ment.  Review of these voice records provided sufficient information to resolve the
dispute.¥  A multinational company was notified by a law enforcement agency in Na-
tion A regarding its suspicions that an employee of the company was committingfraud against the company.  This employee was a national of Nation B.  The compa-
ny began an investigation of this individual in cooperation with law enforcement
authorities in Nation B, and in due course, legal authorization for a wiretap on thisindividual using company facilities was obtained.  The company cooperated with
these law enforcement authorities in the installation of the wiretap.SOURCE: Anonymous testimony to the Committee to Study National CryptographyPolicy.sharper.  Private individuals as well as businesses have a need to retrieve
encrypted data that is stored and for which they may have lost or forgot-
ten the key.  For example, a person may have lost the key to an encrypted

will or financial statement and wish to retrieve the data.  However, it is

much more difficult to imagine circumstances under which a person

might have a legitimate need for the real-time monitoring of communica-
tions.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY3.6  OTHER TYPES OF EXCEPTIONAL ACCESS
TO PROTECTED INFORMATIONThe discussion of exceptional access above involves only the question
of encryption for confidentiality.  While it is possible to imagine legiti-

mate needs for exceptional access to encrypted data (for purposes of en-
suring secrecy), it is nearly impossible to imagine a legitimate need for
exceptional access to cryptography used for the purposes of user authen-
tication, data integrity, or nonrepudiation.  In a business context, these

cryptographic capabilities implement or support longstanding legal pre-
cepts that are essential to the conduct of commerce.¥Without unforgeable digital signatures, the concept of a bindingcontract is seriously weakened.¥Without trusted digitally notarized documents, questions of timeprecedence might not be legally resolvable.¥Without unforgeable integrity checks, the notion of a certifiablyaccurate and authentic copy of digital documents is empty.¥Without strong authentication and unquestionable nonrepudia-tion, the analog of registered delivery in postal systems is open to suspi-
cion.45With exceptional access to the cryptography implementing such fea-tures or to the private keys associated with them, the legal protection that
such features are intended to provide might well be called into question.
At a minimum, there would likely be a questioning of the validity or
integrity of the protective safeguards, and there might be grounds for
legal challenge.  For example, a businessperson might have to demon-

strate to the satisfaction of a court or jury that he has properly and ad-
equately protected the private keys used to digitally sign his contracts.It is conceivable that the government, for national security purposes,might seek exceptional access to such capabilities for offensive informa-
tion warfare (see Chapter 2); however, public policy should not promote
these capabilities, because such access could well undermine public con-
fidence in such cryptographic mechanisms.45In fact, digital signatures and nonrepudiation provide a stronger guarantee than doesregistered delivery; the former can be used to assure the delivery of the contents of anÒenvelope,Ó whereas postal registered delivery can only be used to assure the delivery of
the envelope.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEEDS FOR ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED INFORMATION1093.7  RECAP
In general, cryptography for confidentiality involves a party under-taking an encryption (to protect information by generating ciphertext from
plaintext) and a party authorized by the encryptor to decrypt the
ciphertext and thus recover the original plaintext.  In the case of informa-
tion that is communicated, these parties are in general different individu-
als.  In the case of information that is stored, the first party and the second

party are in general the same individual.  However, circumstances can

and do arise in which third parties (i.e., decrypting parties that are not
originally authorized or intended by the encrypting party to recover the
information involved) may need access to such information.  These needs

for exceptional access to encrypted information may arise from businesses,
individuals, law enforcement, and national security, and these needs are
different depending on the parties in question.  Encryption that renders

such information confidential threatens the ability of these third parties to
obtain the necessary access.How the needs for confidentiality and exceptional access are recon-ciled in a policy context is the subject of Part II.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART
 II
Policy InstrumentsTO THE BEST OF THE COMMITTEEÕS KNOWLEDGE, the goals of U.S. cryptographypolicy have not been explicitly formalized and articulated within the government.
However, senior government officials have indicated that U.S. cryptography
policy seeks to promote the following objectives:¥Deployment of encryption adequate and strong enough to protect elec-
tronic commerce that may be transacted on the future information infrastructure;¥Development and adoption of global (rather than national) standards and
solutions;¥Widespread deployment of products with encryption capabilities for con-
fidentiality that enable legal access for law enforcement and national security
purposes; and¥Avoidance of the development of de facto cryptography standards (either
domestically or globally) that do not permit access for law enforcement and
national security purposes, thus ensuring that the use of such products remains
relatively limited.Many analysts believe that these goals are irreconcilable.  To the extent thatthis is so, the U.S. government is thus faced with a policy problem requiring a
compromise among these goals that is tolerable, though by assumption not ideal
with respect to any individual goal.  Such has always been the case with many

issues that generate social controversyÑbalancing product safety against the
undesirability of burdensome regulation on product vendors, public health against
the rights of individuals to refuse medical treatment, and so on.111Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYAs of this writing, U.S. cryptography policy is still evolving, and the par-ticular laws, regulations, and other levers that government uses to influence
behavior and policy are under review or are being developed.Chapter 4 is devoted to the subject of export controls, which dominate indus-try concerns about national cryptography policy.  Many senior executives in the
information technology industry perceive these controls as a major limitation on
their ability to export products with encryption capabilities.  Furthermore, be-

cause exports of products with encryption capabilities are governed by the regime
applied to technologies associated with munitions, reflecting the importance of
cryptography to national security, they are generally subject to more stringent
controls than are exports of other computer-related technologies.Chapter 5 addresses the subject of escrowed encryption.  Escrowed encryp-
tion is a form of encryption intended to provide strong protection for legitimate
uses but also to permit exceptional access by government officials, by corporate
employers, or by end users under specified circumstances.  Since 1993, the Clinton

Administration has aggressively promoted escrowed encryption as a basic pillar
of national cryptography policy.  Public concerns about escrowed encryption

have focused on the possibilities for failure in the mechanisms intended to prevent
improper access to encrypted information, leading to losses of confidentiality.Chapter 6 addresses a variety of other aspects of national cryptography policyand public concerns that these aspects have raised.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS1131134Export Controls
Export controls on cryptography and related technical data have beena pillar of national cryptography policy for many years.  Increasingly,

they have generated controversy because they pit the needs of national
security to conduct signals intelligence against the information security
needs of legitimate U.S. businesses and the markets of U.S. manufacturers
whose products might meet these needs.  Chapter 4 describes the current
state of export controls on cryptography and issues that these controls
raise, including their effectiveness in achieving their stated objectives;
negative effects that the export control regime has on U.S. businesses and
U.S. vendors of information technology that must be weighed against the
positive effects of reducing the use of cryptography abroad; the mismatch
between vendor and government perceptions of export controls; and vari-
ous other aspects of the export control process as it is experienced by
those subject to it.4.1  BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF CURRENT EXPORT CONTROLS
Many advanced industrialized nations maintain controls on exportsof cryptography, including the United States.  The discussion below fo-

cuses on U.S. export controls; Appendix G addresses foreign export con-
trol regimes on cryptography.4.1.1  The Rationale for Export Controls
On the basis of discussion with senior government officials and itsown deliberations, the committee believes that the current U.S. exportCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYcontrol regime on products with encryption capabilities for confidential-ity is intended to serve two primary purposes:¥To delay the spread of strong cryptographic capabilities and the
use of those capabilities throughout the world.  Senior intelligence offi-

cials recognize that in the long run, the ability of intelligence agencies to
engage in signals intelligence will inevitably diminish due to a variety of
technological trends, including the greater use of cryptography.1¥To give the U.S. government a tool for monitoring and influencing
the commercial development of cryptography.  Since any U.S. vendor

that wishes to export a product with encryption capabilities for confiden-
tiality must approach the U.S. government for permission to do so, the
export license approval process is an opportunity for the U.S. government
to learn in detail about the capabilities of such products.  Moreover, the

results of the license approval process have influenced the cryptography
that is available on the international market.4.1.2  General Description
2Authority to regulate imports and exports of products with crypto-graphic capabilities to and from the United States derives from two items
of legislation: the Arms Export Control Act (AECA) of 1949 (intended to
regulate munitions) and the Export Administration Act (EAA; intended
to regulate so-called dual-use products3).  The AECA is the legislative
basis for the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR), in which
the U.S. Munitions List (USML) is defined and specified.  Items on the

USML are regarded for purposes of import and export as munitions, and
the ITAR are administered by the Department of State.  The EAA is the

legislative basis for the Export Administration Regulations (EAR), which1Although the committee came to this conclusion on its own, it is consistent with that ofthe Office of Technology Assessment, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environ-ments, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., September 1994.2Two references that provide detailed descriptions of the U.S. export control regime forproducts with encryption capability are a memorandum by Fred Greguras of the law firm
Fenwick & West (Palo Alto, Calif.), dated March 6, 1995, and titled ÒUpdate on CurrentStatus of U.S. Export Administration Regulations on SoftwareÓ (available at http://www.batnet.com:80/oikoumene/SftwareEU.html), and a paper by Ira Rubinstein, ÒExport Con-
trols on Encryption Software,Ó in Coping with U.S. Export Controls 1994, Commercial Law &Practice Course Handbook Series No. A-733, Practicing Law Institute, October 18, 1995.The Greguras memorandum focuses primarily on the requirements of products controlled
by the Commerce Control List, while the Rubinstein paper focuses primarily on how tomove a product from the Munitions List to the Commerce Control List.3A dual-use item is one that has both military and civilian applications.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS115define dual-use items on a list known as the Commerce Control List(CCL);4 the EAR are administered by the Department of Commerce.  TheEAA lapsed in 1994 but has been continued under executive order since
that time.  Both the AECA and the EAA specify sanctions that can be

applied in the event that recipients of goods exported from the United
States fail to comply with all relevant requirements, such as agreements to
refrain from reexport (Box 4.1).At present, products with encryption capabilities can be importedinto the United States without restriction, although the President does
have statutory authority to regulate such imports if appropriate.  Exports

are a different matter.  Any export of an item covered by the USML

requires a specific affirmative decision by the State DepartmentÕs Officeof Defense Trade Controls, a process that can be time-consuming and
cumbersome from the perspective of the vendor and prospective foreign
purchaser.The ITAR regulate and control exports of all Òcryptographic systems,equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or soft-
ware with the capability of maintaining secrecy or confidentiality of infor-
mation or information systemsÓ; in addition, they regulate informationabout cryptography but not implemented in a product in a category
known as Òtechnical data.Ó5Until 1983, USML controls were maintained on all cryptography prod-
ucts.  However, since that time, a number of relaxations in these controls

have been implemented (Box 4.2), although many critics contend that
such relaxation has lagged significantly behind the evolving marketplace.
Today, the ITAR provide a number of certain categorical exemptions that
allow for products in those categories to be regulated as dual-use items
and controlled exclusively by the CCL.  For products that do not fall into

these categories and for which there is some question about whether it is
the USML or the CCL that governs their export, the ITAR also provide for
a procedure known as commodity jurisdiction,6 under which potential
exporters can obtain judgments from the State Department about which
list governs a specific product.  A product granted commodity jurisdic-

tion to the CCL falls under the control of the EAR and the Department of
Commerce.  Note that commodity jurisdiction to the CCL is generally

granted for products with encryption capabilities using 40-bit keys re-
gardless of the algorithm used, although these decisions are made on a4The CCL is also commonly known as the Commodity Control List.5However, encryption products intended for domestic Canadian use in general do notrequire export licenses.6Commodity jurisdiction is also often known by its acronym, CJ.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 4.1Enforcing Compliance with End-Use AgreementsIn general, a U.S. Munitions List (USML) license is granted to a U.S. exporter forthe shipping of a product, technical data, or service covered by the USML to a par-ticular foreign recipient for a set of specified end uses and subject to a number of
conditions (e.g., restrictions on reexport to another nation, nontransfer to a thirdparty).  The full range of ITAR sanctions is available against the U.S. exporter and the
foreign recipient outside the United States.The ITAR specify that as a condition of receiving a USML license, the U.S. export-er must include in the contract with the foreign recipient language that binds therecipient to abide by all appropriate end-use restrictions.  Furthermore, the U.S.

exporter that does not take reasonable steps to enforce the contract is subject to ITARcriminal and civil sanctions.  But how can end-use restrictions be enforced for a
foreign recipient?A number of sanctions are available to enforce the compliance of foreign recip-ients of USML items exported from the United States.  The primary sanctions avail-
able are the criminal and civil liabilities established by the Arms Export Control Act
(AECA); the foreign recipient can face civil and/or criminal charges in U.S. federalcourts for violating the AECA.  Although different U.S. courts have different views on
extraterritoriality claims asserted for U.S. law, a criminal conviction or a successful
civil lawsuit could result in the imposition of criminal penalties on individuals in-volved and/or seizure of any U.S. assets of the foreign recipient.  (When there are no
U.S. assets, recovering fines or damages can be highly problematic, although some
international agreements and treaties provide for cooperation in such cases.)  Wheth-
er an individual could be forced to return to the United States for incarcerationwould depend on the existence of an appropriate extradition treaty between theUnited States and the foreign nation to whose jurisdiction the individual is subject.A second avenue of enforcement is that the foreign recipient found to be in vio-lation can be denied all further exports from the United States.  In addition, the
foreign violator can be denied permission to compete for contracts with the U.S.government.  From time to time, proposals are made to apply sanctions against vio-

lators that would deny privileges for them to export products to the United States,though such proposals often create political controversy.A third mechanism of enforcement may proceed through diplomatic channels.Depending on the nation to whose jurisdiction the foreign recipient is subject, theU.S. government may well approach the government of that nation to seek its assis-tance in persuading or forcing the recipient to abide by the relevant end-use restric-
tions.A fourth mechanism of enforcement is the sales contract between the U.S. ex-porter and the foreign recipient, which provides a mechanism for civil action against
the foreign recipient.  A foreign buyer who violates the end-use restrictions is in
breach of contract with the U.S. exporter, who may then sue for damages incurred bythe U.S. company.  Depending on the language of the contract, the suit may be

carried out in U.S. or foreign courts; alternatively, the firms may submit to bindingarbitration.The operation of these enforcement mechanisms can be cumbersome, uncertain,and slow.  But they exist, and they are used.  Thus, while some analysts believe thatthey do not provide sufficient protection for U.S. national security interests, othersdefend them as a reasonable but not perfect attempt at defending those interests.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS117BOX 4.2Licensing Relaxations on Cryptography:  A Short History
Prior to 1983, all cryptography exports required individual licenses from the StateDepartment.  Since then, a number of changes have been proposed and mostly
implemented.YearChange
1983Distribution licenses established allowing exports to multiple users under a
single license1987Nonconfidentiality products moved to Department of Commerce (DOC) on
a case-by-case basis1990International Traffic in Arms Regulations amendedÑall nonconfidentiality
products under DOC jurisdiction1990Mass-market general-purpose software with encryption for confidentiality
 moved to DOC on case-by-case basis
1992Software Publishers Association agreement providing for 40-bit RC2/RC4-
based products under DOC jurisdiction1993Mass-market hardware products with encryption capabilities moved to DOC
on case-by-case basis1994Reforms to expedite license processing at Department of State
1995Proposal to move to DOC software products with 64-bit cryptography for
confidentiality with Òproperly escrowedÓ keys1996ÒPersonal useÓ exemption finalized
SOURCE:  National Security Agency.
product-by-product basis.  In addition, when a case-by-case export licens-
ing decision results in CCL jurisdiction for a software product, it is usually
only the object code, which cannot be modified easily, that is transferred;
the source code of the product (embedding the identical functionality but
more easily modified) generally remains on the USML.As described in Box 4.3, key differences between the USML and theCCL have the effect that items on the CCL enjoy more liberal export
consideration than items on the USML.  (This report uses the term 
Òliberalexport considerationÓ to mean treatment under the CCL.)  Most impor-
tantly, a product controlled by the CCL is reviewed only once by the U.S.
government, thus drastically simplifying the marketing and sale of the
product overseas.The most important of these explicit categorical exemptions to theUSML for cryptography are described in Box 4.4.  In addition, the current

export control regime provides for an individual case-by-case review of
USML licensing applications for products that do not fall under the juris-
diction of the CCL.  Under current practice, USML licenses to acquire and
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 4.3Important Differences Between the U.S. Munitions List and the Commerce Control ListItems are included on the USML if the item is Òinherently militaryin characterÓ; the end use is irrelevant in such a determination.Broad categories of product are included.Decisions about export can take as long as necessary.Export licenses can be denied on very general grounds (e.g., theexport would be against the U.S. national interest).For Items on Commerce Control List (CCL)Department of Commerce may limit exports only to the extent thatthey would make Òa significant contribution to the military poten-tial of any other country which would prove detrimental to thenational security of the United StatesÓ or 
Òwhere necessary to fur-ther significantly the foreign policy of the United States.Ó  The his-
tory of the Export Administration Act strongly suggests that its na-tional security purpose is to deny dual-use items to countries ofCommunist Bloc nations, nations of concern with respect to prolif-eration of weapons of mass destruction, and other rogue nations.Performance parameters rather than broad categories define includeditems.Decisions about export must be completed within 120 days.Export licenses can be denied only on very specific grounds (e.g., highlikelihood of diversion to proscribed nations).For Items on U.S. Munitions List (USML)Department of State has broad leeway to take national securityconsiderations into account in licensing decisions; indeed,national security and foreign policy considerations are thedriving force behind the Arms Export Control Act.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS1191Bulk licenses authorize multiple shipments without requiring individual approval.  Distribution licenses authorize multiple
shipments to a foreign distributor.  In each case, record-keeping requirements are imposed on the vendor.  In practice, a
distribution license shifts the burden of export restrictions from vendor to distributor.  Under a distribution license, enforc
ement ofrestrictions on end use and on destination nations and post-shipment record-keeping requirements are the responsibility of thedistributor; vendors need not seek an individual license for each specific shipment.2Even if an item is controlled by the CCL, U.S. exporters are not allowed to ship such an item if the exporter knows that it willbe used directly in the production of weapons of mass destruction or ballistic missiles by a certain group of nations.  Moreove
r,U.S. exports from the CCL are prohibited entirely to companies and individuals on a list of ÒSpecially Designated NationalsÓdesignated as agents of Cuba, Libya, Iraq, North Korea, or Yugoslavia or to a list of companies and individuals on the Bureau ofExport AdministrationÕs Table of Denial Orders (including some located in the United States and Europe).Individually validated licenses are generally required, althoughdistribution and bulk licenses are possible .1Prior government approval is needed for export.Licensing decisions are not subject to judicial review.Foreign availability may or may not be a consideration in grantinga license at the discretion of the State Department.Items included on the USML are not subject to periodic review.
A ShipperÕs Export Declaration (SED) is required in all instances.General licenses are often issued, although general licenses do notconvey blanket authority for export.2Prior government approval is generally not needed for export.Licensing decisions are subject to judicial review by a federal judge oran administrative law judge.Foreign availability of items that are substantially equivalent is, bylaw, a consideration in a licensing decision.Items included on the CCL must be reviewed periodically.A SED may be required, unless exemption from the requirement isgranted under the Export Administration Regulations.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 4.4Categorical Exemptions on the USML for Products IncorporatingCryptography and Informal Practices Governing LicensingCategorical ExemptionsThe International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) provide for a number ofcategorical exemptions, including:¥  Mass-market software products that use 40-bit key lengths with the RC2 or RC4
algorithm for confidentiality.1¥  Products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality (of any strength) that
are specifically intended for use only in banking or money transactions.  Products in
this category may have encryption of arbitrary strength.¥  Products that are limited in cryptographic functionality to providing capabili-
ties for user authentication, access control, and data integrity.Products in these categories are automatically granted commodity jurisdiction to theCommerce Control List (CCL).Informal Noncodified ExemptionsThe current export control regime provides for an individual case-by-case reviewof U.S. Munitions List (USML) licensing applications for products that do not fall
under the jurisdiction of the CCL.  Under current practice, certain categories of firms
will generally be granted a USML license through the individual review process toacquire and export for their own use products with encryption capabilities strongerthan that provided by 40-bit RC2/RC4 encryption:2¥  A U.S.-controlled firm (i.e., a U.S. firm operating abroad, a U.S.-controlled
foreign firm, or a foreign subsidiary of a U.S. firm);¥  Banks and financial institutions (including stock brokerages and insurance
companies), whether U.S.-controlled or -owned or foreign-owned, if the productsinvolved are intended for use in internal communications and communications with
other banks even if these communications are not limited strictly to banking or mon-ey transactions.1The RC2 and RC4 algorithms are symmetric-key encryption algorithms de-veloped by RSA Data Security Inc. (RSADSI).  They are both proprietary algo-
rithms, and manufacturers of products using these algorithms must enter into alicensing arrangement with RSADSI.  RC2 and RC4 are also trademarks owned

by RSADSI, although both algorithms have appeared on the Internet.  A prod-
uct with capabilities for confidentiality will be automatically granted com-modity jurisdiction to the CCL if it meets a certain set of requirements, the
most important of which are the following:a.  The software includes encryption for data confidentiality and uses the
RC4 and/or RC2 algorithms with a key space of 40 bits.b.  If both RC4 and RC2 are used in the same software, their functionality
must be separate; that is, no data can be operated on by both routines.c.  The software must not allow the alteration of the data encryption mecha-
nism and its associated key spaces by the user or by any other program.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS121export for internal use products with encryption capabilities stronger thanthat provided by 40-bit RC2/RC4 encryption (hereafter in this chapter
called Òstrong encryptionÓ7) are generally granted to U.S.-controlled firms
(i.e., U.S. firms operating abroad, U.S.-controlled foreign firms, or foreign
subsidiaries of a U.S. firm).  In addition, banks and financial institutions

(including stock brokerages and insurance companies), whether U.S.-con-
trolled or -owned or foreign-owned, are generally granted USML licenses
for strong encryption for use in internal communications and communi-
cations with other banks even if these communications are not limited
strictly to banking or money transactions.In September 1994, the Administration promulgated regulations thatprovided for U.S. vendors to distribute approved products with encryp-
tion capabilities for confidentiality directly from the United States to for-
eign customers without using a foreign distributor and without prior7How much stronger than 40-bit RC2/RC4 is unspecified.  Products incorporating the 56-
bit DES algorithm are often approved for these informal exemptions, and at times even
products using larger key sizes have been approved.  But the key size is not unlimited, as
may be the case under the explicit categorical exemptions specified in the ITAR.d.  The key exchange used in the data encryption must be based on either a
public-key algorithm with a key space less than or equal to a 512-bit modulus
and/or a symmetrical algorithm with a key space less than or equal to 64 bits.e.  The software must not allow the alteration of the key management
mechanism and its associated key space by the user or any other program.To ensure that the software has properly implemented the approved encryp-tion algorithm(s), the State Department requires that the product pass a Òvectortest,Ó in which the vendor receives test data (the vector) and a random key
from the State Department, encrypts the vector with the product using the keyprovided, and returns the result to the State Department; if the product-com-
puted result is identical to the known correct answer, the product automati-cally qualifies for jurisdiction under the CCL.Note that the specific technical requirements described in this footnote arenot contained in the Federal Register; rather, they were described in a StateDepartment document, any change in which is not subject to an official pro-cedure for public comment.  (These conditions were first published in 
ÒDe-fense Trade News,Ó Volume 3(4), October 1992, pp. 11-15.  
ÒDefense TradeNewsÓ is a newsletter published by the Office of Defense Trade Controls at theDepartment of State.)2See Footnote 7 in the main text of this chapter.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYState Department approval for each export.8  It also announced plans to
finalize a Òpersonal use exemptionÓ to allow license-free temporary ex-
ports of products with encryption capabilities when intended for per-
sonal use; a final rule on the personal use exemption was announced in
early 1996 and is discussed below in Section 4.3.2.  Lastly, it announced a
number of actions intended to streamline the export control process to
provide more rapid turnaround for certain ÒpreapprovedÓ products.
 In August 1995, the Administration announced a proposal to liberal-
ize export controls on software products with encryption capabilities for
confidentiality that use algorithms with a key space of 64 or fewer bits,
provided that the key(s) required to decrypt messages and files are Òprop-erly escrowedÓ; such products would be transferred to the CCL.  How-
ever, since an understanding of this proposal requires some background
in escrowed encryption, discussion of it is deferred to Chapter 5.4.1.3  Discussion of Current Licensing Practices
Categorical ExemptionsThe categorical exemptions described in Box 4.4 raise a number ofissues:¥In the case of the 40-bit limitation, the committee was unable tofind a specific analytical basis for this figure.  Most likely, it was the result

of a set of compromises that were politically driven by all of the parties
involved.9  However, whatever the basis for this key size, recent success-
8Prior to this rule, almost every encryption export required an individual license.  Only
those exports covered by a distribution arrangement could be shipped without an indi-vidual license.  This distribution arrangement required a U.S. vendor of products with
cryptographic capabilities to export to a foreign distributor that could then resell them to
multiple end users.  The distribution arrangement had to be approved by the State Depart-
ment and included some specific language.  Under the new rule, a U.S. vendor without a
foreign distributor can essentially act as his own distributor, and avoid having to obtain a
separate license for each sale.  Exporters are required to submit a proposed arrangement
identifying, among other things, specific items to be shipped, proposed end users and enduse, and countries to which the items are destined.  Upon approval of the arrangement,

exporters are permitted to ship the specified products directly to end users in the approvedcountries based on a single license.  See Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, Department of
State, ÒAmendment to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations,Ó Federal Register, Sep-tember 2, 1994.9It is worth noting a common argument among many nongovernment observers that anylevel of encryption that qualifies for export (e.g., that qualifies for control by the CCL, or
that is granted an export license under the USML) must be easily defeatable by NSA, or elseCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS123ful demonstrations of the ability to undertake brute-force cryptanalysison messages encrypted with a 40-bit key (Box 4.5) have led to a wide-
spread perception that such key sizes are inadequate for meaningful in-
formation security.¥In the case of products intended for use only in banking or moneytransactions, the exemption results from the recognition by national secu-
rity authorities that the integrity of the worldÕs financial system is worthprotecting with high levels of cryptographic security.  Given the primacy
of the U.S. banking community in international financial markets, such a
conclusion makes eminent sense.  Furthermore, at the time this exemp-

tion was promulgated, the financial community was the primary cus-
tomer for products with encryption capabilities.This rationale for protecting banking and money transactions natu-rally calls attention to the possibilities inherent in a world of electronic
commerce, in which routine communications will be increasingly likely
to include information related to financial transactions.  Banks (and retail

shops, manufacturers, suppliers, end customers, and so on) will engage in
such communications across national borders.  In a future world of elec-

tronic commerce, connections among nonfinancial institutions may be-
come as important as the banking networks are today.  At least one ven-

dor has been granted authority to use strong encryption in software

intended for export that would support international electronic commerce
(though under the terms of the license, strong encryption applies only to
a small portion of the transaction message).10¥In the case of products useful only for user authentication, accesscontrol, and data integrity, the exemption resulted from a judgment that
the benefits of more easily available technology for these purposes out-
weigh whatever costs there might be to such availability.  Thus, in prin-

ciple, these nonconfidentiality products from U.S. vendors should be

available overseas without significant restriction.In practice, however, this is not entirely the case.  Export restrictions
on confidentiality have some ÒspilloverÓ effects that reduce somewhat
NSA would not allow it to leave the country.  The subtext of this argument is that such a
level of encryption is per force inadequate.  Of course, taken to its logical conclusion, this
argument renders impossible any agreement between national security authorities and ven-
dors and users regarding acceptable levels of encryption for export.10ÒExport Approved for Software to Aid Commerce on Internet,Ó New York Times, May 8,1995, p. D7.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthe availability of products that are intended primarily for authentica-tion.11Another spillover effect arises from a desire among vendors and us-ers to build and use products that integrate multiple cryptographic capa-
bilities (for confidentiality and for authentication/integrity) with general-BOX 4.5Successful Challenges to 40-bit EncryptionIn the summer of 1995, a message encoded with the 40-bit RC4 algorithm wassuccessfully decrypted without prior knowledge of the key by Damien Doligez of theINRIA organization in France.  The message in question was a record of an actual

submission of form data that was sent to NetscapeÕs electronic shop order form inÒsecureÓ mode (including a fictitious name and address).  The challenge was posed
to break the encryption and recover the name and address information entered in the
form and sent securely to Netscape.  Breaking the encryption was accomplished by
a brute-force search on a network of about 120 workstations and a few parallelcomputers at INRIA, Ecole Polytechnique, and ENS.  The key was found after scan-

ning a little more than half the key space in 8 days, and the message was successfullydecrypted.  Doligez noted that many people have access to the amount of computing
power that he used, and concluded that the exportable Secure Sockets Layer proto-
col is not strong enough to resist the attempts of amateurs to decrypt a ÒsecureÓmessage.In January 1996, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology undergraduate studentused a single $83,000 graphics computer to perform the same task in 8 days.  Testing
keys at an average rate of more than 830,000 keys per second, the program runningon this computer would take 15 days to test every key.11For example, Kerberos is an application designed to enhance operating system securityby providing strong cryptographic authentication of users (and hence strong access controlfor system resources).  As a secondary feature, Kerberos was designed with the capability

to provide confidentiality, both as a subroutine library (called by application programmers)and as a set of user programs run by users (e.g., the remote-login program offers an optionto encrypt the network connection involved).  Typically, Kerberos is distributed in the

United States in source code through the Internet to increase its usability on a wide range ofplatforms, to accommodate diverse user needs, and to increase maintainability; source codedistribution is a common practice on the Internet.Only a small amount of Kerberos code is used to support user-invocable confidentiality.However, in order to prevent running afoul of export regulations, most sites from whichKerberos is available strip out all of the cryptographic source code, including the DES
module used as the cryptographic engine to support both the authentication and the confi-dentiality features and every system call to the module for either authentication or confi-dentiality purposes.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS125purpose functionality.  In many instances, it is possible for cryptography
for authentication/integrity and cryptography for confidentiality to draw
on the same algorithm.  Export control regulations may require that a

vendor weaken or even eliminate the encryption capabilities of a product
that also provides authentication/integrity capabilities, with all of the
consequent costs for users and vendors (as described in Section 4.3).Such spillover effects suggest that government actions that discour-age capabilities for confidentiality may also have some negative impact
on the development and use of products with authentication/integrity
capabilities even if there is no direct prohibition or restriction on export of
products with capabilities only for the latter.Informal Noncodified PracticesAs described above, it is current practice to grant USML licenses forexports of strong cryptography to firms in a number of categories de-
scribed in Box 4.4.  However, the fact that this practice is not explicitly

codified contributes to a sense of uncertainty among vendors and users
about the process and in practice leads to unnecessary delays in license
processing.In addition, there is uncertainty about whether or not a given foreigncompany is ÒcontrolledÓ by a U.S. firm.  Specifically, vendors often do not
know (and cannot find out in advance) whether a proposed sale to a
particular foreign company falls under the protection of this unstated
exemption.  As a practical rule, the U.S. government has a specific set of
Thus, export controls on confidentiality have inhibited the use of Kerberos for its in-tended authentication purposes.  However, because no one (to the committee
Õs knowledge)has actually obtained a formal decision on the status of a source-code version of Kerberos
without confidentiality capabilities but with authentication capabilities, it is an open ques-tion whether such a version would qualify for commodity jurisdiction to the CCL under theauthentication exception.A second example was provided in testimony to the committee from a company thathad eliminated all cryptographic capabilities from a certain product because of its percep-tions of the export control hurdles to be overcome.  The capabilities eliminated included

those for authentication.  While it can be argued that the company was simply ignorant of
the exemptions in the ITAR for products providing authentication capabilities, the factremains that much of the vendor community is either not familiar with the exemptions or
does not believe that they represent true Òfast-trackÓ or 
ÒautomaticÓ exceptions.
Note: The committee appreciates John GilmoreÕs assistance in correcting the informationprovided about Kerberos in the prepublication version of this report.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYguidelines that are used to make this determination.12  But these rules
require considerable interpretation and thus do not provide clear guid-
ance for U.S. vendors.A third issue that arises with current practice is that the lines betweenÒforeignÓ and 
ÒU.S.Ó companies are blurring in an era of transnational
corporations, ad hoc strategic alliances, and close cooperation between
suppliers and customers of all types.  For example, U.S. companies often

team with foreign companies in global or international ventures.  It would

be desirable for U.S. products with encryption capabilities to be used by
both partners to conduct business related to such alliances without re-
quiring a specific export licensing decision.13In some instances, USML licenses have granted U.S. companies theauthority to use strong encryption rather freely (e.g., in the case of a U.S.
company with worldwide suppliers).  But these licenses are still the result

of a lengthy case-by-case review whose outcome is uncertain.Finally, the State Department and NSA explicitly assert control overproducts without any cryptographic capability at all but developed with
Òsockets,Ó or, more formally, cryptographic applications programming
12Under Defense Department guidelines for determining foreign ownership, control, orinfluence (FOCI), a U.S. company is considered under FOCI Òwhenever a foreign interesthas the power, direct or indirect, whether or not exercised, and whether or not exercisable
through the ownership of the U.S. companyÕs securities, by contractual arrangements orother means, to direct or decide matters affecting the management or operations of thatcompany in a manner which may result in unauthorized access to classified information or
may affect adversely the performance of classified contracts.Ó  A FOCI determination for a
given company is made on the basis of a number of factors, including whether a foreignperson occupies a controlling or dominant minority position and the identification of im-
mediate, intermediate, and ultimate parent organizations.  (See Department of Defense,
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual, DOD-5220.22-M, January 1995, pp. 2-3-1 to 2-3-2.) According to ITAR Regulation 122.2, ÒownershipÓ means that more than 50
percent of the outstanding voting securities of the firm are owned by one or more foreignpersons. ÒControlÓ means that one or more foreign persons have the authority or ability to
establish or direct the general policies or day-to-day operations of the firm.  Control is

presumed to exist where foreign persons own 25 percent or more of the outstanding votingsecurities if no U.S. persons control an equal or larger percentage. The standards for controlspecified in 22 CFR 60.2(c) also provide guidance in determining whether control in fact
exists.  Defense Department Form 4415, August 1990, requires answers to 11 questions in
order for the Defense Department to make a FOCI determination for any given company.13In one instance reported to the committee, a major multinational company with cus-tomer support offices in China experienced a break-in in which Chinese nationals appar-ently copied paper documents and computer files.  File encryption would have mitigated
the impact associated with this Òbag job.Ó  Then-current export restrictions hampered de-
ployment of encryption to this site because the site was owned by a foreign (Chinese)company rather than a U.S.-controlled company and therefore not easily covered underthen-current practice.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS127interfaces into which a user can insert his own cryptography.  Such prod-
ucts are regarded as having an inherent cryptographic capability (al-
though such capability is latent rather than manifest) and as such are
controlled by the USML, even though the text of the ITAR does not men-
tion these items explicitly.14  In general, vendors and users understand
this to be the practice and do not challenge it, but they dislike the fact that
it is not explicit.4.2  EFFECTIVENESS OF EXPORT CONTROLS
ON CRYPTOGRAPHYOne of the most contentious points in the debate over export controlson cryptography concerns their effectiveness in delaying the spread of
strong cryptographic capabilities and the use of those capabilities through-
out the world.  Supporters of the current export control regime believe

that these controls have been effective, and they point to the fact that
encryption is not yet in widespread commercial use abroad and that a
significant fraction of the traffic intercepted globally is unencrypted.  Fur-

ther, they argue that U.S. products with encryption capabilities dominate
the international market to an extent that impeding the distribution of
U.S. products necessarily affects worldwide usage.Critics of current policy assert that export controls have not beeneffective in limiting the availability of cryptography abroad.  For example,

based on its ongoing survey of cryptography products worldwide (a study
widely cited by critics of current policy), Trusted Information Systems
Inc. has noted that[w]e have now identified 1181 products worldwide [as of March 30,1996], and weÕre continuing to learn about new products, both domesticand foreign, on a daily basis.  We
Õve also obtained numerous productsfrom abroad and are examining these products to assess their function-ality and security.  The survey results show that cryptography is indeed
widespread throughout the world.  Export controls outside of the U.S.
14Specifically, the ITAR place on the USML Òcryptographic devices, software, and com-ponents specifically designed or modified therefor, including: cryptographic (including keymanagement) systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or
software with the capability of maintaining secrecy or confidentiality of information orinformation systems.Ó  Note that these categories do not explicitly mention systems with-
out cryptography but with the capability of accepting Òplug-inÓ cryptography.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYappear to be less restrictive.  The quality of foreign products seems to be
comparable to that of U.S. products.15Furthermore, critics of U.S. export controls argue that sources otherthan U.S. commercial vendors (specifically foreign vendors, the in-house
expertise of foreign users, Internet software downloads, and pirated U.S.
software) are capable of providing very good cryptography that is usable
by motivated foreign users.In assessing the arguments of both supporters and critics of the cur-rent export control regime, it is important to keep in mind that the ulti-
mate goal of export controls on cryptography is to keep strong cryptogra-
phy out of the hands of potential targets of signals intelligence.  Set against

this goal, the committee believes that the arguments of both supporters
and critics have merit but require qualification.The supporters of the current export regime are right in asserting thatU.S. export controls have had a nontrivial impact in retarding the use of
cryptography worldwide.  This argument is based on three linked factors:
¥U.S. export controls on cryptography have clearly limited the saleof U.S. products with encryption capabilities in foreign markets; indeed,
it is this fact that drives the primary objection of U.S. information technol-
ogy vendors to the current export control regime on cryptography.¥Very few foreign vendors offer integrated products with encryp-tion capabilities.16  U.S. information technology products enjoy a very
high reputation for quality and usability, and U.S. information technol-
ogy vendors, especially those in the mass-market software arena, have
marketing and distribution skills that are as yet unparalleled by their
foreign counterparts.  As a result, foreign vendors have yet to fill the void

left by an absence of U.S. products.¥U.S. information technology products account for a large fractionof global sales.  For example, a recent U.S. International Trade Commis-

sion staff report points out that over half of all world sales in information15Available on-line from the TIS home page, http://www.tis.com; at the time of its pre-sentation to the committee, TIS had identified 450 such products available from foreignnations.  Testimony on this topic was first presented by Steven Walker, president of Trusted

Information Systems, to the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Subcommittee on Eco-nomic Policy, Trade, and Environment, on October 12, 1993.  TIS briefed the study commit-tee on December 15, 1994, and July 19, 1995.  The survey mentioned in testimony to the

committee continues, and regularly updated figures can be found on the TIS Web page(http://www.tis.com/crypto-survey).16The Department of Commerce and the National Security Agency found no general-purpose software products with encryption capability from non-U.S. manufacturers.  See
Department of Commerce and National Security Agency, A Study of the International Marketfor Computer Software with Encryption, released January 11, 1996, p. III-9.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS129technology come from the United States.17  Actions that impede the flow
of U.S. products to foreign consumers are bound to have significant ef-
fects on the rate at which those products are purchased and used.On the other hand, it is also true that some foreign targets of interestto the U.S. government today use encryption that is for all practical pur-
poses unbreakable; major powers tend to use Òhome-grownÓ cryptogra-
phy that they procure on the same basis that the United States procures
cryptography for its own use, and export controls on U.S. products clearly
cannot prevent these powers from using such cryptography.Furthermore, the fact that cryptography is not being widely usedabroad does not necessarily imply that export controls are effectiveÑorwill be in the near futureÑin restraining the use of cryptography by thosewho desire the protection it can provide.  The fact is that cryptography is
not used widely either in the United States or abroad, and so it is unclear
whether it is the lack of information security consciousness described in
Chapter 2 or the U.S. export control regime for cryptography that is re-
sponsible for such non-use; most probably, it is some combination of
these two factors.Critics of the current export regime are right in asserting that foreignsuppliers of cryptography are many and varied, that software products
with encryption capabilities are quite easily available through the Internet
(probably hundreds of thousands of individuals have the technical skill
needed to download such products), and that cryptography does pose
special difficulties for national authorities wishing to control such tech-
nology (Box 4.6).  Yet, most products with encryption capabilities avail-

able on the Internet are not integrated products; using security-specific
products is generally less convenient than using integrated products (as
described in Chapter 2), and because such products are used less often,
their existence and availability pose less of a threat to the collection of
signals intelligence.Furthermore, Internet products are, as a general rule, minimally sup-ported and do not have the backing of reputable and established ven-
dors.18  Users who download software from the Internet may or may not
17Office of Industries, U.S. International Trade Commission, Global Competitiveness of theU.S. Computer Software and Service Industries, Staff Research Study #21, Washington, D.C.,June 1995, executive summary.18Whether major vendors will continue to avoid the Internet as a distribution mediumremains to be seen.  Even today, a number of important products, including Adobe
Õs Acro-bat Reader, MicrosoftÕs Word Viewer and Internet Assistant, and the Netscape Navigatorare distributed through the Internet.  Some vendors make products freely available in lim-

ited functionality versions as an incentive for users to obtain full-featured versions; othersmake software products freely available to all takers in order to stimulate demand for otherproducts from that vendor for which customers pay.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 4.6Difficulties in Controlling CryptographyHardware products with encryption capabilities can be controlled on approxi-mately the same basis as traditional munitions.  But software products with encryp-
tion capabilities are a different matter.  A floppy disk containing programs involving
cryptography is visually indistinguishable from one containing any other type of pro-gram or data files.  Furthermore, software products with encryption capabilities can
be transported electronically, with little respect for physical barriers or national
boundaries, over telephone lines and the Internet with considerable ease.  Crypto-
graphic algorithms, also controlled by the International Traffic in Arms Regulationsas Òtechnical data,Ó represent pure knowledge that can be transported over nationalborders inside the heads of people or via letter.As is true for all other software products, software products with encryption capa-bilities are infinitely reproducible at low cost and with perfect fidelity; hence, a con-
trolled item can be replicated at a large number of points.  This fact explains how
vast amounts of software piracy can occur both domestically and abroad.  In princi-ple, one software product with encryption capabilities taken abroad can serve as the
seed for an unlimited number of reproductions that can find their way to hostileparties.  Finally, it can be argued that the rogue nations that pose the most important
targets for U.S. signals intelligence collection are also the least likely to refrain from
pirating U.S. software.know exactly what code the product contains and may not have the capa-bility to test it to ensure that it functions as described.19  Corporate cus-
tomers, the primary driver for large-scale deployment of products, are
unlikely to rely on products that are not sold and supported by reputable
vendors, and it is products with a large installed base (i.e., those created
by major software vendors) that would be more likely to have the high-
quality encryption that poses a threat to signals intelligence.  Table 4.1

indicates the primary differences between commercial products and
ÒfreewareÓ available on the Internet.
The committeeÕs brief survey of product literature describing foreignstand-alone security-specific products with encryption capabilities (Box
4.7) also indicated many implementations that were unsound from a se-
curity standpoint, even taking for granted the mathematical strength of
the algorithms involved and the proper implementation of the indicated
algorithms.20  The committee has no reason to believe that the stand-alone
19Indeed, the lack of quality control for Internet-available software provides an opportu-nity for those objecting to the proliferation of good products with encryption capability toflood the market with their own products anonymously or pseudonymously; such prod-ucts may include features that grant clandestine access with little effort.20The committeeÕs analysis of foreign stand-alone products for cryptography was basedon material provided to the committee by TIS, which TIS had collected through its survey.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS131TABLE 4.1Key Differences Between Commercial Products and
ÒFreewareÓProducts fromMajorCommercialÒFreewareÓVendorsProducts
Stake in reputation of product offererHigherLower
Scale of operationLargerSmaller
Cost of distributionHigherLower

Support for productsGreaterLesser
Role of profit-making motiveGreaterLesser
Ability to integrate cryptography into usefulGreaterLesser
and sophisticated general-purpose softwareVulnerability to regulatory and legal constraintsHigherLower
Likelihood of market Òstaying powerÓHigherLower
Likelihood of wide distribution and useHigherLower
Financial liability for poor product performanceHigherLower
Cost of entry into marketsHigherLower
NOTE:  All of the characterizations listed are tendencies rather than absolutes and are

relative (i.e., determined by comparing products from major commercial vendors to Òfree-wareÓ products).
security-specific products with encryption capabilities made by U.S. ven-dors are on average better at providing security,21 although the large
This material was limited to product brochures and manuals that the committee believesput the best possible face on a productÕs quality.  Thus, the committee
Õs identification ofsecurity defects in these products is plausibly regarded as a minimum estimate of their
weaknessesÑmore extensive testing (e.g., involving disassembly) would be likely to revealadditional weaknesses, since implementation defects would not be written up in a productbrochure.  Moreover, the availability of a product brochure does not ensure the availability

of the corresponding product; TIS has brochures for all of the 800-plus products identifiedin its survey, but due to limited resources, it has been able to obtain physical versions (e.g.,a disk, a circuit board) of fewer than 10 percent of the products described in those bro-
chures.21An ÒamateurÓ review of encryption for confidentiality built into several popular U.S.
mass-market software programs noted that the encryption facilities did not provide par-
ticularly good protection.  The person who reviewed these programs was not skilled in
cryptography but was competent in his understanding of programming and how theMacintosh manages files.  By using a few commonly available programming tools (a file

compare program, a ÒdebuggerÓ that allows the user to trace the flow of how a program
executes, and a ÒdisassemblerÓ that turns object code into source code that can be exam-
ined), the reviewer was able to access in less than two hours the ÒprotectedÓ files generatedCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 4.7A Partial Survey of Foreign Encryption Products on the TIS Survey¥  A British product manual notes that 
Òa key can be any word, phrase, or numberfrom 1 to 78 characters in length, though for security purposes keys shorter than sixcharacters are not recommended.Ó Only alphanumeric characters are used in the
key, and alpha characters do not distinguish between upper and lower case.  While
the longer pass phrases can produce keys with the full 56 bits of uncertainty [chang-ing ÒcanÓ to 
ÒdoÓ would require more extensive tests], passwords of even 6 charac-
ters are woefully inadequate.  It is dangerous to allow users to enter such keys, much
less the single-character keys allowed by this product.¥  One British product is a DES implementation that recommends cipher block
chaining but uses electronic codebook (ECB) mode as the default.  The use of ECB as
the default is dangerous because ECB is less secure than cipher block chaining.¥  A Danish product uses DES with an 8-character key, but limits each characterto alphanumeric and punctuation symbols.  Hence the key is less than a full 56 bits
long.  With this restriction, many users are likely to use only upper or lower case
alpha characters, resulting in a key less than 40 bits long.¥  A foreign product uses the FEAL algorithm as well as a proprietary algorithm.
Aside from the question of algorithm strength, the key is 1 to 8 characters long anddoes not distinguish between upper and lower case.  The result is a ridiculously short

key, a problem that is compounded by the recommendation in the manual to use a6- to 8-letter artificial word as the key (e.g., it suggests that for the name Bill, Òbill-bumÓ might be used as the key).
¥  A product from New Zealand uses DES plus a public-key system similar to
RSA, but based on Lucas functions.  The public-key portion limits the key size to
1,024 bits, but does not seem to have a lower bound, a potentially dangerous situa-tion.  The DES key can be 1 to 24 characters in length.  If the key is 1 to 8 characters,
established software vendors in the United States do have reputations forproviding relatively high quality in their products for features unrelated
to security.22  Without an acceptable product certification service, most
users have no reliable way of determining the quality of any given prod-
uct for themselves.by four out of eight programs.  See Gene Steinbert, 
ÒFalse Security,Ó MACWORLD, Novem-ber 1995, pp. 118-121.One well-publicized cryptographic security flaw found in the Netscape CorporationÕsNavigator Web browser is discussed in footnote 34 in Chapter 2.  Because of a second flaw,

Netscape Navigator could also enable a sophisticated user to damage information stored onthe host computer to which Navigator is connected.  (See Jared Sandberg, 
ÒNetscape Soft-ware for Cruising Internet Is Found to Have Another Security Flaw,Ó Wall Street Journal,September 25, 1995, p. B12.)22In addition, a product with a large installed base is subject to a greater degree of criticalexamination than is a product with a small installed base, and hence flaws in the former are
more likely to be noticed and fixed.  Large installed bases are more characteristic of prod-
ucts produced by established vendors than of freeware or shareware products.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS133then single DES is used; otherwise triple DES is used.  The lack of a lower bound onkey length is dangerous.¥  An Israeli product uses DES or QUICK, a proprietary algorithm.  The minimum
key length is user selectable between 0 and 8 characters.  Allowing such small lower
bounds on key length is dangerous.  The product also has a 
Òsuper-passwordÓ sup-
plied by the vendor, another potentially dangerous situation.  This product is avail-

able both in hardware and in software.¥  A German hardware product has user-settable S-boxes, and the key can be
entered either as 8 characters or 16 hexadecimal characters to yield a true 64-bit key
(which will be reduced by the algorithm to 56 bits).  The use of 16 hexadecimal
character keys will result in higher security, but if the key can also be entered as 8alphanumeric characters, many users are likely to do so, thus severely reducing the
security level.  User-selectable S-boxes can have advantages (if they are unknown to
a cryptanalyst) and disadvantages (if they are poorly chosen and either are known toor can be guessed by a cryptanalyst).  On balance, the danger is arguably greater

than the advantage.¥  A British product recommends one master key per organization so that files
can be shared across personal computers.  This practice is very dangerous.
To summarize, the defects in these products are related to poor key managementpractices, because they either employ or allow poor key management that would
enable a determined and knowledgeable adversary to penetrate with relative easethe security they offer.  As noted in Section 4.2 of the text, U.S. products are not
necessarily more secure.SOURCE:  Committee examination and synthesis of materials provided by
Trusted Information Systems Inc.As a general rule, a potential user of cryptography faces the choice ofbuying commercially available products with encryption capabilities on
the open market (perhaps custom-made, perhaps produced for a mass
market) or developing and deploying those products independently.  The

arguments discussed above suggest that global dissemination of knowl-
edge about cryptography makes independent development an option,
but the problems of implementing knowledge as a usable and secure
product drive many potential users to seek products available from repu-
table vendors.  In general, the greater the resources available to potential

users and the larger the stakes involved, the more likely they are to at-
tempt to develop their own cryptographic resources.  Thus, large corpo-

rations and First World governments are, in general, more likely than
small corporations and Third World governments to develop their own
cryptographic implementations.Finally, the text of the ITAR seems to allow a number of entirely legalactions that could have results that the current export control regime isCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYintended to prevent (Box 4.8). For example, RSA Data Security Inc. hasannounced a partnership with the Chinese government to fund an effort
by Chinese government scientists to develop new encryption software.
This software may be able to provide a higher degree of confidentiality
than software that qualifies today for liberal export consideration under
the CCL.234.3  THE IMPACT OF EXPORT CONTROLS ON U.S.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY VENDORSU.S. export controls have a number of interrelated effects on the eco-nomic health of U.S. vendors and on the level of cryptographic protection
available to U.S. firms operating domestically.  (The impact of foreign im-

port controls on U.S. vendors is discussed in Chapter 6 and Appendix G.)4.3.1  De Facto Restrictions on the
Domestic Availability of CryptographyCurrent law and policy place no formal restrictions whatever on prod-ucts with encryption capabilities that may be sold or used in the United
States.  In principle, the domestic market can already obtain any type of

cryptography it wants.  For stand-alone security-specific products, this

principle is true in practice as well.  But the largest markets are not for
23See Don Clark, ÒChina, U.S. Firm Challenge U.S. on Encryption-Software Exports,ÓWall Street Journal, February 8, 1996, p. A10.BOX 4.8Circumventions of the ITARCurrent export controls on cryptography can apparently be circumvented in anumber of entirely legal and/or hard-to-detect ways.  For example:
¥  A U.S. company can develop a product without encryption capabilities and
then sell the source code of the product to a friendly foreign company that incorpo-rates additional source code for encryption into the product for resale from thatforeign country (assuming that that country has no (or weaker) export controls on
cryptography).¥  A U.S. company possessing products with encryption capabilities can be
bought by a foreign company; in general, no attempt is made to recover those prod-
ucts.¥  A U.S. company can work with legally independent counterparts abroad that
can incorporate cryptographic knowledge available worldwide into products.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS135stand-alone security-specific products, but rather for integrated productswith encryption capabilities.For integrated products with encryption capabilities, export controlsdo have an effect on domestic availability.  For example:
¥The Netscape Communications Corporation distributes a versionof Netscape Navigator over the Internet and sells a version as shrink-
wrapped software.  Because the Internet version can be downloaded from

abroad, its encryption capabilities are limited to those that will allow for
liberal export consideration; the shrink-wrapped version is under no such
limitation and in fact is capable of much higher levels of encryption.24Because it is so much more convenient to obtain, the Internet version of
Netscape Navigator is much more widely deployed in the United States
than is the shrink-wrapped version, with all of the consequences for infor-
mation security that its weaker encryption capability implies.¥The Microsoft Corporation recently received permission to shipWindows NT Version 4, a product that incorporates a cryptographic ap-
plications programming interface approved by the U.S. government for
commodity jurisdiction to the CCL.  However, this product is being

shipped worldwide with a cryptographic module that provides encryp-
tion capabilities using 40-bit RC4.25  While domestic users may replace the
default module with one providing stronger encryption capabilities, many
will not, and the result is a weaker encryption capability for those users.¥A major U.S. software vendor distributes its major product inmodular form in such a way that the end user can assemble a system
configuration in accordance with local needs.  However, since the full

range of USML export controls on encryption is applied to modular prod-
ucts into which cryptographic modules may be inserted, this vendor has
not been able to find a sensible business approach to distributing the
product in such a way that it would qualify for liberal export consider-
ation.  The result has been that the encryption capabilities provided to

domestic users of this product are much less than they would otherwise
be in the absence of export controls.What factors underlie the choices made by vendors that result in the24 The shrink-wrapped version of Netscape Navigator sold within the United States andCanada supports several different levels of encryption, including 40-bit RC4, 128-bit RC4,56-bit DES, and triple-DES.  The default for a domestic client communicating with a domes-
tic server is 128-bit RC4 (Jeff Weinstein, Netscape Communications Corporation, Mountain
View, Calif., personal communication, February 1996).25See Jason Pontin, ÒMicrosoft Encryption API to Debut in NT Workstation Beta,ÓInfoworld, January 29, 1996, p. 25.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYoutcomes described above?  At one level, the examples above are simply
the result of market decisions and preferences.  At a sufficiently high level

of domestic market demand, U.S. vendors would find it profitable and
appropriate to develop products for the domestic market alone.  Simi-

larly, given a sufficiently large business opportunity in a foreign country
(or countries) that called for a product significantly different from that
used by domestic users, vendors would be willing to develop a custom-
ized version of a product that would meet export control requirements.
Furthermore, many other manufacturers of exportable products must

cope with a myriad of different requirements for export to different na-
tions (e.g., differing national standards for power, safety, and electromag-
netic interference), as well as differing languages in which to write error
messages or user manuals.  From this perspective, export controls are

simply one more cost of doing business outside the United States.On the other hand, the fact that export controls are an additional cost
of doing business outside the United States is not an advantage for U.S.
companies planning to export products.  A vendor incurs less expense

and lower effort for a single version of a product produced for both do-
mestic and foreign markets than it does when multiple versions are in-
volved.  While the actual cost of 
developing two different versions of a
product with different key lengths and different algorithms is relatively
small, a much larger part of the expense associated with multiple versions
relates to marketing, manufacture, support, and maintenance of multiple
product versions after the initial sale has been made.26Since a vendor may be unable to export a given product with encryp-tion capabilities to foreign markets, domestic market opportunities must
be that much greater to warrant a domestic-only version.  (Given that

about half of all sales of U.S. information technology vendors are made to
foreign customers,27 the loss of foreign markets can be quite damaging toa U.S. vendor.)  When they are not, vendors have every incentive to

develop products with encryption capabilities that would easily qualify26Note that development and support concerns are even more significant when a givenproduct is intended for cross-platform use (i.e., for use in different computing environ-
ments such as Windows, Mac OS, Unix, and so on), as is the case for many high-endsoftware products (such as database retrieval systems): when a product is intended for useon 50 different platforms, multiplying by a factor of two the effort required on the part of
the vendor entails much more of an effort by the vendor than if the product were intendedfor use on only one platform.27See footnote 17.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS137for liberal export consideration.  As a result, the domestic availability of
products with strong encryption capability is diminished.  While a suffi-

ciently high level of domestic market demand would make it profitable
for U.S. vendors to develop products for the domestic market alone, the
ÒsufficientlyÓ qualifier is a strong one indeed, given the realities of the
market into which vendors must sell and compete, and one infrequently
met in practice.Users are also affected by an export control regime that forces foreignand domestic parties in communication with each other to use encryption
systems based on different algorithms and/or key lengths.  In particular,

an adversary attempting to steal information will seek out the weakest
point.  If that weakest point is abroad because of the weak cryptography

allowed for liberal export, then that is where the attack will be.  In busi-

nesses with worldwide network connections, it is critical that security
measures be taken abroad, even if key information repositories and cen-
ters of activity are located in the continental United States.  Put differ-

ently, the use of weak cryptography abroad means that sensitive informa-
tion communicated by U.S. businesses to foreign parties faces a greater
risk of compromise abroad because stronger cryptography integrated into
U.S. information technology is not easily available abroad.Finally, the export licensing process can have a significant impact onhow a product is developed.  For example, until recently, products devel-

oped to permit the user to substitute easily his own cryptography module
were subject to the USML and the ITAR.28  One vendor pointed out to the
committee that its systems were designed to be assembled Òout of theboxÓ by end users in a modular fashion, depending on their needs and
computing environment.  This vendor believed that such systems would

be unlikely to obtain liberal export consideration, because of the likeli-
hood that a foreign user would be able to replace an Òexport-approvedÓcryptography module with a cryptography module that would not pass
export review.  Under these circumstances, the sensible thing from the

export control perspective would be to deny exportability for the modu-28Note, however, that the use of object-oriented software technology can in general facili-tate the use of applications programming interfaces that provide ÒhooksÓ to modules of theuserÕs choosing.  A number of vendors have developed or are developing general-purpose
applications programming interfaces that will allow the insertion of a module to do almost
anything.  Since these programming interfaces are not specialized for cryptography, but
instead enable many useful functions (e.g., file compression, backups), it is very difficult toargue the basis on which applications incorporating these interfaces should be denied ex-
port licenses simply because they could be used to support encryption.
A further discussion of recent developments involving cryptography modules and cryp-tographic applications programming interfaces is contained in Chapter 7.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYlarized product even if its capabilities did fall within the Òsafe harborÓprovisions for products with encryption capabilities.The considerations above led the committee to conclude that U.S.export controls have had a negative impact on the cryptographic strength
of many integrated products with encryption capabilities available in the
United States.29  Export controls tend to drive major vendors to a 
Òlowestcommon denominatorÓ cryptographic solution that will pass export re-
view as well as sell in the United States.  The committee also believes that

export controls have had some impact on the availability of cryptographic
authentication capabilities around the world.  Export controls distort the

global market for cryptography, and the product decisions of vendors
that might be made in one way in the absence of export controls may well
be made another way in their presence.Some of the reasons for this vendor choice are explored in Section4.3.2.4.3.2  Regulatory Uncertainty Related to Export Controls
A critical factor that differentiates the costs of complying with exportcontrols from other costs of doing business abroad is the unpredictability
of the export control licensing process.  (Other dimensions of uncertainty
for vendors not related to export controls are discussed in Chapter 6.)  A

company must face the possibility that despite its best efforts, a USML
export license or a commodity jurisdiction to the CCL will not be granted
for a product.  Uncertainties about the decisions that will emerge from the

export control regime force vendors into very conservative planning sce-
narios.  In estimating benefits and costs, corporate planners must take

into account the additional costs that could be incurred in developing two
largely independent versions of the same product or limit the size of the
potential market to U.S. purchasers.  When such planning requirements

are imposed, the number of product offerings possible is necessarily re-
duced.USML licensing is particularly unpredictable, because the reasonsthat a license is denied in any given instance are not necessarily made
available to the applicant; in some cases, the rationale for specific licens-
ing decisions is based on considerations that are highly classified and by
law cannot be made available to an uncleared applicant.  Since such ration-
29A similar conclusion was reached by the FBI, whose testimony to the committee notedthat Òthe use of export controls may well have slowed the speed, proliferation, and volumeof encryption products sold in the U.S.Ó  (written statement, 
ÒFBI Input to the NRCÕs Na-tional Cryptographic Study Committee,Ó received December 1, 1995).
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS139ales cannot be discussed openly, an atmosphere of considerable uncer-tainty pervades the development process for vendors seeking to develop
products for overseas markets.  Furthermore, there is no independent adju-

dicating forum to which a negative licensing decision can be appealed.Since USML licensing is undertaken on a case-by-case basis, it re-quires the exercise of judgment on the part of the regulatory authorities.
A judgment-based approach has the disadvantage that it requires a con-
siderable degree of trust between the regulated and the regulator.30  To
the extent that an individual regulated party believes that the regulator is
acting in the best interests of the entire regulated community, it is natural
that it would be more willing to accept the legitimacy of the process that
led to a given result.  However, in instances in which those who are

regulated do not trust the regulator, the judgments of the regulator are
much more likely to be seen as arbitrary and capricious.31This situation currently characterizes the relationship between cryp-tography vendors/users and national security authorities responsible for
implementing the U.S. export control regime for cryptography.  In input

received by the committee, virtually all industry representatives, from
large to small companies, testified about the unpredictability of the pro-
cess.  From the vendor point of view, the resulting uncertainty inhibits

product development and allows negative decisions on export to be ren-
dered by unknown forces and/or government agencies with neither ex-
planation nor a reasonable possibility of appeal.The need to stay far away from the vague boundaries of what mightor might not be acceptable is clearly an inhibitor of technological progress
and development.  Vendor concerns are exacerbated in those instances in

which export control authorities are unwilling to provide a specific rea-
son for the denial of an export license or any assurance that a similarly but
not identically configured product with encryption capabilities would
pass export review.  Even worse from the vendor perspective, product

parameters are not the only determinant of whether a licensing decision30In contrast to a judgment-based approach, a clarity-based approach would start fromthe premise that regulations and laws should be as clear as possible, so that a party that
may be affected knows with a high degree of certainty what is and is not permitted orproscribed.  The downside of a clarity-based approach is that affected parties tend to go
Òright up to the lineÓ of what is prohibited and may seek ways to 
Òdesign aroundÓ any
stated limitations.  Furthermore, a clarity-based approach would require the specification,
in advance, of all acts that are prohibited, even when it may not be possible to define inadvance all acts that would be undesirable.31For example, critics of the uncertainty engendered by the export regime point out thatuncertainty is helpful to policy makers who wish to retain flexibility to modify policy with-out the work or publicity required for a formal regulatory change.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYwill be favorable except in a very limited and narrow range of crypto-graphic functionality.The uncertainty described above is not limited to new and inexperi-enced vendors encountering the U.S. export control regime for the first
time; large and sophisticated institutions with international connections
have also encountered difficulties with the current export control regime.
For example, a representative from a major U.S. bank with many interna-
tional branches reported that export controls affect internally developed
bank software with encryption capabilities; a U.S. citizen who works on
bank software with encryption capabilities in England may ÒtaintÓ that
software so that it falls under U.S. export control guidelines.  Thus, de-

spite the fact that the current export control regime treats banks and other
financial institutions relatively liberally, major banks have still struggled
under its limitations.The situation is worse for smaller companies.  While large companies
have experience and legal staffs that help them to cope with the export
control regime, small companies do not.  New work on information tech-
nology often begins in garage-shop operations, and the export control
regime can be particularly daunting to a firm with neither the legal exper-
tise nor the contacts to facilitate compliance of a product with all of the
appropriate regulations.  These companies in particular are the ones most

likely to decide in the end to avoid entirely the inclusion of cryptographic
features due to concern about running afoul of the export control rules.The following three examples illustrate how the unpredictability ofthe export control licensing process has affected U.S. vendors and their
products.ModularityAs noted above, cryptographic applications programming interfacesthat are directly and easily accessible to the user are in general subject to
USML licensing.  However, even 
ÒclosedÓ interfaces that are not easily
accessible to the user are sometimes perceived to pose a risk for the ven-
dor.  One major product vendor reported to the committee that it was

reluctant to use modular development for fear that even an internal mod-
ule interface could keep a product from passing export control review.
Any software product that uses modular techniques to separate the basic
product functionality from the cryptography has a well-defined interface
between the two.  Even when the software product is converted to object

code, that interface is still present (though it is hidden from the casual
user).  However, the interface cannot in general be hidden from a person

with strong technical skills, and such a person would be able to find it andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS141tamper with it in such a way that a different cryptography module couldbe used.32  A number of similar considerations apply for hardware prod-
ucts, in which the cryptographic capabilities might be provided by a
Òplug-inÓ chip.
The alternative to the use of modular techniques in the development ofintegrated products would complicate the Òswap-in/swap-outÓ of crypto-
graphic capabilities: lines of code (if software) and wires (if hardware) that
implemented cryptographic capabilities would be highly interwoven with
lines of code and wires that implemented the primary capabilities of the
product.  On the other hand, this approach would be tantamount to the

development of two largely distinct products with little overlap in the work
that was required to produce them.The NSA has spoken publicly about its willingness to discuss withvendors from the early stages of product design features and capabilities
of proposed products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality so
that the export license approval process can be facilitated, and also its
willingness to abide by nondisclosure agreements to reassure vendors
that their intellectual property rights will be protected.33  Nonetheless, the
receipt of an export control license useful for business purposes is not
guaranteed by such cooperation.  For example, while decisions about

commodity jurisdiction often provide CCL jurisdiction for object code
and USML jurisdiction for source code (and thus need not inhibit modu-
lar product development if the product is to be distributed in object form
only), the fact remains that such decisions are part of a case-by-case re-
view whose outcome is uncertain.  Different vendors are willing to toler-

ate different levels of risk in this regard, depending on the magnitude of
the investments involved.As a general rule, NSA does not appear willing to make agreementsin advance that will assure licenses for a product that has not yet been
instantiated or produced.  Such a position is not unreasonable given

NSAÕs stance toward products with encryption capabilities in general,and the fact that the true capabilities of a product may depend strongly on
how it is actually implemented in hardware or software.  Thus, vendors
32Of course, such considerations obviously apply to software products with cryptographiccapabilities that are designed to be shipped in source code; not only can the cryptographicmodule be easily identified and replaced, but it can also be pulled out and adapted to other
purposes.  This point was also raised in footnote  11 of this chapter.
33For example, NSA representatives made comments to this effect at the RSA Data Secu-rity Conference in San Francisco in January 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYhave no indemnification against the risk that a product might not beapproved.34The Definition of ExportThere is uncertainty about what specific act constitutes the ÒexportÓof software products with encryption capabilities.  It is reasonably clear

that the act of mailing to a foreign country a disk with a product with
encryption capabilities on it constitutes an export of that product.  But if

that product is uploaded to an Internet site located in the United States
and is later downloaded by a user located in another country, is the act of
export the upload or the download?  What precautions must be taken by

the uploader to remain on the legal side of the ITAR?The committee has been unable to find any formal document thatindicates answers to these questions.  However, a March 1994 letter from
the State DepartmentÕs Office of Defense Trade Controls appears to indi-cate that a party could permit the posting of cryptographic software on an
Internet host located in the United States if Ò(a) the host system is config-ured so that only people originating from nodes in the United States and
Canada can access the cryptographic software, or (b) if the software is
placed in a file or directory whose name changes every few minutes, and
the name of the file or directory is displayed in a publicly known and
readable file containing an explicit notice that the software is for U.S. and
Canadian use only.Ó35  Of course, such a letter does not provide formal
guidance to parties other than the intended addressee (indeed, under the
ITAR, advisory opinions provided to a specific party with a given set of
circumstances are not binding on the State Department even with respect
to that party), and so the issue remains murky.The Speed of the Licensing ProcessUncertainty is also generated by a lengthy licensing process withouttime lines that allow vendors to make realistic schedules.  Box 4.9 de-

scribes some of the problems reported to the committee.  To summarize,
34Although other industries also have to deal with the uncertainties of regulatory ap-proval regarding products and services, the export control process is particularly opaque,because clear decisions and rationales for those decisions are often not forthcoming (andindeed are often classified and/or unrelated to the product per se).35Letter from Clyde Bryant, Office of Defense Trade Controls, U.S. Department of State,Washington, D.C., to Daniel Appelman, Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe, dated March11, 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS143BOX 4.9Problems Arising from a Lengthy Export Licensing Process¥  Some foreign customers know it will take a long time to obtain a positive
licensing decision and as a consequence do not bother to approach U.S. vendors atall.¥  Products to market are delayed; even when export licenses are eventually
granted, they are often granted too late to be useful, because the area of informationtechnology is so fast-moving.¥  Rapid decisions are not rendered.  In one instance reported to the committee,a U.S. information technology company wanted permission to use its own software(with strong encryption capabilities) to communicate with its foreign offices.  Such

cases are in theory expedited because of a presumptive approval in these circum-stances; this vendorÕs government contacts agreed that Òsuch an application wouldbe no problemÓ and that an approval would be a rapid 
Òrubber-stampÓ one, but in
fact, this vendor is still awaiting a license after more than a year.¥  System integrators intending to ship complete systems rather than individual
products face particular difficulties in obtaining a speedy turnaround, because the
task for national security authorities involves an assessment of the entire system intowhich a given product (or products) with encryption capabilities will be integrated,rather than an assessment of just the products with encryption capabilities alone.¥  Even vendors that manufacture cryptographic software not intended for export
are required to register with the State DepartmentÕs Office of Defense Trade Controls,primarily Òto provide the U.S. government with necessary information on who isinvolved in certain manufacturing and exporting activities.Ó11International Traffic in Arms Regulations, Section 122.1 (c).the perceptions of many vendors about the excessive length of time ittakes to obtain a license reflect the time required for discussions with
NSA about a product before an application is formally submitted; the
prospect of facing the export control process deters some vendors entirely
from creating certain products.  By contrast, NSA starts the clock only

when it receives a formal application, and in fact the usual time between
receipt of a formal application and rendering of a decision is relatively
short (a few weeks).  The reason that such a fast turnaround is possible is
that by the time the application is received, enough is known about the
product involved that processing is routine because there is no need for
negotiation about how the product must be changed for a license to be
approved.In response to some of these concerns, the U.S. government has under-taken a number of reforms of the export control regime (described in Sec-
tion 4.1) to reduce the hassle and red tape involved in obtaining exportCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYlicenses.36  These reforms are important.  Nevertheless, the pace at which
new information technology products develop and the increasing complex-
ity of those products will complicate product review efforts in the future.
Given relatively fixed staffing, these factors will tend to increase the length
of time needed to conduct product reviews at a time when vendors are
feeling pressures to develop and market products more rapidly.One particular reform effort that deserves discussion is the ÒpersonaluseÓ exemption.  For many years, Americans traveling abroad were re-
quired under the ITAR to obtain Òtemporary export licensesÓ for prod-
ucts with encryption capabilities carried overseas for their personal use.37The complexity of the procedure for obtaining such a license was a con-
siderable burden for U.S. businesspeople traveling abroad, and these in-
dividuals were subject to significant criminal penalties for an act that was
widely recognized to be harmless and well within the intent of the export
control regime.In February 1994, the Administration committed itself to promulgat-ing regulations to support a personal-use exemption from the licensing
requirement.  Two years later, on February 16, 1996, the 
Federal Registercontained a notice from the Department of State, Bureau of Political-Mili-
tary Affairs, announcing final rule of an amendment to the ITAR allowing
U.S. persons to temporarily export cryptographic products for personal
use without the need for an export license.38Some critics of government policy have objected to the particularformulation of the record-keeping requirement.  All parties involved
Ñincluding senior Administration officialsÑhave agreed that 2 years wasfar too long a period for promulgation of so simple a rule.36For example, according to NSA, the detailing of an NSA representative to work withthe State Department Office of Defense Trade Controls has resulted in a considerable reduc-tion in the time needed to process a license.37For a description of how this process worked in practice, see Matt Blaze, ÒMy Life as anInternational Arms Courier,Ó e-mail message circulated by Matt Blaze (mab@research.
att.com) on January 6, 1995.  A news article based on Blaze
Õs story is contained in Peter H.Lewis, ÒBetween a Hacker and a Hard Place:  Data-Security Export Law Puts Businesses in
a Bind,Ó New York Times, April 10, 1995, p. D1.38According to the regulation, the product must not be intended for copying, demonstra-tion, marketing, sale, re-export, or transfer of ownership or control.  It must remain in the
possession of the exporting person, which includes being locked in a hotel room or safe.While in transit, it must be with the personÕs accompanying baggage.  Exports to certain
countries are prohibitedÑcurrently Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan, and Syria.The exporter must maintain records of each temporary export for 5 years.  See Public Notice
2294, Federal Register, Volume 61(33), February 16, 1996, pp. 6111-6113.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS1454.3.3  The Size of the Affected Market for Cryptography
Since export controls on products with encryption capabilities con-strain certain aspects of sales abroad, considerable public attention has
focused on the size of the market that may have been affected by export
controls.  Vendors in particular raise the issue of market share with con-

siderable force:¥ÒThe only effect of the export controls is to cause economic harm toUS software companies that are losing market share in the global cryptog-
raphy market to companies from the many countries that do not have
export controls.Ó39¥Ò[The governmentÕs current policy on encryption] is anti-competi-tive.  The government
Õs encryption export policy jeopardizes the future ofthe software industry, one of the fastest growing and most successful
industries.Ó40The size of the market for products with encryption capabilities cutsacross many dimensions of cryptography policy, but since it is raised
most often in the context of the export control debate, it is addressed in
this section.Plausible arguments can be made that the market ranges from nomore than the value of the security-specific products sold annually (i.e.,
several hundred million dollars per yearÑa low-end estimate)41 to the
total value of all hardware and software products that might include
encryption capabilities (many tens of billions of dollarsÑa high-end esti-mate).42  The committee was unable to determine the size of the informa-39Jim Hassert, Washington Connections, Software Publishers Association, Washington,D.C., Chapter 9.  Available on-line at http://www.spa.org.
40Business Software Alliance, Information and Data Security: The Encryption Update.  Avail-
able on-line at http://www.bsa.org.41Department of Commerce and National Security Agency, A Study of the InternationalMarket for Computer Software with Encryption, released January 11, 1996, p. III-1.  Note, how-
ever, that this report does not arrive at this estimate independently; rather, it cites otherestimates made in the private sector.42Of course, it is a matter of speculation what fraction of the information technologymarket (on the order of $193 billion in 1993; see below) might usefully possess encryptioncapabilities; good arguments can be made to suggest that this fraction is very small or verylarge.  A number of information technology trade organizations have also made estimates.

The Software Publishers Association cited a survey by the National Computer SecurityAssociation that quoted a figure of $160 million in aggregate known losses in 1993 becauseof export controls; see ÒWritten Testimony of the Software Publishers Association to theNational Research Council,Ó Washington, D.C., July 19, 1995.  In 1993, the Business Soft-
ware Alliance estimated that Òapproximately $6-9 billion in U.S. company revenues areCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtion technology market directly affected by export controls on encryptionto within a factor of more than 100, a range of uncertainty that renders
any estimate of the market quite difficult to use as the basis for a public
policy decision.Nevertheless, although it is not large enough to be decisive in thepolicy debate, the floor of such estimatesÑa few hundred million dollarsper yearÑis not a trivial sum.  Furthermore, all trends point to growth inthis number, growth that may well be very large and nonlinear in the near
future.  To the extent that both of these observations are valid, it is only a
matter of a relatively short time before even the floor of any estimate will
be quite significant in economic terms.The next three subsections describe some of the factors that confoundthe narrowing of the large range of uncertainty in any estimate of the size
of the market affected by export controls.Defining a ÒLost SaleÓA number of vendors have pointed to specific instances of lost salesas a measure of the harm done to vendors as a result of export controls oncurrently at risk because of the inability of those companies to be able to sell world widegenerally available software with encryption capabilities employing DES or other compa-
rable strength algorithmsÓ; see testimony of Ray Ozzie, president, Iris Associates, on behalfof the Business Software Alliance, ÒThe Impact on AmericaÕs Software Industry of CurrentU.S. Government Munitions Export Controls,Ó before the Economic Policy, Trade, and En-
vironment Subcommittee, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Washington, D.C., Octo-ber 12, 1993.  The Computer Systems Policy Project (CSPP) estimated that in 2000, the
potential annual revenue exposure for U.S. information technology vendors would range
from $3 billion to $6 billion on sales of cryptographic products, including both hardwareand software; CSPP also estimated $30 billion to $60 billion in potential revenue exposureon sales of associated computer systems; see William F. Hagerty IV, The Management
Advisory Group, Computer Systems Policy Project, The Growing Need for Cryptography: TheImpact of Export Control Policy on U.S. Competitiveness, Study Highlights (viewgraphs),Bethesda, Md., December 15, 1995.The $193 billion figure is taken from Department of Commerce, U.S. Industrial Outlook,1994, and includes computers and peripherals ($62.5 billion, p. 26-1), packaged software($32.0 billion, p. 27-1), information services ($13.6 billion, p. 25-1), data processing and
network services ($46.4 billion, p. 25-1), and systems integration/custom programmingservices ($38.7 billion, p. 25-5).  Note that this figure does not include some other industry
sectors that could, in principle, be affected by regulations regarding secure communica-
tions; in 1993, U.S. companies provided telecommunications services valued at $10.4 billionto foreign nations (p. 29-1) and shipped $17.5 billion (1987 dollars) in telephone equipmentworldwide (p. 30-3).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS147cryptography.43  National security officials believe that these figures are
considerably overstated.  Administration officials and congressional staff

have expressed considerable frustration in pinning down a reliable esti-
mate of lost sales.It is important to begin with the understanding that the concept of aÒlost saleÓ is intrinsically soft.  Trying to define the term 
Òlost salesÓ raises
a number of questions:¥What events count as a sale lost because of export restrictions?Several possibilities illustrate the complications:ÑA U.S. vendor is invited along with foreign vendors to bid on aforeign project that involves cryptography, but declines because the bid
requirements are explicit and the U.S. vendor knows that the necessary
export licenses will not be forthcoming on a time scale compatible with
the project.ÑA U.S. vendor is invited along with foreign vendors to bid on aforeign project that involves cryptography.  In order to expedite export

licensing, the U.S. vendor offers a bid that involves 40-bit encryption
(thus ignoring the bid requirements), and the bid is rejected.ÑA U.S. vendor is invited along with foreign vendors to bid on aforeign project that involves cryptography.  A foreign vendor emerges as
the winner.  The sale is certainly a lost sale, but since customers often

make decisions with a number of reasons in mind and may not inform
losing vendors of their reasons, it is difficult to determine the relationship
of export controls to the lost sale.ÑNo U.S. vendor is invited to bid on a foreign project that involvescryptography.  In such an instance, the potential foreign customer may

have avoided U.S. vendors, recognizing that the cryptography would
subject the sale to U.S. export control scrutiny, possibly compromising43For example, in a presentation to the committee on July 19, 1995, the Software Publish-ersÕ Association documented several specific instances in which a U.S. company had lost a
sale of a product involving cryptography to a foreign firm.  These instances included a
company that lost one-third of its total revenues because export controls on DES-based
encryption prevented sales to a foreign firm; a company that could not sell products withencryption capability to a European company because that company resold products toclients other than financial institutions; a U.S. company whose European division estimated
at 50 percent the loss of its business among European financial institutions, defense indus-tries, telecommunications companies, and government agencies because of inadequate keysizes; and a U.S. company that lost the sale of a DES-based system to a foreign company
with a U.S. subsidiary (Software PublishersÕ Association, 
ÒPresentation on Impacts of Ex-port Control on Encryption Before the NRC National Cryptography Policy Committee,ÓJuly 19, 1995).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY44See, for example, Kara Swisher, ÒOld World, New Frontier in Cyberspace,Ó WashingtonPost, December 12, 1995, p. C1; Victoria Shannon, ÒU.S. On-Line Services Fall Short onInternational Reach,Ó Washington Post, April 3, 1995, Washington Business, p. 20.  For more
detail on AOL plans, see Elizabeth Cocoran, ÒAmerica Online to Offer Access in Europe,ÓWashington Post, May 19, 1995, p. F3.45See, for example, Office of Technology Assessment, U.S. Telecommunications Services inEuropean Markets, OTA-TCT-548, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., Au-gust 1993.sensitive information or delaying contract negotiations inordinately.  On
the other hand, the potential customer may have avoided U.S. vendors for
other reasons, e.g., because the price of the U.S. product was too high.¥What part of a productÕs value is represented by the cryptographicfunctionality that limits a productÕs sales when export controls apply?  As
noted in Chapter 2, stand-alone products with encryption capabilities are
qualitatively different from general-purpose products integrated with
encryption capabilities.  A security-specific stand-alone product provides

no other functionality, and so the value of the cryptography is the entire
cost of the product.  But such sales account for a very small fraction of

information technology sales.  Most sales of information technology prod-

ucts with encryption capabilities are integrated products.  Many word

processing and spreadsheet programs may have encryption capabilities,
but users do not purchase such programs for those capabilitiesÑtheypurchase them to enhance their ability to work with text and numbers.
Integrated products intended for use in networked environments (e.g.,
ÒgroupwareÓ) may well have encryption capability, but such productsare purchased primarily to serve collaboration needs rather than encryp-
tion functions.  In these instances, it is the cost of the entire integrated

product (which may not be exportable if encryption is a necessary but
secondary feature) that counts as the value lost.¥How does a vendor discover a Òlost saleÓ?  In some cases, a specific
rejection counts as evidence.  But in general there is no systematic way to
collect reliable data on the number or value of lost sales.¥An often-unnoticed dimension of Òlost salesÓ does not involve
product sales at all, but rather services whose delivery may depend on
cryptographic protection.  For example, a number of U.S. on-line service

providers (e.g., America Online, Compuserve, Prodigy) intend to offer or
expand access abroad;44 the same is true for U.S. providers of telecommu-
nications services.45  To the extent that maintaining the security of foreign
interactions with these service providers depends on the use of strong
cryptography, the ability of these companies to provide these services
may be compromised by export restrictions and thus sales of service po-
tentially reduced.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS149Latent vs. Actual DemandIn considering the size of the market for cryptography, it is importantto distinguish between ÒactualÓ demand and 
ÒlatentÓ demand.
¥Actual demand reflects what users spend on products with en-cryption capabilities.  While the value of 
Òthe market for cryptographyÓ is
relatively well defined in the case of stand-alone security-specific prod-
ucts (it is simply the value of all of the sales of such products), it is not
well defined when integrated products with encryption capabilities are
involved.  The reason is that for such products, there is no demand for

cryptography per se.  Rather, users have a need for products that do

useful things; cryptography is a feature added by designers to protect
users from outside threats to their work, but as a purely defensive capa-
bility, cryptography does not so much add functional value for the user as
protect against reductions in the value that the user sees in the product.
Lotus Notes, for example, would not be a viable product in the communi-
cations software market without its encryption capabilities, but users buy
it for the group collaboration capabilities that it provides rather than for
the encryption per se.¥Latent demand (i.e., inherent demand that users do not realize orwish to acknowledge but that surfaces when a product satisfying this
demand appears on the market) is even harder to measure or assess.
Recent examples include Internet usage and faxes; in these instances, the
underlying technology has been available for many years, but only re-
cently have large numbers of people been able to apply these technologies
for useful purposes.  Lower prices and increasing ease of use, prompted

in part by greater demand, have stimulated even more demand.  To the

extent that there is a latent demand for cryptography, the inclusion of
cryptographic features in integrated products might well stimulate a de-
mand for cryptography that grows out of knowledge and practice, out of
learning by doing.Determining the extent of latent demand is complicated greatly bythe fact that latent demand can be converted into actual demand on a
relatively short time scale.  Indeed, such growth curves
Ñvery slowgrowth in use for a while and then a sudden explosion of demandÑcharacterize many critical mass phenomena: some information technolo-
gies (e.g., networks, faxes, telephones) are valuable only if some critical
mass of people use them.  Once that critical mass is reached, other people

begin to use those technologies, and demand takes off.  Linear extrapola-
tions 5 or 10 years into the future based on 5 or 10 years in the past miss
this very nonlinear effect.Of course, it is difficult to predict a surge in demand before it actuallyoccurs.  In the case of cryptography, market analysts have been predicting
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYsignificantly higher demand for many years; today, growth rates are high,but demand for information security products including cryptography is
not yet ubiquitous.Two important considerations bearing directly on demand are increas-ing system complexity and the need for interoperability.  Users must be

able to count on a high degree of interoperability in the systems and soft-
ware they purchase if they are to operate smoothly across national bound-
aries (as described in Chapter 1).  Users understand that it is more difficult
to make different products interoperate, even if they are provided by the
same vendor, than to use a single product.  For example, the complexity of
a product generally rises as a function of the number of products with
which it must interoperate, because a new product must interoperate with
already-deployed products.  Increased complexity almost always increases

vulnerabilities in the system or network that connects those products.  In

addition, more complex products tend to be more difficult to use and re-
quire greater technical skill to maintain and manage; thus, purchasers tend
to shy away from such products.  This reluctance, in turn, dampens de-

mand, even if the underlying need is still present.From the supply side, vendors feel considerable pressure from usersto develop interoperable products.  But greater technical skills are needed

by vendors to ensure interoperability among different product versions
than to design a single product that will be used universally, just as they
are for users involved in the operation and maintenance of these prod-
ucts.  Requirements for higher degrees of technical skill translate into

smaller talent pools from which vendors can draw and thus fewer prod-
ucts available that can meet purchasersÕ needs for interoperability.
Problems relating to interoperability and system complexity, as wellas the size of the installed base, have contributed to the slow pace of
demand to date for products with encryption capabilities.Nevertheless, the committee believes it is only a matter of time until asurge occurs, at the same time acknowledging the similarity between this
prediction and other previous predictions regarding demand.  This belief

is based on projections regarding the growth of networked applications4646For example, a survey by the International Data Corporation indicated that the in-stalled base of users for work-group applications (involving communications among physi-cally separated users) is expected to grow at a rate of about 74 percent annually between
1993 and 1998.  See Ann Palermo and Darby Johnson, Analysts, International Data Corpo-
ration, Workgroup Applications Software: Market Review and Forecast, 1993-1998, Framingham,Mass., 1993.  It is true that a considerable amount of remote collaboration is done via e-mail
without cryptographic protection, but work-group applications provide much higher de-grees of functionality for collaboration because they are specifically designed for that pur-pose.  As these applications become more sophisticated (e.g., as they begin to process large

assemblies of entire documents rather than the short messages for which e-mail is bestsuited), the demand for higher degrees of protection is likely to increase.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS151and the trends discussed in Chapter 1Ñincreasing demand for all kindsof information technology, increasing geographic dispersion of businesses
across international boundaries, increasing diversity of parties wishing/
needing to communicate with each other, and increasing diversity in in-
formation technology applications and uses in all activities of a business.
Further, the committee believes that computer users the world over have
approximately the same computing needs as domestic users, and so do-
mestic trends in computing (including demand for more information se-
curity) will be reflected abroad, though perhaps later (probably years
later but not decades later).Market DevelopmentA third issue in assessing the size of the market for cryptography isthe extent to which judgments should be made on the basis of todayÕsmarket conditions (which are known with a higher certainty) rather than
markets that may be at risk tomorrow (which are known with a much
lower degree of certainty).The market for certain types of software tends to develop in a charac-teristic manner.  In particular, the long-term success of infrastructure soft-

ware (i.e., software that supports fundamental business operations such
as operating systems or groupware) depends strongly on the productÕsmarket timing; once such software is integrated into the infrastructure of
the installing organization, demands for backward-compatibility make it
difficult for the organization to install any alternative.47  In other words,
an existing software infrastructure inhibits technological change even if
better software might be available.  It is for this reason that in some

software markets, major advantages accrue to the first provider of a rea-
sonable product.These pressures complicate life for government policy makers whowould naturally prefer a more deliberate approach to policy making,
because it is only during a small window of time that their decisions are
relevantÑthe sooner they act, the better.  The longer they wait, the higher
will be the percentage of companies that have already made their technol-47Many products require backward-compatibility for marketplace acceptance.  Demands
for backward-compatibility even affect products intended for operation in a stand-aloneenvironmentÑan institution with 2 million spreadsheet files is unlikely to be willing toswitch to a product that is incompatible with its existing database unless the product pro-vides reasonable translation facilities for migrating to the new product.  Network compo-
nents are even harder to change, because stations on a network must interoperate.  For

example, most corporate networks have servers deployed with workstations that commu-nicate with those servers.  Any change to the software for the servers must not render it
impossible for those workstations to work smoothly with the upgrade.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYogy choices, and these companies will face large changeover costs if policydecisions entail incompatible alternatives to their currently deployed in-
frastructure.  If the initial choices of companies involve putting non-U.S.

software in place, U.S. vendors fear that they will have lost huge future
market opportunities.484.3.4  Inhibiting Vendor Responses to User Needs
In todayÕs marketing environment, volume sales (licensing) to largecorporate or government customers, rather than purchases by individu-
als, tend to drive sales of business software products.49  Since corporate
customers have large leverage in the marketplace (because one purchas-
ing decision can result in thousands of product sales to a single corpora-
tion), major software vendors are much more responsive to the needs of
corporate users.  Of particular relevance to the export control debate are

three perceptions of corporate users:¥Corporate users do not see that different levels of encryptionstrength (as indicated, for example, by the key length of foreign and do-
mestic versions of a product) provide differential advantages.  Put differ-

ently, the market reality is that users perceive domestic-strength versions
as the standard and liberally exportable versions of cryptography as weak,

rather than seeing liberally exportable versions of cryptography as the
standard and domestic-strength versions as stronger.¥Corporate users weigh all features of a product in deciding whetheror not to buy it.  Thus, the absence of a feature such as strong encryption

that is desired but not easily available because of U.S. export controls
counts as a distinct disadvantage for a U.S. product.  Although other

features may help to compensate for this deficiency, the deficiency may
pose enough of a barrier to a productÕs acceptance abroad that sales aresignificantly reduced.¥Corporate users see cryptographic strength as an important pa-rameter in their assessments of the information security that products
offer.  It is true that cryptography is only one dimension of information
48The deployment of Lotus Notes provides a good example.  Lotus marketing data sug-
gests fairly consistently that once Notes achieves a penetration of about 200 users in a givencompany, an explosion of demand follows, and growth occurs until Notes is deployed
company-wide.49The Department of Commerce noted that Òcivil use of software-based encryption willsignificantly increase in the next five years, with corporate customers dominating this new
marketplace.Ó  See Department of Commerce and National Security Agency, 
A Study of theInternational Market for Computer Software with Encryption, released January 11, 1996, p. III-2.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS153security, that export controls do not affect certain approaches to increas-ing overall information security, and that vendors often do not address
these other approaches.  But cryptography is a visible aspect of the infor-
mation security problem, and vendors feel an obligation to respond to
market perceptions even if these perceptions may not be fully justified by
an underlying technical reality.  Moreover, many of the information secu-

rity measures that do not involve export controls are more difficult and
costly than cryptography to implement, and so it is natural for vendors to
focus their concerns on export controls on cryptography.U.S. vendors that are unable to respond in a satisfactory manner tothese perceptions have a natural disadvantage in competing against ven-
dors that are able to respond.4.4  THE IMPACT OF EXPORT CONTROLS ON U.S. ECONOMIC
AND NATIONAL SECURITY INTERESTSBy affecting U.S. industries abroad that might use cryptography toprotect their information interests and U.S. vendors of a critical technol-
ogy (namely, information technology), export controls have a number of
potentially negative effects on national security that policy makers must
weigh against the positive effects of reducing the use of cryptography by
hostile parties.4.4.1  Direct Economic Harm to U.S. Businesses
While acknowledging the economic benefits to U.S. business from sig-
nals intelligence (as described in Chapter 3), the committee notes that pro-
tection of the information interests of U.S. industries is also a dimension of
national security, especially when the threats emanate from foreign sources.
If the potential value of proprietary information is factored into thedebate over export controls, it dominates all other figures of merit.  A

figure of $280 billion to $560 billion was placed by the Computer Systems
Policy Project on the value of future revenue opportunities as the result of
electronic distribution and commerce and future opportunities to
reengineer business processes by 2000.50  Opponents of export controls on
cryptography argue that if electronic channels and information systems50William F. Hagerty IV, The Growing Need for Cryptography: The Impact of Export ControlPolicy on U.S. Competitiveness, Study Highlights (viewgraphs), December 15, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYare perceived to be vulnerable, businesses may well be discouraged fromexploiting these opportunities, thereby placing enormous potential rev-
enues at risk.On the other hand, it is essentially impossible to ascertain with anydegree of confidence what fraction of proprietary information would be
at risk in any practical sense if businesses did move to exploit these op-
portunities.  Current estimates of industrial and economic espionage pro-

vide little guidance.  The most authoritative publication on the subject to

date, the Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and In-dustrial Espionage,51 noted that
[i]n todayÕs world in which a countryÕs power and stature are oftenmeasured by its economic/industrial capability, foreign government

ministriesÑsuch as those dealing with finance and tradeÑand majorindustrial sectors are increasingly looked upon to play a more promi-nent role in their respective countryÕs collection efforts. . . .  An econom-ic competitor steals a US companyÕs proprietary business information orgovernment trade strategies, [and] foreign companies and commerciallyoriented government ministries are the main beneficiaries of US eco-
nomic information.  The aggregate losses that can mount as a result of
such efforts can reach billions of dollars per year, constituting a seriousnational security concern.The report went on to say that Ò[t]here is no formal mechanism fordetermining the full qualitative and quantitative scope and impact of the
loss of this targeted information.  Industry victims have reported the loss
of hundreds of millions of dollars, lost jobs, and lost market share.ÓThus, even this report, backed by all of the counterintelligence effortsof the U.S. government, is unable to render a definitive estimate to within
an order of magnitude.  Of course, it may well be that these estimates of

loss are low, because companies are reluctant to publicize occurrences of
foreign economic and industrial espionage since such publicity can ad-
versely affect stock values, customersÕ confidence, and ultimately com-
petitiveness and market share, or also because clandestine theft of infor-
mation may not be detected.  Furthermore, because all business trends

point to greater volumes of electronically stored and communicated in-
formation in the future, it is clear that the potential for information com-
promises will growÑthe value of information that could be compromisedthrough electronic channels is only going to increase.51National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Col-lection and Industrial Espionage, Washington, D.C., July 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS15552Obviously, it is impossible to predict with certainty whether export controls will stimu-late the growth of significant foreign competition for U.S. information technology vendors.But the historical evidence suggests some reason for concern.  For example, a 1991 report

(National Research Council, Finding Common Ground: U.S. Export Controls in a Changed Glo-bal Environment, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991) found that Òunilateralembargoes on exports [of technologies for commercial aircraft and jet engines] to numerous
countries not only make sales impossible but actually encourage foreign competitors todevelop relationships with the airlines of the embargoed countries.  By the time the U.S.
controls are lifted, those foreign competitors may have established a competitive advan-tageÓ (p. 22).  The same report also found that for computer technology, 
Òmarginal supplierdisadvantages can lead to significant losses in market position, and it is just such marginal
disadvantages that can be introduced by export controlsÓ (p. 23).  An earlier study (CharlesFerguson, ÒHigh Technology Product Life Cycles, Export Controls, and International Mar-kets,Ó in 
Working Papers of the National Research Council report 
Balancing the National Inter-est, U.S. National Security Export Controls and Global Economic Competition, National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C., 1987) pointed out that the emergence of strong foreigncompetition in a number of high-technology areas appeared in close temporal proximity to
the enforcement of strong export controls in these areas for U.S. vendors.  While the correla-
tion does not prove that export controls necessarily influenced or stimulated the growth offoreign competition, the history suggests that they may have had some causal relationship.
In the financial arena (not subject to export controls), U.S. financial controls associated withthe Trading-with-the-Enemy Act may have led to the rise of the Eurodollar market, a set offoreign financial institutions, markets, and instruments that eroded the monopoly held on
dollar-denominated instruments and dollar-dominated institutions by U.S. firms.The likelihood of foreign competition being stimulated for cryptography may be largerthan suggested by some of these examples, because at least in the software domain, product
development and distribution are less capital intensive than in traditional manufacturingindustries; lower capital intensiveness would mean that competitors would be more likelyto emerge.Finally, while it is true that some foreign nations also impose export controls on cryptog-raphy, those controls tend to be less stringent than those of the United States, as discussedin Appendix G.  In particular, it is more difficult to export encryption from the United

States to the United Kingdom than the reverse, and the U.S. market is an important marketfor foreign vendors.  Further, it takes only one nation with weak or nonexistent controls to
spawn a competitor in an industry such as software.4.4.2  Damage to U.S. Leadership in Information Technology
The strength of the U.S. information technology industry has beentaken as a given for the past few decades.  But as knowledge and capital

essential to the creation of a strong information technology industry be-
come more available around the world, such strength can no longer be
taken for granted.52  If and when foreign products become widely de-
ployed and well integrated into the computing and communications in-
frastructure of foreign nations, even better versions of U.S. products will
be unable to achieve significant market penetration.  One example of such

a phenomenon may be the growing interest in the United States in per-
sonal communications systems based on GSM, the European standard forCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYdigital cellular voice communications.  Further, as the example of
Microsoft vis-‹-vis IBM in the 1980s demonstrated, industry dominanceonce lost is quite difficult to recover in rapidly changing fields.The development of foreign competitors in the information technol-ogy industry could have a number of disadvantageous consequences from
the standpoint of U.S. national security interests:¥Foreign vendors, by assumption, will be more responsive to theirown national governments than to the U.S. government.  To the extent

that foreign governments pursue objectives involving cryptography that
are different from those of the United States, U.S. interests may be ad-
versely affected.  Specifically, foreign vendors could be influenced by

their governments to offer for sale to U.S. firms products with weak or
poorly implemented cryptography.  If these vendors were to gain signifi-

cant market share, the information security of U.S. firms could be ad-
versely affected.  Furthermore, the United States is likely to have less

influence and control over shipments of products with encryption capa-
bilities between foreign nations than it has over similar U.S. products that
might be shipped abroad; indeed, many foreign nations are perfectly will-
ing to ship products (e.g., missile parts, nuclear reactor technology) to
certain nations in contravention to U.S. or even their own interests.  In the

long run, the United States may have even less control over the products
with encryption capabilities that wind up on the market than it would
have if it promulgated a more moderate export control regime.¥Detailed information about the workings of foreign products withencryption capabilities is much less likely to be available to the U.S. gov-
ernment than comparable information about similar U.S. products that
are exported.  Indeed, as part of the export control administration pro-

cess, U.S. products with encryption capabilities intended for export are
examined thoroughly by the U.S. government; as a result, large amounts
of information about U.S. products with encryption capabilities are avail-
able to it.53Export controls on cryptography are not the only factor influencingthe future position of U.S. information technology vendors in the world
market.  Yet, the committee believes that these controls do pose a risk to

their future position that cannot be ignored, and that relaxation of con-
trols will help to ensure that U.S. vendors are able to compete with for-
eign vendors on a more equal footing.53For example, U.S. vendors are more likely than foreign vendors to reveal the sourcecode of a program to the U.S. government (for purposes of obtaining export licenses).  While

it is true that the object code of a software product can be decompiled, decompiled objectcode is always much more difficult to understand than the original source code that corre-sponds to it.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS1574.5  THE MISMATCH BETWEEN THE PERCEPTIONS
OF GOVERNMENT/NATIONAL SECURITYAND THOSE OF VENDORSAs the committee proceeded in its study, it observed what can only becalled a disconnect between the perceptions of the national security au-
thorities that administer the export control regulations on cryptography
and the vendors that are affected by it.  This disconnect was apparent in a

number of areas:¥National security authorities asserted that export controls did notinjure the interests of U.S. vendors in the foreign sales of products with
encryption capabilities.  U.S. vendors asserted that export controls had a

significant negative effect on their foreign sales.¥National security authorities asserted that nearly all export licenseapplications for a product with encryption capabilities are approved.
Vendors told the committee that they refrained from submitting products
for approval because they had been told on the basis of preliminary dis-
cussions that their products would not be approved for export.¥National security authorities presented data showing that the turn-around time for license decisions had been dramatically shortened (to a
matter of days or a few weeks at most).  Vendors noted that these data

took into account only the time from the date of formal submission of an
application to the date of decision, and did not take into account the much
greater length of time required to negotiate product changes that would
be necessary to receive approval.  (See Section  4.3.2 for more discussion.)
¥National security authorities asserted that they wished to promotegood information security for U.S. companies, pointing out the current
practice described in Section 4.1.2 that presumes the granting of USML
licenses for stronger cryptography to U.S.-controlled companies and bank-
ing and financial institutions.  Vendors pointed to actions taken by these

authorities to weaken the cryptographic security available for use abroad,
even in business ventures in which U.S. firms had substantial interests.
Potential users often told the committee that even under presumptive
approval, licenses were not forthcoming, and that for practical purposes,
these noncodified categories were not useful.¥National security authorities asserted that they took into accountforeign competition and the supply of products with encryption capabili-
ties when making decisions on export licenses for U.S. products with
encryption capabilities.  Vendors repeatedly pointed to a substantial sup-

ply of foreign products with encryption capabilities.¥National security authorities asserted that they wished to maintainthe worldwide strength and position of the U.S. information technology
industry.  Vendors argued that when they are prevented from exploiting
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtheir strengthsÑsuch as being the first to develop integrated productswith strong encryption capabilitiesÑtheir advantages are in fact beingeroded.The committee believes that to some extent these differences can beexplained as the result of rhetoric by parties intending to score points in a
political debate.  But the differences are not merely superficial; they re-

flect significantly different institutional perspectives.  For example, when

national security authorities Òtake into account foreign supplies of cryp-tography,Ó they focus naturally on what is available at the time the deci-
sion is being made.  On the other hand, vendors are naturally concerned

about incorporating features that will give their products a competitive
edge, even if no exactly comparable foreign products with cryptography
are available at the moment.  Thus, different parties focus on different

areas of concernÑnational security authorities on the capabilities avail-able today, and vendors on the capabilities that might well be available
tomorrow.NSA perceptions of vendors and users of cryptography may well beclouded by an unwillingness to speak publicly about the full extent of
vendor and user unhappiness with the current state of affairs.  National

security authorities asserted that their working relationships with ven-
dors of products with encryption capabilities are relatively harmonious.
Vendors contended that since they are effectively at the mercy of the
export control regulators, they have considerable incentive to suppress
any public expression of dissatisfaction with the current process.  A lack

(or small degree) of vendor outcry against the cryptography export con-
trol regime cannot be taken as vendor support for it.  More specifically,

the committee received input from a number of private firms on the ex-
plicit condition of confidentiality.  For example:
¥Companies with interests in cryptography affected by export con-trol were reluctant to express fully their dissatisfaction with the current
rules governing export of products with encryption capabilities or how
these rules were actually implemented in practice.  They were concerned

that any explicit connection between critical comments and their com-
pany might result in unfavorable treatment of a future application for an
export license for one of their products.¥Companies that had significant dealings with the Department ofDefense (DOD) were reluctant to express fully their unhappiness with
policy that strongly promoted classified encryption algorithms and gov-
ernment-controlled key-escrow schemes.  These companies were con-

cerned that expressing their unhappiness fully might result in unfavor-
able treatment in competing for future DOD business.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS159Many companies have expressed dissatisfaction publicly, although avery small number of firms did express to the committee their relative
comfort with the way in which the current export control regime is man-
aged.  The committee did not conduct a systematic survey of all firms

affected by export regulations, and it is impossible to infer the position of
a company that has not provided input on the matter.544.6  EXPORT OF TECHNICAL DATA
The rules regarding Òtechnical dataÓ are particularly difficult to un-
derstand.  A cryptographic algorithm (if described in a manner that is not

machine-executable) is counted as technical data, whereas the same algo-
rithm if described in machine-readable form (i.e., source or object code)
counts as a product.  Legally, the ITAR regulate products with encryption

capabilities differently than technical data related to cryptography, al-
though the differences are relatively small in nature.  For example, techni-

cal data related to cryptography enjoys an explicit exemption when dis-
tributed to U.S.-controlled foreign companies, whereas products with
encryption capabilities are in principle subject to a case-by-case review in
such instances (although in practice, licenses for products with encryp-
tion capabilities under such circumstances are routinely granted).Private citizens, academic institutions, and vendors are often unclearabout the legality of actions such as:¥Discussing cryptography with a foreign citizen in the room;¥Giving away software with encryption capabilities over theInternet (see Section 4.8);¥Shipping products with encryption capabilities to a foreign com-pany within the United States that is controlled but not owned by a U.S.
company;¥Selling a U.S. company that makes products with strong encryp-tion capabilities to a foreign company;¥Selling products with encryption capabilities to foreign citizens onU.S. soil;¥Teaching a course on cryptography that involves foreign graduatestudents;54The Department of Commerce study is the most systematic attempt to date to solicitvendorsÕ input on how they have been affected by export controls, and the solicitation
received a much smaller response than expected.  See Department of Commerce and Na-
tional Security Agency, A Study of the International Market for Computer Software with Encryp-tion, released January 11, 1996.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY¥Allowing foreign citizens residing in the United States to work onthe source code of a product that uses embedded cryptography.55Box 4.10 provides excerpts from the only document known to thecommittee that describes the U.S. government explanation of the regula-
tions on technical data related to cryptography.  In practice, these and

other similar issues regarding technical data do not generally pose prob-
lems because these laws are for the most part difficult to enforce and in
fact are not generally enforced.  Nevertheless, the vagueness and broad

nature of the regulations may well put people in jeopardy unknowingly.5655For example, one vendor argues that because foreign citizens hired by U.S. companiesbring noncontrolled knowledge back to their home countries anyway, the export controlregulations on technical data make little sense as a technique for limiting the spread of
knowledge.  In addition, other vendors note that in practice the export control regulations
on technical data have a much more severe impact on the employees that they may hirethan on academia, which is protected at least to some extent by presumptions of academic
freedom.56A suit filed in February 1995 seeks to bar the government from restricting publicationof cryptographic documents and software through the use of the export control laws.  The

plaintiff in the suit is Dan Bernstein, a graduate student in mathematics at the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley.  Bernstein developed an encryption algorithm that he wishes to
publish and to implement in a computer program intended for distribution, and he wants
to discuss the algorithm and program at open, public meetings.  Under the current export
control laws, any individual or company that exports unlicensed encryption software maybe in violation of the export control laws that forbid the unlicensed export of defense ar-
ticles, and any individual who discusses the mathematics of cryptographic algorithms maybe in violation of the export control laws that forbid the unlicensed export of Òtechnicaldata.Ó  The lawsuit argues that the export control scheme as applied to encryption softwareis an Òimpermissible prior restraint on speech, in violation of the First AmendmentÓ and
that the current export control laws are vague and overbroad in denying people the right tospeak about and publish information about cryptography freely.  A decision by the North-

ern District Court of California on April 15, 1996, by Judge Marilyn Patel, denied thegovernmentÕs motion to dismiss this suit, and found that for the purposes of First Amend-ment analysis, source code should be treated as speech.  The outcome of this suit is unknown

at the time of this writing (spring 1996).  The full text of this decision and other related
documents can be found at http://www.eff.org/pub/Legal/Cases/Bernstein_v_DoS/Legal.The constitutionality of export controls on technical data has not been determined by theU.S. Supreme Court.  A ruling by the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the
ITAR, when construed as Òprohibiting only the exportation of technical data significantlyand directly related to specific articles on the Munitions List, do not interfere with constitu-
tionally protected speech, are not overbroad and the licensing provisions of the Act are notan unconstitutional prior restraint on speech.Ó  (See 579 F.2d 516, U.S. vs. Edler, U.S. Court
of Appeals, Ninth Circuit, July 31, 1978.)  Another suit filed by Philip Karn directly chal-

lenging the constitutionality of the ITAR was dismissed by the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia on March 22, 1996.  The issue at hand was the fact that Karn had been
denied CCL jurisdiction for a set of floppy diskettes containing source code for crypto-
graphic confidentiality identical to that contained in Bruce SchneierÕs book Applied Cryptog-raphy (which the State Department had determined was not subject to cryptographic export
controls of any kind).  See http://www.qualcomm.com/people/pkarn/export/index.htmlCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS161BOX 4.10On the Export of Technical Data Related to CryptographyÒCryptologic technical data . . .  refers . . .  only [to] such information as is
designed or intended to be used, or which reasonably could be expected to be givendirect application, in the design, production, manufacture, repair, overhaul, process-
ing, engineering, development, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of items insuch categories.  This interpretation includes, in addition to engineering and design
data, information designed or reasonably expected to be used to make such equip-
ment more effective, such as encoding or enciphering techniques and systems, andcommunications or signal security techniques and guidelines, as well as other cryp-tographic and cryptanalytic methods and procedures.  It does not include general

mathematical, engineering or statistical information, not purporting to have or rea-sonably expected to be given direct application to equipment in such categories.  It
does not include basic theoretical research data.  It does, however, include algo-

rithms and other procedures purporting to have advanced cryptologic application.ÒThe public is reminded that professional and academic presentations and infor-mal discussions, as well as demonstrations of equipment, constituting disclosure of
cryptologic technical data to foreign nationals are prohibited without the prior ap-proval of this office.  Approval is not required for publication of data within the
United States as described in Section 125.11(a)(1).  Footnote 3 to section 125.11

does not establish a prepublication review requirement.ÒThe interpretation set forth in this newsletter should exclude from the licensingprovisions of the ITAR most basic scientific data and other theoretical research infor-
mation, except for information intended or reasonably expected to have a directcryptologic application.  Because of concerns expressed to this office that licensing
procedures for proposed disclosures of cryptologic technical data contained in pro-fessional and academic papers and oral presentations could cause burdensome de-lays in exchanges with foreign scientists, this office will expedite consideration as to
the application of ITAR to such disclosures.  If requested, we will, on an expedited
basis provide an opinion as to whether any proposed disclosure, for other than com-mercial purposes, of information relevant to cryptology, would require licensing
under the ITAR.ÓSOURCE:  Office of Munitions Control, Department of State, 
ÒCryptography/Technical Data,Ó in Munitions Control Newsletter, Number 80, February 1980.(The Office of Munitions Control is now the Office of Defense Trade Controls.)for the running story (Karn is appealing this decision); this Web page also contains theDistrict CourtÕs opinion on this lawsuit.)  Some scholars argue to the contrary that export
controls on technical data may indeed present First Amendment problems, especially ifthese controls are construed in such a way that they inhibit academic discussions of cryp-tography with foreign nationals or prevent academic conferences on cryptography held in
the United States from inviting foreign nationals.  See, for example, Allen M. Shinn, Jr.,
ÒFirst Amendment and Export Laws:  Free Speech on Scientific and Technical Matters,
ÓGeorge Washington Law Review, January 1990, pp. 368-403; and Kenneth J. Pierce, ÒPublicCryptography, Arms Export Controls, and the First Amendment:  A Need for Legislation,
ÓCornell International Law Journal, Volume 17(19), 1984, pp. 197-237.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY4.7  FOREIGN POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
A common perception within the vendor community is that the Na-tional Security Agency is the sole Òpower behind the scenesÓ for enforc-
ing the export control regime for cryptography.  While NSA is indeed

responsible for making judgments about the national security impact of
exporting products with encryption capabilities, it is by no means the
only player in the export license application process.The Department of State plays a role in the export control process thatis quite important.  For example, makers of foreign policy in the U.S.

government use economic sanctions as a tool for expressing U.S. concern
and displeasure with the actions of other nations; such sanctions most
often involve trade embargoes of various types.  Violations of human

rights by a particular nation, for example, represent a common issue that
can trigger a move for sanctions.  Such sanctions are sometimes based on
presidential determinations (e.g., that the human rights record of country
X is not acceptable to the United States) undertaken in accordance with
law; in other cases, sanctions against specific nations are determined di-
rectly by congressional legislation; in still other cases, sanctions are based
entirely on the discretionary authority of the President.The imposition of sanctions is often the result of congressional actionthat drastically limits the discretionary authority of the State Department.
In such a context, U.S. munitions or articles of war destined for particular
offending nations (or to the companies in such nations) are the most
politically sensitive, and in practice the items on the USML are the ones
most likely to be denied to the offending nations.  In all such cases, the

State Department must determine whether a particular item on the USML
should or should not qualify for a USML license.  A specific example of

such an action given to the committee in testimony involved the export of
cryptography by a U.S. bank for use in a branch located in the PeopleÕsRepublic of China.  Because of China
Õs human rights record, the Depart-ment of State delayed the export, and the contract was lost to a Swiss firm.
The sale of cryptographic tools that are intended to protect the interests of
a U.S. company operating in a foreign nation was subject to a foreign
policy stance that regarded such a sale as equivalent to supplying muni-
tions to that nation.Thus, even when NSA has been willing to grant an export license fora given cryptography product, the State Department has sometimes de-
nied a license because cryptography is on the USML.  In such cases, NSA
takes the blame for a negative decision, even when it had nothing to do
with it.Critics of the present export control regime have made the argumentthat cryptography, as an item on the USML that is truly dual-use, shouldCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS163not necessarily be included in such sanctions.  Such an argument has
some intellectual merit, but under current regulations it is impossible to
separate cryptography from the other items on the USML.4.8  TECHNOLOGY-POLICY MISMATCHES
Two cases are often cited in the cryptography community as examplesof the mismatch between the current export control regime and the cur-
rent state of cryptographic technology (Box 4.11).  Moreover, they are

often used as evidence that the government is harassing innocent, law-
abiding citizens.Taken by themselves and viewed from the outside, both of the casesoutlined in Box 4.11 suggest an approach to national security with evident
weaknesses.  In the first instance, accepting the premise that programs for

cryptography cannot appear on the Internet because a foreigner might
download them seems to challenge directly the use of the Internet as a
forum for exchanging information freely even within the United States.
Under such logic (claim the critics), international telephone calls would
also have to be shut down because a U.S. person might discuss cryptogra-
phy with a foreign national on the telephone.  In the second instance, the

information contained in the book (exportable) is identical to that on the
disk (not exportable).  Since it is the information about cryptography that

is technically at issue (the export control regulations make no mention of
the medium in which that information is represented), it is hard to see
why one would be exportable and the other not.On the other hand, taking the basic assumptions of the national secu-rity perspective as a given, the decisions have a certain logic that is not
only the logic of selective prosecution or enforcement.¥In the case of Zimmermann, the real national security issue is notthe program itself, but rather the fact that a significant PGP user base may
be developing.  Two copies of a good encryption program distributed

abroad pose no plausible threat to national security.  But 20 million copies

might well pose a threat.  The export control regulations as written do not

mention potential or actual size of the user base, and so the only remain-
ing leverage for the U.S. government is the broad language that brings
cryptography under the export control laws.¥In the case of Schneier, the real national security issue relates to thenature of any scheme intended to deny capabilities to an adversary.  Typ-

ing the bookÕs source code into the computer is an additional step that anadversary must take to implement a cryptography program and a step at
which an adversary could make additional errors.  No approach to denial

can depend on a single Òsilver bulletÓ; instead, denial rests on the erectionCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 4.11Two Export Control CasesThe Zimmermann PGP CasePhilip Zimmermann is the author of a software program known as PGP (for PrettyGood Privacy).  PGP is a program that is used to encrypt mail messages end-to-end

based on public-key cryptography.  Most importantly, PGP includes a system for key
management that enables two users who have never interacted to communicatesecurely based on a set of trusted intermediaries that certify the validity of a given
public key.  Across the Internet, PGP is one of the most widely used systems for
secure e-mail communication.Zimmermann developed PGP as a ÒfreewareÓ program to be distributed via dis-
kette.  Another party subsequently posted PGP to a USENET 
Ònewsgroup.Ó1  (A com-
mercial version licensed from but not supplied by Zimmermann has since emerged.)In 1993, it was determined that Zimmermann was the target of a criminal investiga-
tion probing possible violations of the export control laws.2  Zimmermann was care-
ful to state that PGP was not to be used or downloaded outside the United States, butof course international connections to the Internet made for easy access to copies of
PGP located within the United States.  In January 1996, the U.S. Department of
Justice closed its investigation of Zimmermann without filing charges against him.3The Bruce Schneier-Applied Cryptography Case
Bruce Schneier wrote a book called Applied Cryptography4 that was well re-
ceived in the cryptography community.  It was also regarded as useful in a practicalsense because it contained printed on its pages source code that could be enteredinto a computer and compiled into a working cryptography program.  In addition,

when distributed within the United States, the book contained a floppy disk thatcontained source code identical to the code found in the book.  However, when
another party (Philip Karn) requested a ruling on the exportability of the book, he
(Karn) received permission to export the book but not the disk.  This decision has
been greeted with considerable derision in the academic cryptography community,with comments such as ÒThey think that terrorists canÕt type?Ó expressing the general
dismay of the community.1A USENET newsgroup is in effect a mailing list to which individuals aroundthe world may subscribe.  Posting is thus an act of transmission to all list
members.2John Schwartz, ÒPrivacy Program:  An On-Line Weapon?,Ó Washington Post,April 3, 1995, p. A1.3Elizabeth Cocoran, ÒU.S. Closes Investigation in Computer Privacy Case,ÓWashington Post, January 12, 1996, p. A11.4Bruce Schneier, Applied Cryptography, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPORT CONTROLS165of multiple barriers, all of which taken together are expected to result in atleast a partial denial of a certain capability.  Moreover, if one begins from

the premise that export controls on software encryption represent appro-
priate national policy, it is clear that allowing the export of the source
code to SchneierÕs book would set a precedent that would make it verydifficult to deny permission for the export of other similar software prod-
ucts with encryption capabilities.  Finally, the decision is consistent with a

history of commodity jurisdiction decisions that generally maintain USML

controls on the source code of a product whose 
object code implementation
of confidentiality has been granted commodity jurisdiction to the CCL.These comments are not intended to excoriate or defend the nationalsecurity analysis of these cases.  But the controversy over these cases does

suggest quite strongly that the traditional national security paradigm of
export controls on cryptography (one that is biased toward denial rather
than approval) is stretched greatly by current technology.  Put differently,

when the export control regime is pushed to an extreme, it appears to be
manifestly ridiculous.4.9  RECAP
Current export controls on products with encryption capabilities area compromise between (1) the needs of national security to conduct sig-
nals intelligence and (2) the needs of U.S. and foreign businesses operat-
ing abroad to protect information and the needs of U.S. information tech-
nology vendors to remain competitive in markets involving products with

encryption capabilities that might meet these needs.  These controls have
helped to delay the spread of strong cryptographic capabilities and the
use of those capabilities throughout the world, to impede the develop-
ment of standards for cryptography that would facilitate such a spread,
and to give the U.S. government a tool for monitoring and influencing the
commercial development of cryptography.  Export controls have clearly

been effective in limiting the foreign availability of products with strong
encryption capabilities made by U.S. manufacturers, although enforce-
ment of export controls on certain products with encryption capabilities
appears to have created many public relations difficulties for the U.S.
government, and circumventions of the current regulations appear pos-
sible.  The dollar cost of limiting the availability of cryptography abroad

is hard to estimate with any kind of confidence, since even the definition
of what counts as a cost is quite fuzzy.  At the same time, a floor of a few

hundred million dollars per year for the market affected by export con-
trols on encryption seems plausible, and all indications are that this figure
will only grow in the future.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYA second consideration is the possibility that export controls on prod-ucts with encryption capabilities may well have a negative impact on U.S.national security interests by stimulating the growth of important foreign
competitors over which the U.S. government has less influence, and pos-
sibly by damaging U.S. competitive advantages in the use and develop-
ment of information technology.  In addition, the export control regime is

clouded by uncertainty from the vendor standpoint, and there is a pro-
found mismatch between the perceptions of government/national secu-
rity and those of vendors on the impact of the export control regime.
Moreover, even when a given product with encryption capabilities may
be acceptable for export on national security grounds, nonnational secu-
rity considerations may play a role in licensing decisions.Partly in response to expressed concerns about export controls, theexport regime has been gradually loosened since 1983.  This relaxation

raises the obvious question of how much farther and in what directions
such loosening could go without significant damage to national security
interests.  This subject is addressed in Chapter 7.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1675Escrowed Encryption and
Related IssuesThis chapter describes a toolÑescrowed encryptionÑthat respondsto the needs described in Chapter 3 for exceptional access to encrypted
information.  Escrowed encryption is the basis for a number of Adminis-

tration proposals that seek to reconcile needs for information security
against the needs of law enforcement and to a lesser extent national secu-
rity.  As in the case of export controls, escrowed encryption generates

considerable controversy.5.1  WHAT IS ESCROWED ENCRYPTION?
The term Òescrow,Ó as used conventionally, implies that some item ofvalue (e.g., a trust deed, money, real property, other physical object) is
delivered to an independent trusted party that might be a person or an
organization (i.e., an escrow agent) for safekeeping, and is accompanied
by a set of rules provided by the parties involved in the transaction gov-
erning the actions of the escrow agent.  Such rules typically specify what

is to be done with the item, the schedule to be followed, and the list of
other events that have to occur.  The underlying notion is that the escrow

agent is a secure haven for temporary ownership or possession of the
item, is legally bound to comply with the set of rules for its disposition,
functions as a disinterested extratransaction party, and bears legal liabil-
ity for malfeasance or mistakes.Usually, the rules stipulate that when all conditions set forth in theescrow rules have been fulfilled, the item will eventually be delivered to aCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYspecified party (e.g., possibly the original depositing party, an estate, ajudicial officer for custody, one or more individuals or organizations).  In
any event, the salient point is that all terms and conditions and function-
ing of an escrow process are, or can be, visible to the parties involved;
moreover, the behavior and performance of formal escrow agents are
governed by legally established obligations.As it applies to cryptography, the term ÒescrowÓ was introduced by
the U.S. governmentÕs April 1993 Clipper initiative in the context of en-cryption keys.  Prior to this time, the term 
ÒescrowÓ had not been widely
associated with cryptography, although the underlying concepts had been
known for some time (as described below).  The Clipper initiative pro-

moting escrowed encryption was intended Òto improve the security andprivacy of telephone communications while meeting the legitimate needs
of law enforcement.Ó1  In this original context, the term 
Òescrowed en-cryptionÓ had a very specific and narrow meaning: escrowed encryption
was a mechanism that would assure law enforcement access to the voice
communications underlying encrypted intercepts from wiretaps.However, during 3 years of public debate and dialogue, Òescrow,ÓÒkey escrow,Ó and 
Òescrowed encryptionÓ have become terms with a
much broader meaning.  Indeed, many different schemes for 
ÒescrowedencryptionÓ are quite different from 
Òescrowed encryptionÓ as the term
was used in the Clipper initiative.As is so often the case in computer-related matters, terminology forescrowed systems is today not clearly established and can be confusing or
misleading.  While new terminology could be introduced in an effort to

clarify meaning, the fact is that the present policy and public and techni-
cal dialogues all use ÒescrowÓ and 
Òescrowed encryptionÓ in a very ge-
neric and broad sense. It is no longer the very precise restricted concept
embodied in the Clipper initiative and described in Section 5.2.1.  Escrow

as a concept now applies not only to the initial purpose of assuring law
enforcement access to encrypted materials, but also to possible end-user
or organizational requirements for a mechanism to protect against lost,
corrupted, or unavailable keys.  It can also mean that some process such

as authority to decrypt a header containing a session key is escrowed with
a trusted party, or it can mean that a corporation is ready to cooperate
with law enforcement to access encrypted materials.1See  ÒStatement by the Press Secretary, The White House, April 16, 1993,Ó reprinted in
David Banisar (ed.),  1994 Cryptography and Privacy Sourcebook, Part II, Electronic PrivacyInformation Center, Diane Publishing, Upland, Pa., 1994.  The name 
ÒClipperÓ initially
selected as the name of this effort proved later to be a trademark whose holder relinquishedit to public use.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES169This report conforms to current usage, considering escrowed encryp-tion as a broad concept that can be implemented in many ways; Section
5.3 addresses forms of escrowed encryption other than that described in
the Clipper initiative.  Also, escrowed encryption is only one of several

approaches to providing exceptional access to encrypted information;

nonescrow approaches to providing exceptional access are discussed in
Chapter 7.2Finally, the relationship between Òstrong encryptionÓ and 
ÒescrowedencryptionÓ should be noted.  As stated above, escrowed encryption re-
fers to an approach to encryption that enables exceptional access to
plaintext without requiring a third party (e.g., government acting with
legal authorization, a corporation acting in accordance with its contrac-
tual rights vis-‹-vis its employees, an individual who has lost an encryp-tion key) to perform a cryptanalytic attack.  At the same time, escrowed

encryption can involve cryptographic algorithms that are strong or weak
and keys that are long or short.  Some participants in the public debate

appear to believe that escrowed encryption is necessarily equivalent to
weak encryption, because it does not prevent third parties from having
access to the relevant plaintext.  But this is a mischaracterization of the

intent behind escrowed encryption, since all escrowed encryption schemes

proposed to date are intended to provide very strong cryptographic con-
fidentiality (strong algorithms, relatively long keys) for users against un-authorized third parties, but no confidentiality at all against third parties
who have authorized exceptional access.
5.2  ADMINISTRATION INITIATIVES SUPPORTING
ESCROWED ENCRYPTIONSince inheriting the problem of providing law enforcement access toencrypted telephony from the outgoing Bush Administration in late 1992,2In the more general meaning of escrowed encryption, exceptional access refers to accessto plaintext by a party other than the originator and the recipient of encrypted communica-tions.  For the case of stored information, exceptional access may refer to access to the
plaintext of an encrypted file by someone not designated by the original encryptor of the
file to decrypt it or even by persons so designated who have forgotten how to do so.  See
also Chapter 3.Contrast the meaning of third-party access in the original Clipper context, in whichthird-party access refers to assured access, under proper court authorization, by law en-forcement to the plaintext of an encrypted voice conversation.  The Clipper initiative was
intended to support a system that provided a technically convenient means to assure fulfill-
ment of such a requirement.  Note that this meaning is much narrower than the use of the
more general term Òexceptional accessÓ described in the previous paragraph.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYClinton Administration officials have said that as they considered the not-so-distant future of information technology and information security
along with the stated needs of law enforcement and national security for
access to information, they saw three alternatives:3¥  To do nothing, resulting in the possible proliferation of products
with encryption capabilities that would seriously weaken, if not wholly
negate, the authority to wiretap embodied in the Wiretap Act of 1968
(Title III) and damage intelligence collection for national security and
foreign policy reasons;¥  To support an approach based on weak encryption, likely resulting
in poor security and cryptographic confidentiality for important personal
and business information; and¥  To support an approach based on strong but escrowed encryption.
If widely adopted and properly implemented, escrowed encryption could
provide legitimate users with high degrees of assurance that their sensi-
tive information would remain secure but nevertheless enable law en-
forcement and national security authorities to obtain access to escrow-
encrypted data in specific instances when authorized under law.
Moreover, the Administration hoped that by meeting legitimate demands
for better information security, escrowed encryption would dampen the
market for unescrowed encryption products that would deny access to
law enforcement and national security authorities even when they sought
access for legitimate and lawfully authorized purposes.The Administration chose the last, and since April 1993, the U.S. gov-ernment has advanced a number of initiatives to support the insertion of
key escrow features into products with encryption capabilities that will
become available in the future.  These include the Clipper initiative and

the Escrowed Encryption Standard, the Capstone/Fortezza initiative, and
the proposal to liberalize export controls on products using escrowed
encryption.  These initiatives raise a number of important issues that are

the focus of Sections 5.3 to 5.13.5.2.1  The Clipper Initiative and the Escrowed Encryption Standard
As noted above, the Clipper initiative was conceived as a way forproviding legal access by law enforcement authorities to encrypted tele-3See, for example, statement of Raymond Kammer, Deputy Director, National Institute ofStandards and Technology, before the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, May 3,1994.  Available on-line at http://www.nist.gov/item/testimony/may94/encryp.html.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES171BOX 5.1Key Technical Attributes of the Clipper Initiative1.A chip-unique secret keyÑthe Òunit keyÓ or Òdevice keyÓ or Òmaster keyÓÑ
would be embedded in the chip at the time of fabrication and could be obtained bylaw enforcement officials legally authorized to do so under Title III.2.Each chip-unique device key would be split into two components.
3.The component parts would be deposited with and held under high security
by two trusted third-party escrow agents proposed to be agencies of the U.S. govern-
ment.  Note: ÒThird-partyÓ is used here to indicate parties other than those participat-
ing in the communication.4.A law enforcement access field (LEAF) would be a required part of every
transmission.  The LEAF would contain (a) the current session key, encrypted with a
combination of the device-unique master key and a different but secret Òfamily keyÓalso permanently embedded in the chip, and (b) the chip serial number, also protect-
ed by encryption with the family key.5.Law enforcement could use the information in the LEAF to identify the par-
ticular device of interest, solicit its master-key components from the two escrow
agents, combine them, recover the session key, and eventually decrypt the encryptedtraffic.6.The encryption algorithm on the chip would be secret.

7.The chip would be protected against reverse engineering and other attempts
to access its technical details.SOURCE:  Dorothy Denning and Miles Smid, ÒKey Escrowing Today,Ó 
IEEECommunications, Volume 32(9), September 1994, pp. 58-68.  Available on-
line at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/ crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.phony.4  The Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES; a Federal Information
Processing Standard, FIPS-185) was promulgated in February 1994 as the
key technological component of the Clipper initiative (Box 5.1).  Specifi-

cally, the EES called for the integration of special microelectronic inte-
grated circuit chips (called ÒClipper chipsÓ) into devices used for voicecommunications; these chips, as one part of an overall system, provide
voice confidentiality for the user and exceptional access to law enforce-
ment authorities.  To provide these functions, the Clipper chip was de-

signed with a number of essential characteristics:¥  Confidentiality would be provided by a classified algorithm known
as Skipjack.  Using an 80-bit key, the Skipjack algorithm would offer
4Dorothy Denning and Miles Smid, ÒKey Escrowing Today,Ó IEEE Communications, Vol-
ume 32(9), September 1994, pp. 58-68.  Available on-line at http://www.cosc.
georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYconsiderably more protection against brute-force attacks than the 56-bitDES algorithm (FIPS 46-1).  The Skipjack algorithm was reviewed by

several independent experts, all with the necessary security clearances.
In the course of an investigation limited by time and resources, they re-
ported that they did not find shortcuts that would significantly reduce the
time to perform a cryptanalytic attack below what would be required by
brute force.5¥  The chip would be protected against reverse engineering and other
attempts to access its technical details.¥  The chip would be factory-programmed with a chip-unique secret
key, the Òunit keyÓ or 
Òdevice key,Ó6 at the time of fabrication.  Possession
of this key would enable one to decrypt all communications sent to and
from the telephone unit in which the chip was integrated.¥  A law enforcement access field (LEAF) would be a required part of
every transmission and would be generated by the chip.  The LEAF would

contain two items: (a) the current session key,7 encrypted with a combina-
tion of the device-unique unit key, and (b) the chip serial number.  The

entire LEAF would itself be encrypted by a different but secret ÒfamilykeyÓ also permanently embedded in the chip.  The family key would be
the same in all Clipper chips produced by a given manufacturer; in prac-
tice, all Clipper chips regardless of manufacturer are programmed today
by the Mykotronx Corporation with the same family key.To manage the use of the LEAF, the U.S. government would under-take a number of actions:5See Ernest Brickell et al., SKIPJACK Review:  Interim Report
, July 28, 1993.  Posted to the
Òsci.cryptÓ newsgroup on August 1, 1993, by Dorothy Denning and available on-line at
http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/SKIPJACK.txt.  Reprinted in Lance J.
Hoffman (ed.), Building in Big Brother:  The Cryptographic Policy Debate
, Springer-Verlag,New York, 1995, pp. 119-130.6The device key or unit key is used to open the encryption that protects a session key.Hence, possession of the unit key allows the decryption of all messages or files encrypted
with that unit or device.  ÒSession keyÓ is defined in footnote 7.
7ÒSession,Ó as in computer science, denotes a period of time during which one or more
computer-based processes are operational and performing some function; typically two ormore of systems, end users, or software processes are involved in a session.  It is analogous
to a meeting among these things.  For cryptography, a session is the plaintext data stream
on which the cryptographic process operates.  The session key is the actual key that is
needed to decrypt the resulting ciphertext.  In the context of an encrypted data transmission

or telephone call, the session key is the key needed to decrypt the communications stream.For encrypted data storage, it is the key needed to decrypt the file.  Note that in the case of
symmetric encryption (discussed in Chapter 2), the decryption key is identical to the en-
cryption key.  Since asymmetric encryption for confidentiality is efficient only for short
messages or files, symmetric encryption is used for session encryption of telephony, datatransmissions, and data storage.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES173¥  The unit key, known at the time of manufacture and unchangeable
for the life of the chip, would be divided into two components, each of
which would be deposited with and held under high security by two
trusted government escrow agents located within the Departments of
Commerce and Treasury.¥  These escrow agents would serve as repositories for all such mate-rials, releasing the relevant information to law enforcement authorities
upon presentation of the unit identification and lawfully obtained court
orders.When law enforcement officials encountered a Clipper-encrypted con-
versation on a wiretap, they would use the LEAF to obtain the serial
number of the Clipper chip performing the encryption and the encrypted
session key.8  Upon presentation of the serial number and court authori-
zation for the wiretap to the escrow agents, law enforcement officials
could then obtain the proper unit-key components, combine them, re-
cover the session key, and eventually decrypt the encrypted voice com-
munications.9  Only one key would be required in order to obtain access
to both sides of the Clipper-encrypted conversation.  The authority for

law enforcement to approach escrow agents and request unit-key compo-
nents was considered to be that granted by Title III and the Foreign Intel-
ligence Surveillance Act (FISA).10As a FIPS, the EES is intended for use by the federal government andhas no legal standing outside the federal government.  Indeed, its use is
8Because the family key would be known to law enforcement officials, obtaining theunencrypted LEAF would present no problems.9Questions have arisen about NSA access to escrowed keys.  NSA has stated for the
record to the committee that Òkey escrow does not affect either the authorities or restric-tions applicable to NSAÕs signals intelligence activities.  NSA
Õs access to escrowed keys willbe tied to collection against legitimate foreign intelligence targets.  The key holder must

have some assurance that NSA is involved in an authorized intelligence collection activityand that the collection activity will be conducted in accordance with the appropriate restric-tions.Ó  For a description of these restrictions, see Appendix D of this report.
10Dorothy Denning and Miles Smid, ÒKey Escrowing Today,Ó IEEE Communications,Volume 32(9), 1994, pp. 58-68.  Available on-line at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/
~denning/crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.Given its initial intent to preserve law enforcementÕs ability to conduct wire taps, itfollows that Clipper key escrow would be conducted without the knowledge of partieswhose keys had been escrowed, and would be conducted according to a set of rules that
would be publicly known but not changeable by the affected parties.  Under the require-
ments of Title III, the affected parties would be notified of the tapping activity at its conclu-sion, unless the information were to become the basis for a criminal indictment or an ongo-
ing investigation.  In the latter case, the accused would learn of the wiretaps, and hence the
law enforcement use of escrowed keys, through court procedures.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYoptional even by federal agencies.  In other words, federal agencies with a
requirement for secure voice communications have a choice about whether
or not to adopt the EES for their own purposes.  More importantly, the use
of EES-compliant devices by private parties cannot in general be compelled

by executive action alone; private consumers are free to decide whether or
not to use EES-compliant devices to safeguard communications and are
free to use other approaches to communications security should they so
desire.11  However, if consumers choose to use EES-compliant devices,
they must accept key escrow as outlined in procedures promulgated by
the government.  This characteristic
Ñthat interoperability requires ac-ceptance of key escrowÑis a design choice; a different specification couldpermit the interoperability of devices with or without features for key
escrow.The EES was developed by communications security experts from theNSA, but the escrow features of the EES are intended to meet the needs of
law enforcementÑi.e., its needs for clandestine surveillance of electronicand wire communications as described in Chapter 3.  NSA played this

development role because of its technical expertise.  EES-compliant devices

are also approved for communicating classified information up to and in-
cluding SECRET.  In speaking with the committee, Administration officials

described the Clipper initiative as more or less irrelevant to the needs of
signals intelligence (SIGINT) (Box 5.2).As of early 1996, AT&T had sold 10,000 to 15,000 units of the SurityTelephone Device 3600.  These include four configurations:  Model C,

containing only the Clipper chip, which has been purchased primarily by
U.S. government customers; Model F, containing only an AT&T-propri-
etary algorithm that is exportable; Model P, containing an AT&T-propri-
etary nonexportable algorithm in addition to the exportable algorithm;
and Model S, with all three of the above.  Only units with the Clipper chip

have a key-escrow feature.  All the telephones are interoperable
Ñtheynegotiate with each other to settle on a mutually available algorithm at
the beginning of a call.12  In addition, AT&T and Cycomm International
have agreed to jointly develop and market Clipper-compatible digital
voice encryption attachments for MotorolaÕs Micro-Tac series of handheld11For example, an opinion issued by the Congressional Research Service argues that leg-islation would be required to mandate the use of the Clipper chip beyond federal computer
systems.  Memorandum from the American Law Division, Congressional Research Service,ÒCurrent Legal Authority to Mandate Adoption of ÔClipper ChipÕ Standards by Private
Parties,Ó Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., October 4, 1994.
12AT&T Secure Communications product literature, available on-line at http://www.att.com/press/0694/940613.pdb.html, and personal communication with Bruce Bailey, AT&TSecure Communications Systems, Greensboro, N.C., March 29, 1996.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES175BOX 5.2The Relationship of Escrowed Encryption to Signals Intelligence
Escrowed encryption
Ñespecially the Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES) and
the Clipper initiativeÑis a tool of law enforcement more than of signals intelligence
(SIGINT).  The EES was intended primarily for domestic use, although exports of EES-

compliant devices have not been particularly discouraged.  Given that the exceptional
access feature of escrowed encryption has been openly announced, purchase by for-eign governments for secure communications is highly unlikely.On the other hand, the U.S. government has classified the Skipjack algorithm tokeep foreign adversaries from learning more about good cryptography.  In addition,
wide deployment and use of escrowed encryption would complicate the task of
signals intelligence, simply because individual keys would have to be obtained oneby one for communications that might or might not be useful.  (Still, EES devices
would be better for SIGINT than unescrowed secure telephones, in the sense that
widely deployed secure telephones without features for exceptional access would bemuch harder to penetrate.)Finally, the impact of escrowed encryption on intelligence collection abroaddepends on the specific terms of escrow agent certification.  Even assuming that all
relevant escrow agents are located within the United States (a question addressed atgreater length in Appendix G), the specific regulations governing their behavior are
relevant.  Intelligence collections of digital data can proceed with few difficulties if
regulations permit escrow agents to make keys available to national security author-ities on an automated basis and without the need to request keys one by one.  On the

other hand, if the regulations forbid wholesale access to keys (and the products inquestion do not include a Òuniversal keyÓ that allows one key to decrypt messages
produced by many devices), escrowed encryption would provide access primarily tospecific encrypted communications that are known to be intrinsically interesting(e.g., known to be from a particular party of interest).  However, escrowed encryp-

tion without wholesale access to keys would not provide significant assistance tointelligence collections undertaken on a large scale.cellular telephones; these products are expected to be available in thesecond quarter of 1996.13  Finally, AT&T makes no particular secret of the
fact that its Surity line of secure voice communication products employs
Clipper chip technology, but that fact is not featured in the product litera-
ture; potential consumers would have to know enough to ask a knowl-
edgeable sales representative.13AT&T news release, ÒAT&T, Cycomm International Develop Digital Voice Encryption,ÓNovember 1, 1995.  Available on-line at http://www.att.com/press/1195/951101.
mma.html.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY5.2.2  The Capstone/Fortezza Initiative
14The Capstone/Fortezza effort supports escrowed encryption for datastorage and communications, although a FIPS for this application has not
been issued.  Specifically, the Capstone chip is an integrated-circuit chip

that provides a number of encryption services for both stored computer
data and data communications.  For confidentiality, the Capstone chip

uses the Skipjack algorithm, the same algorithm that is used in the Clip-
per chip (which is intended only for voice communications, including
low-speed data and fax transmission across the public switched telephone
network, and the same mechanism to provide for key escrowing.  The

agents used to hold Capstone keys are also identical to those for holding
Clipper keysÑnamely, the Departments of Treasury and Commerce.  In
addition, the Capstone chip (in contrast to the Clipper chip) provides
services that conform to the Digital Signature Standard (FIPS-186) to pro-
vide digital signatures that authenticate user identity and the Secure Hash
Standard (FIPS-180); the chip also implements a classified algorithm for
key exchange (usually referred to as the Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA))
and a random number generator.The Capstone chip is the heart of the Fortezza card.15  The Fortezza
card is a PC-card (formerly known as a PCMCIA card) intended to be
plugged into any computer with a PC-card expansion slot and appropri-
ate support software; with the card in place, the host computer is able to
provide reliable user authentication and encryption for confidentiality
and certify data transmission integrity in any communication with any
other computer so equipped.  The Fortezza card is an example of a hard-

ware token that can be used to ensure proper authentication.16  Note also14Technically speaking, Clipper and Capstone/Fortezza are not separate initiatives.  The
Capstone program had been under way for a number of years prior to the public announce-ment of the Clipper chip in 1993, and the Clipper chip is based entirely on technologydeveloped under the Capstone program.  The Clipper chip was developed when the incom-

ing Clinton Administration felt it had to address the problem of voice encryption.  How-
ever, while Clipper and Capstone/Fortezza are not technically separate programs, the pub-lic debate has engaged Clipper to a much greater degree than it has Capstone.  For this

reason, this report discusses Clipper and Capstone/Fortezza separately.15The Fortezza card was previously named the Tessera card; the name was changedwhen previous trademark claims on ÒTesseraÓ were discovered.
16To ensure that the holder of the Fortezza card is in fact the authorized holder, a per-sonal identification number (PIN) is associated with the card: only when the proper PIN isentered will the Fortezza card activate its various functions.  While concerns have been

raised in the security literature that passwords and PINs are not secure when transmittedover open communications lines, the PIN used by the Fortezza card is never used outsidethe confines of the userÕs system.  That is, the PIN is never transmitted over any network
link; the sole function of the PIN is to turn on the Fortezza card, after which an automatedprotocol ensures secure authentication.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES177that there are other hardware PC cards that provide cryptographic func-tionality similar to that of Fortezza but without the escrow features.17To date, the NSA has issued two major solicitations for Fortezza cards,the second of which was for 750,000 cards.18  These cards will be used by
those on the Defense Messaging System, a communications network that
is expected to accommodate up to 2 million Defense Department users in
2005.  In addition, Fortezza cards are intended to be available for private

sector use.  The extent to which Fortezza cards will be acceptable in the

commercial market remains to be seen, although a number of product
vendors have decided to incorporate support for Fortezza cards in some
products.195.2.3  The Relaxation of Export Controls on Software Products Using
ÒProperly EscrowedÓ 64-bit EncryptionAs noted in Chapter 4, the Administration has proposed to treat soft-ware products using a 64-bit encryption key as it currently treats products
with encryption capabilities that are based on a 40-bit RC2 or RC4 algo-
rithm, providing that products using this stronger encryption are Òprop-erly escrowed.Ó  This change is intended to facilitate the global sale of U.S.
software products with significantly stronger cryptographic protection
than is available from U.S. products sold abroad today.To work out the details of what is meant by Òproperly escrowed,Ó the
National Institute of Standards and Technology held workshops in Sep-
tember and December 1995 at which the Administration released a num-
ber of draft criteria for export control (Box 5.3).  These criteria are in-

tended to ensure that a productÕs key escrow mechanism cannot be readily
altered or bypassed so as to defeat the purposes of key escrowing.  In

early 1996, the Administration expressed its intent to move forward rap-
idly with its proposal and to finalize export criteria and make formal
conforming modifications to the export regulations Òsoon.Ó17For example, such devices are made by Cylink and Telequip.  See Government ComputerNews, ÒSecurity Device Is 007 in Your Pocket,Ó August 7, 1995, p. 6.
18Paul Constance, ÒDoD Plans to Install 750,000 Fortezza Cards,Ó Government ComputerNews, July 31, 1995, p. 1 for the solicitation.19For example, the Netscape Communications Corporation has announced that it willsupport Fortezza in the next version of its Web browser, while the Oracle Corporation will
support Fortezza in the next version of its Secure Network Services product.  See Elizabeth
Sikorovsky, ÒNetscape and Oracle Products Support Fortezza Card,Ó Federal Computer Week,October 23, 1995, p. 36.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 5.3AdministrationÕs Draft Software Key Escrow Export CriteriaNovember 1995Key Escrow Feature1.The key(s) required to decrypt the product
Õs key escrow cryptographic func-tionsÕ ciphertext shall be accessible through a key escrow feature.
2.The product
Õs key escrow cryptographic functions shall be inoperable untilthe key(s) is escrowed in accordance with #3.3.The product
Õs key escrow cryptographic functionsÕ key(s) shall be escrowed
with escrow agent(s) certified by the U.S. Government, or certified by foreign govern-
ments with which the U.S. Government has formal agreements consistent with U.S.law enforcement and national security requirements.4.The product
Õs key escrow cryptographic functionsÕ ciphertext shall contain,
in an accessible format and with a reasonable frequency, the identity of the keyescrow agent(s) and information sufficient for the escrow agent(s) to identify the key(s)required to decrypt the ciphertext.5.The product
Õs key escrow feature shall allow access to the key(s) needed todecrypt the productÕs ciphertext regardless of whether the product generated or re-ceived the ciphertext.6.The product
Õs key escrow feature shall allow for the recovery of multipledecryption keys during the period of authorized access without requiring repeatedpresentations of the access authorization to the key escrow agent(s).Key Length Feature7.The product
Õs key escrow cryptographic functions shall use an unclassifiedencryption algorithm with a key length not to exceed sixty-four (64) bits.8.The product
Õs key escrow cryptographic functions shall not provide the fea-ture of multiple encryption (e.g., triple-DES).Interoperability Feature9.The product
Õs key escrow cryptographic functions shall interoperate onlywith key escrow cryptographic functions in products that meet these criteria, andshall not interoperate with the cryptographic functions of a product whose key es-crow encryption function has been altered, bypassed, disabled, or otherwise ren-
dered inoperative.Design, Implementation, and Operational Assurance10.The product shall be resistant to anything that could disable or circumvent
the attributes described in #1 through #9.SOURCE:  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Draft Software KeyEscrow Encryption Export Criteria, November 6, 1995.  Reprinted from text
available on-line at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow/criteria.txt (November1995 version; NIST Web page).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES1795.2.4  Other Federal Initiatives in Escrowed Encryption
In addition to the initiatives described above, the Administration hasannounced plans for new Federal Information Processing Standards in
two other areas:¥  FIPS-185 will be modified to include escrowed encryption for datain both communicated and stored forms.  The modified FIPS is expected

in late 1996; how this modification will relate to Capstone/Fortezza is as
yet uncertain.¥  A FIPS for key escrow will be developed that will, among other
things, specify performance requirements for escrow agents and for es-
crowed encryption products.  How this relates to the existing or modified

FIPS-185 is also uncertain at this time.Note:  As this report goes to press from the prepublication version,
the Administration has released a draft working paper entitled ÒEnablingPrivacy, Commerce, Security and Public Safety in the Global Information
InfrastructureÓ20 that appears to call for one infrastructure for cryptogra-
phy that would support both public-key authentication and key-escrow-
ing functions.5.3  OTHER APPROACHES TO ESCROWED ENCRYPTION
A general concept akin to escrowed encryption has long been familiarto some institutions, notably banks, that have for years purchased infor-
mation systems allowing them to retrieve the plaintext of encrypted files
or other stored information long after the immediate need for such infor-
mation has passed.21  However, only since the initial announcement of the
Clipper initiative in April 1993 has escrowed encryption gained promi-
nence in the public debate.Denning and Branstad describe a number of different approaches toimplementing an escrowed encryption scheme, all of which have been20See ÒEnabling Privacy, Commerce, Security and Public Safety in the Global InformationInfrastructure,Ó Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, Wash-
ington, D.C., May 20, 1996.21An example first announced in 1994 is Northern TelecomÕs ÒEntrust,Ó which provides
for file encryption and digital signature in a corporate network environment using RSApublic-key cryptography.  ÒEntrustÓ allows master access by a network administrator to allusersÕ encrypted files, even after a user has left the company.  A product review for a recent
version of ÒEntrustÓ can be found in Stephen Cobb, 
ÒEncryption for the Enterprise,Ó Net-work World, March 11, 1996, p. 57.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYdiscussed publicly since 1993.22  Those and other different approaches
vary along the dimensions discussed below:¥  Number of escrow agents required to provide exceptional access.  For
example, one proposal called for separation of Clipper unit keys into
more than two components.23  A second proposal called for the 
k-of-narrangement described in Section 5.9.1.¥  Affiliation of escrow agents.  Among the possibilities are government
in the executive branch, government in the judicial branch, commercial
institutions, product manufacturers, and customers.¥  Ability of parties to obtain exceptional access.  Under the Clipper initia-
tive, the key-escrowing feature of the EES is available only to law enforce-
ment authorities acting under court order; users never have access to the
keys.¥  Authorities vested in escrow agents.  In the usual discussion, escrow
agents hold keys or components of keys.  But in one proposal, escrow

agents known as Data Recovery Centers (DRCs) do not hold user keys or
user key components at all.  Products escrowed with a DRC would in-

clude in the ciphertext of a transmission or a file the relevant session key
encrypted with the public key of that DRC and the identity of the DRC in
plaintext.  Upon presentation of an appropriate request (e.g., valid court

order for law enforcement authorities, a valid request by the user of the
DRC-escrowed product), the DRC would retrieve the encrypted session
key, decrypt it, and give the original session key to the authorized third
party, who could then recover the data encrypted with that key.24¥  Hardware vs. software implementation of products.¥  Partial key escrow.25  Under a partial key escrow, a product with
encryption capabilities could use keys of any length, except that all but a
certain number of bits would be escrowed.  For example, a key might be

256 bits long, and 216 bits (256  40) of the key would be escrowed; 40 bits
22All of these examples are taken from Dorothy Denning and Dennis Branstad, ÒA Tax-onomy of Key Escrow Encryption,Ó Communications of the ACM, Volume 39, March 1996.23This comment was probably made during the meetings of July, August, and September1993 by the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board to solicit public viewson the Clipper initiative.  Transcripts of the meetings are available from the National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology.24Stephen T. Walker et al., Commercial Key Escrow: Something for Everyone Now and for theFuture, Report #541, Trusted Information Systems, Glenwood, Md., January 1995.
25Adi Shamir, ÒPartial Key Escrow:  A New Approach to Software Key Escrow,
Ó sum-
mary of presentation at NIST FIPS Key Escrow Workshop, National Institute of Standardsand Technology, Gaithersburg, Md., September 15, 1995.  Available on-line at http://
reality.sgi.com/employees/chrisr_corp/pkedc.html.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES181would remain private.  Thus, decrypting ciphertext produced by this
product would require a 256-bit work factor for those without the es-
crowed bits and a 40-bit work factor for those individuals in possession of
the escrowed bits.  Depending on the number of private bits used, this

approach would protect users against disclosure of keys to those without
access to the specialized decryption facilities required to conduct an ex-
haustive search against the private key (in this case, 40 bits).Box 5.4 describes a number of other conceptual approaches to es-
crowed encryption.5.4  THE IMPACT OF ESCROWED ENCRYPTION ON
INFORMATION SECURITYIn the debate over escrowed encryption, the dimension of informa-tion security that has received the largest amount of public attention has
been confidentiality.  Judgments about the impact of escrowed encryp-

tion on confidentiality depend on the point of comparison.  If the point of

comparison is taken to be the confidentiality of data available today, then
the wide use of escrowed encryption does improve confidentiality.  The

reason is that most information today is entirely unprotected.Consider first information in transit (communications).  Most com-
munications today are unencrypted.  For example, telephonic communi-

cations can be tapped in many different ways, including through alligator
clips at a junction box in the basement of an apartment house or on top of
a telephone pole, off the air when some part of a telephonic link is wire-
less (e.g., in a cellular call), and from the central switching office that is
carrying the call.  Calls made using EES-compliant telephones would be

protected against such surveillance, except when surveillance parties (pre-
sumably law enforcement authorities) had obtained the necessary keys
from escrow agents.  As for information in storage, most files on most

computers are unencrypted.  Escrowed encryption applied to these files

would protect them against threats such as casual snoops, although indi-
viduals with knowledge of the vulnerabilities of the system on which
those files reside might still be able to access them.On the other hand, if the point of comparison is taken to be the levelof confidentiality that could be possible using unescrowed encryption,
then escrowed encryption offers a lower degree of confidentiality.  Es-

crowed encryption by design introduces a system weakness (i.e., it is
deliberately designed to allow exceptional access), and so if the proce-
dures that protect against improper use of that access somehow fail, infor-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 5.4Non-Clipper Proposals for Escrowed EncryptionAT&T CryptoBackup.  CryptoBackup is an AT&T proprietary design for a com-
mercial or private key-escrow encryption system.  The data encryption key for a

document is recovered through a backup recovery vector (BRV), which is stored inthe document header.  The BRV contains the document key encrypted under a mas-
ter public key of the escrowed agent(s).  (David P. Maher, 
ÒCrypto Backup and KeyEscrow,Ó Communications of the ACM, March 1996.)Bankers Trust Secure Key Escrow Encryption System (SecureKEES).  Employees
of a corporation register their encryption devices (e.g., smart card) and private en-
cryption keys with one or more commercial escrow agents selected by the corpora-tion.  (SecureKEES product literature, CertCo, Bankers Trust Company.)
Bell Atlantic Yaksha System.  An on-line key security server generates and dis-
tributes session keys and file keys using a variant of the RSA algorithm.  The server
transmits the keys to authorized parties for data recovery purposes.  (Ravi Ganesan,
ÒThe Yaksha Security System,Ó Communications of the ACM, March 1996.)Royal Holloway Trusted Third Party Services.  This proposed architecture for a
public key infrastructure requires that the trusted third parties associated with pairs ofcommunicating users share parameters and a secret key.  (Nigel Jefferies, Chris Mitch-

ell, and Michael Walker, A Proposed Architecture for Trusted Third Party Services,ÓRoyal Holloway, University of London, 1995.)RSA SecureTM.  This file encryption product provides data recovery through an
escrowed master public key, which can be split among up to 255 trustees using athreshold scheme.  (RSA Secure
TM, product literature from RSA Data Security Inc.)Nortel Entrust.  This commercial product archives users
Õ private encryption keys
as part of the certificate authority function and public-key infrastructure support.
(Warwick Ford, ÒEntrust Technical Overview,Ó White Paper, Nortel Secure Networks,
October 1994.)National Semiconductor CAKE.  This proposal combines a TIS Commercial Key
Escrow (CKE) with National SemiconductorÕs PersonaCardTM.  (W.B. Sweet, 
ÒCom-mercial Automated Key Escrow (CAKE): An Exportable Strong Encryption Proposal,ÓNational Semiconductor, iPower Business Unit, June 4, 1995.)TIS Commercial Key Escrow (CKE).  This is a commercial key escrow system for
stored data and file transfers.  Data recovery is enabled through master keys held bya Data Recovery Center.  (Stephen T. Walker, Stephen B. Lipner, Carl M. Ellison, and

David M. Balenson, ÒCommercial Key Recovery,Ó Communications of the ACM,March 1996.)TECSEC VEILTM.  This commercial product provides file (and object) encryp-
tion.  Private key escrow is built into the key management infrastructure.  (Edward M.
Scheidt and Jon L. Roberts, ÒPrivate Escrow Key Management,Ó TECSEC Inc., Vienna,
Va.  See also TECSEC VEIL
TM, product literature.)Viacrypt PGP/BE (Business Edition).  Viacrypt is a commercialized version of
PGP, the free Internet-downloadable software package for encrypted communica-tions.  The Business Edition of Viacrypt optionally enables an employer to decrypt all

encrypted files or messages sent or received by an employee by carrying the sessionkey encrypted under a ÒCorporate Access KeyÓ in the header for the file or message.
(See http://www.viacrypt.com.)SOURCE:  Most of these examples are taken from Dorothy Denning and Miles

Smid, ÒKey Escrowing Today,Ó IEEE Communications, Volume 32(9), 1994, pp.
58-68.  Available on-line at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES183mation is left unprotected.26  For example, EES-compliant telephones
would offer less confidentiality for telephonic communications than would
telephones that could be available with the same encryption algorithm
and implementation but without the escrow feature, since such telephones

could be designed to provide communications confidentiality against alleavesdroppers, including rogue police, private investigators, or (and this
is the important point) legally authorized law enforcement officials.More generally, escrowed encryption weakens the confidentiality pro-vided by an encryption system by providing an access path that can be
compromised.27  Yet escrowed encryption also provides a hedge against
the loss of access to encrypted data by those authorized for access; for
example, a user may lose or forget a decryption key.  Assurances that

encrypted data will be available when needed are clearly greater when a
mechanism has been installed to facilitate such access.  Reasonable people

may disagree about how to make that trade-off in any particular case,
thus underscoring the need for end users themselves to make their own
risk-benefit assessments regarding the loss of authorized access (against
which escrowed encryption can protect by guaranteeing key recovery) vs.
the loss of confidentiality to unauthorized parties (whose likelihood is
increased by the use of escrowed encryption).A point more specifically related to EES is that escrowed encryptioncan also be used to enhance certain dimensions of Title III protection.  For

example, the final procedures for managing law enforcement access to
EES-protected voice conversations call for the hardware providing excep-
tional access to be designed in such a way that law enforcement officials
would decrypt communications only if the communications were occur-
ring during the time window specified in the initial court authorization.
The fact that law enforcement officials will have to approach escrow agents26Even worse, it is not just future communications that are placed at risk, but past com-munications as well.  For example, if encrypted conversations are recorded and the
relevant key is not available, they are useless.  However, once the unit key is obtained,

those recordings become decipherable if they are still available.  Such recording would be
illegal, because legal authorization for the wiretap would have been necessary to obtain thekey, but since these circumstances presume a breakdown of escrow procedures in the first
place, the fact of illegality is not particularly relevant.27For example, if a party external to the corporation has the keys that provide access tothat corporationÕs encrypted information, the corporation is more vulnerable to a loss ofconfidentiality, because the external party can become the target of theft, extortion, black-mail, and the like by unauthorized parties who are seeking that information.  Of course, the
corporation itself is vulnerable, but since only one target (either the corporation or any
external key-holding party) needs to be compromised, more targets lead to greater vulner-ability.  Of course, if keys are split among a number of external parties, the likelihood of
compromise through this route is reduced, but the overall risk of compromise is still in-
creased.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYto obtain the relevant key means that there will be an audit trail for wire-taps requiring decryption, thus deterring officials who might be tempted or
able to act on their own in obtaining a wiretap without legal authorization.5.5  THE IMPACT OF ESCROWED ENCRYPTION ON
LAW ENFORCEMENTBox 5.5 describes the requirements for escrowed encryption that lawenforcement authorities (principally the FBI) would like product vendors
to accommodate.  But two additional high-level questions must be ad-

dressed before escrowed encryption is accepted as an appropriate solu-
tion to the stated law enforcement problem.5.5.1  Balance of Crime Enabled vs. Crime Prosecuted
One question is the following: Does the benefit to law enforcementfrom access to encrypted information through an escrow mechanism out-
weigh the damage that might occur due to the failure of procedures in-
tended to prevent unauthorized access to the escrow mechanism?  Since

government authorities believe that the implementation of these proce-
dures can be made robust (and thus the anticipated expectation of failure
is slight), they answer the question in the affirmative.  Critics of govern-

ment initiatives promoting escrowed encryption raise the concern that
the risk of failure may be quite large, and thus their answer to the ques-
tion ranges from ÒmaybeÓ to 
Òstrongly negative.Ó  These parties generally
prefer to rely on technologies and procedures that they fully understand
and control to maintain the security of their information, and at best, they
believe that any escrow procedures create a potentially serious risk of
misuse that must be stringently counteracted, diligently monitored, and
legally constrained.  Moreover, they believe that reliance on government-

established procedures to maintain proper access controls on escrowed
keys invites unauthorized third parties to target those responsible for
upholding the integrity of the escrow system.History suggests that procedural risks materialize as real problemsover the long run,28 but in practice, a base of operational experience is
necessary to determine if these risks are significant.28See, for example, Peter G. Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, Addison-Wesley, NewYork, 1995; and Charles Perrow, Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk Technologies, BasicBooks, New York, 1984.  Neumann describes a large number of computer-related reliabilityand safety problems and security vulnerabilities that have arisen from combinations ofdefective system implementation, flawed system design, and human error in executing
procedures.  Perrow describes a number of accidents that have occurred in other domains
(e.g., maritime shipping, air traffic control, nuclear power plant operation) that have re-sulted from a similar set of problems.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES185BOX 5.5Law Enforcement Requirements for Escrowed Encryption ProductsInformation Identification¥  The product is unable to encrypt/decrypt data unless the necessary informa-tion to allow law enforcement to decrypt communications and stored information isavailable for release to law enforcement.¥  A field is provided that readily identifies the information needed to decrypt
each message, session, or file generated or received by the user of the product.¥  Repeated involvement by key escrow agents (KEAs) is not required to obtain
the information needed to decrypt multiple conversations and data messages (refer to
expeditious information release by KEAs) during a period of authorized communica-tions interception.Provision of SubjectÕs Information Only¥  Only information pertaining to the communications or stored information
generated by or for the subject is needed for law enforcement decryption.Subversions of Decryption Capability¥  The product is resistant against alterations that disable or bypass law enforce-
ment decryption capabilities.¥  Any alteration to the product to disable or bypass law enforcement
Õs decryp-tion capability requires a significant level of effort regardless of whether similar alter-ations have been made to any other identical version of that product.Transparency¥  The decryption of an intercepted communication is transparent to the inter-
cept subject and all other parties to the communication except the investigative agen-
cy and the key escrow agent.Access to Technical Details to Develop Decrypt Capability¥  Law enforcement may need access to a product
Õs technical details to developa key escrow decrypt capability for that product.SOURCE:  Federal Bureau of Investigation, viewgraphs of presentation to Inter-national Cryptography Institute 1995 conference, September 22, 1995.5.5.2  Impact on Law Enforcement Access to Information
Even if escrowed encryption were to achieve significant market pen-etration and were widely deployed, the question would still remain re-
garding the likely effectiveness of a law enforcement strategy to preserve
wiretapping and data recovery capabilities through deployments of es-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYcrowed encryption built around voluntary use.29  This question has sur-
faced most strongly in the debate over EES, but as with other aspects of
the cryptography debate, the answer depends on the scenario in question:¥  Many criminals will reach first for devices and tools that are readily
at hand because they are so much more convenient to use than those that
require special efforts to obtain.  Criminals who have relatively simple

and straightforward needs for secure communications may well use EES-
compliant devices if they are widely available.  In such cases, they will

simply have forgotten (or not taken sufficient conscious account of) the
fact that these ÒsecureÓ devices have features that provide law enforce-
ment access,30 and law enforcement officials will obtain the same level
and quality of information they currently obtain from legal wiretaps.  In-

deed, the level and quality of information might be even greater than
what is available today because criminals speaking on EES-compliant
devices might well have a false sense of security that they could not be
wiretapped.¥  Criminals whose judgment suggests the need for extra and non-
routine security are likely to use secure communications devices without
features for exceptional access.  In these cases, law enforcement officials

may be denied important information.  However, the use of these com-

munications devices is likely to be an ad hoc arrangement among
participants in a criminal activity.  Since many criminal activities often

require participants to communicate with people outside the immediate
circle of participants, ÒsecondaryÓ wiretap information might be avail-
able if nonsecure devices were used to communicate with others not di-
rectly associated with the activity.Senior Administration officials have recognized that the latter sce-nario is inevitableÑit is impossible to prevent all uses of strong un-escrowed encryption by criminals and terrorists.  However, the wide-

spread deployment of strong encryption without features for exceptional
access would mean that even the careless criminal would easily obtain
unbreakable encryption, and thus the AdministrationÕs initiatives are di-rected primarily at the first scenario.Similar considerations would apply to escrowed encryption productsused to store dataÑmany criminals will use products with encryption29ÒVoluntaryÓ has been used ambiguously in the public debate on key escrow.  It can
mean voluntary use of key escrow in any context or implementation, or it can mean volun-tary use of EES-compliant products.  In the latter situation, of course, the key-escrow fea-

ture would be automatic.  Usually, the context of its use will clarify which interpretation of
ÒvoluntaryÓ is intended.
30Cf. point in Chapter 2 regarding behavior of criminals with respect to wiretapped tele-phone calls.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES187capabilities that are easily available to store files and send e-mail.  If these
products are escrowed, law enforcement officials have a higher likelihood
of having access to those criminal data files and e-mail.  On the other

hand, some criminals will hide or conceal their stored data through the
use of unescrowed products or by storing them on remote computers
whose location is known only to them, with the result that the efforts of
law enforcement authorities to obtain information will be frustrated.5.6  MANDATORY VS. VOLUNTARY USE OF
ESCROWED ENCRYPTIONAs noted above, the federal government cannot compel the privatesector to use escrowed encryption in the absence of legislation, whether
for voice communications or any other application.  However, EES raised

the very important public concern that the use of encryption without
features for exceptional access might be banned by statute.  The Adminis-

tration has stated that it has no intention of outlawing the use of such
cryptography or of regulating in any other way the domestic use of cryp-
tography.  Nevertheless, no administration can bind future administra-

tions, and Congress can change a law at any time.  More importantly,

widespread acceptance of escrowed encryption, even if voluntary, would
put into place an infrastructure that would support such a policy change.
Thus, the possibility that a future administration and/or Congress might
support prohibitions on unescrowed encryption cannot be dismissed.
This topic is discussed in depth in Chapter 7.With respect to the federal governmentÕs assertion of authority in theuse of the EES by private parties, there are a number of gray areas.  For

example, a federal agency that has adopted the EES for secure telephonic
communications clearly has the right to require all contractors that inter-
act with it to use EES-compliant devices as a condition of doing business
with the government;31,32
 this point is explored further in Chapter 6.  More
problematic is the question of whether an agency that interacts with the
public at large without a contractual arrangement may require such use.A second important gray area relates to the establishment of EES as a31For example, at present the Department of Defense requires that contractors acquireand employ STU-III secure telephones for certain sensitive telephonic communications withDOD personnel.  The Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) were modified to allow the

costs of such telephones to be charged against contracts, to further encourage purchase ofthese telephones.32One major manufacturer noted to the committee that meeting federal requirements forencryption also reduces its ability to standardize on a single solution in distributed net-works.  Government-mandated key escrow could differ substantially enough from key
escrow systems required for commercial operations that two separate key escrow systems
could be needed.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYde facto standard for use in the private sector through mechanisms de-scribed in Chapter 6.  In this area, Administration officials have expressed

to the committee a hope that such would be the case.  If EES-compliant

devices were to become very popular, they might well drive potential
competitors (specifically, devices for secure telephonic communications
without features for exceptional access) out of the market for reasons of
cost and scarcity. Under such circumstances, it is not clear that initially
voluntary use of the EES would in the end leave room for a genuine
choice for consumers.5.7  PROCESS THROUGH WHICH POLICY ON ESCROWED
ENCRYPTION WAS DEVELOPEDMuch criticism of the Clipper initiative has focused on the processthrough which the standard was established.  Specifically, the Clipper

initiative was developed out of the public eye, with minimal if any con-
nection to the relevant stakeholders in industry and the academic com-
munity, and appeared to be ÒsprungÓ on them with an announcement in
the New York Times.  Furthermore, a coherent approach to the interna-
tional dimensions of the problem was not developed, a major failing since
business communications are global in nature.  After the announcement

of the Clipper initiative, the federal government promulgated the EES
despite a near-unanimous condemnation of the proposed standard in the
public comments on it.Similar comments have been expressed with respect to the August-September 1995 Administration proposal to relax export controls on 64-bit
software products if they are properly escrowed.  This proposal, advertised

by the Administration as the follow-up to the Gore-Cantwell letter of July
1994,33 emerged after about a year of virtual silence from the Administra-
tion during which public interactions with industry were minimal.33On July 20, 1994, Vice President Al Gore wrote to Representative Maria Cantwell (D-Washington) expressing a willingness to enter into Òa new phase of cooperation amonggovernment, industry representatives and privacy advocates with a goal of trying to de-velop a key escrow encryption system that will provide strong encryption, be acceptable to
computer users worldwide, and address our national security needs as well.Ó  The Vice
President went on to say that Òwe welcome the opportunity to work with industry todesign a more versatile, less expensive system.  Such a key escrow system would be

implementable in software, firmware, hardware, or any combination thereof, would notrely upon a classified algorithm, would be voluntary, and would be exportable. . . .  We also
recognize that a new key escrow encryption system must permit the use of private-sector
key escrow agents as one option. . . .  Having a number of escrow agents would give
individuals and businesses more choices and flexibility in meeting their needs for securecommunications.Ó  Letter reprinted in Hoffman, 
Building in Big Brother, 1995, pp. 236-238.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES189The result has been a tainting of escrowed encryption that inhibitsunemotional discussion of its pros and cons and makes it difficult to reach
a rational and well-balanced decision.5.8  AFFILIATION AND NUMBER OF ESCROW AGENTS
Any deployment of escrowed encryption on a large scale raises thequestion of who the escrow agents should be.  (The equally important

question of their responsibilities and liabilities is the subject of Section
5.9.)  The original Clipper/Capstone escrow approach called for agencies

of the executive branch to be escrow agents; at this writing, the
AdministrationÕs position seems to be evolving to allow parties in theprivate sector to be escrow agents.  Different types of escrow agents have
different advantages and disadvantages.The use of executive branch agencies as escrow agents has a numberof advantages.  Executive branch escrow agents can be funded directly

and established quickly, rather than depending on the existence of a pri-
vate sector market or business for escrow agents.  Their continuing exist-

ence depends not on market forces but on the willingness of the  Congress

to appropriate money to support them.  Executive branch escrow agents

may well be more responsive than outside escrow agents to authorized
requests from law enforcement for keys.  Executive branch escrow agents

can be enjoined more easily from divulging to the target of a surveillance
the fact that they turned over a key to law enforcement officials, thereby
helping to ensure that a surveillance can be performed surreptitiously.  In

the case of FISA intercepts, executive branch escrow agents may be more
protective of associated classified information (such as the specific target
of the intercept).  Under sovereign immunity, executive branch escrow

agents can disavow civil liability for unauthorized disclosure of keys.Of course, from a different standpoint, most of these putative advan-tages can be seen as disadvantages.  If direct government subsidy is re-

quired to support an escrow operation, by definition it lacks the support
of the market.34  The high speed with which executive branch escrow
agents were established suggested to critics that the Administration was
attempting to present the market with a fait accompli with respect to
escrow.  A higher degree of responsiveness to requests for keys may well34The original Clipper/Capstone proposal made no provision for parties other than lawenforcement authorities to approach escrow agents, and in this context could be regardedas a simple law enforcement initiative with no particular relevance to the private sector.However, in light of the AdministrationÕs arguments concerning the desirability of escrowedencryption to meet the key backup needs of the private sector, the importance of relevanceto the private sector is obvious.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYcoincide with greater disregard for proper procedure; indeed, since one ofthe designated escrow agencies (the Treasury Department) also has law
enforcement jurisdiction and the authority to conduct wiretaps under
some circumstances, a Treasury escrow agent might well be faced with a
conflict of interest in managing keys.  The obligation to keep the fact of

key disclosure secret might easily lead to circumvention and unautho-
rized disclosures.  The lack of civil liability and of criminal penalties for

improper disclosure might reduce the incentives for compliance with
proper procedure.  Most importantly, all executive branch workers are in

principle responsible to a unitary source of authority (the President).
Thus, concerns are raised that any corruption at the top levels of govern-
ment might diffuse downward, as exemplified by past attempts by the
Executive Office of the President to use the Internal Revenue Service to
harass its political enemies.  One result might be that executive branch

escrow agents might divulge keys improperly; a second result might be
that executive branch escrow agents could be more likely to reveal the
fact of key disclosure to targets in the executive branch under investiga-
tion.Some of the concerns described above could be mitigated by placementof escrow agents in the judiciary branch of government on the theory that
since judicial approval is needed to conduct wiretaps, giving the judiciary
control of escrowed keys would in fact give it a way of enforcing the Title III
requirements for legal authorization.  On the other hand, the judiciary

branch would have to rule on procedures and misuse, thereby placing it at
risk of a conflict of interest should alleged misdeeds in the judiciary branch
come to light.  Matters related to separation of powers between the execu-

tive and judicial branches of government are also relevant.The best argument for government escrow agents is that governmentcan be held politically accountable.  When a government does bad things,

the government can be replaced.  Escrow agents must be trustworthy, and

the question at root is whether it is more appropriate to trust government
or a private party; the views on this point are diverse and often vigor-
ously defended.The committee believes that government-based escrow agents present
few problems when used to hold keys associated with government work.
Nonetheless, mistrust of government-based escrow agents has been one
of the primary criticisms of the EES.  If escrowed encryption is to serve

broad social purposes across government and the private sector, it makes
sense to consider other possible escrow agents in addition to government
escrow agents:¥  Private organizations established to provide key registration services (ona fee-for-service basis).  Given that some business organizations have cer-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES191tain needs for data retrieval and monitoring of communications as de-scribed in Chapter 3, such needs might create a market for private escrow
agents.  Some organizations might charge more and provide users with

bonding against failure or improper revelations of keys; other organiza-
tions might charge less and not provide such bonding.¥  Vendors of products with encryption capabilities and features for excep-
tional access.  Vendors acting as escrow agents would face a considerable
burden in having to comply with registration requirements and might be
exposed to liability.35  At the same time, vendors could register keys at the
time of manufacture or by default at some additional expense.36¥  Customers themselves.  In the case of a corporate customer, a spe-
cially trusted department within the corporation that purchases escrowed
encryption products could act as an escrow agent for the corporation.
Such Òcustomer escrowÓ of a corporation
Õs own keys may be sufficient forits needs; customer escrow would also enable the organization to know
when its keys have been revealed.  Since legal entities such as corpora-

tions will continue to be subject to extant procedures of the law enforce-
ment court order or subpoena, law enforcement access to keys under
authorized circumstances could be assured.  In the case of individual

customers who are also the end users of the products they purchase, the
individual could simply store a second copy of the relevant keys as a form
of customer escrow.Note especially that site licenses37 to corporations account for the
35For example, in the early days of an offering by AT&T to provide picture-phone meet-ing services, the question arose as to whether AT&T or the end user should provide secu-
rity.  The business decision at the time was that AT&T should not provide security because
of the legal implicationsÑa company that guaranteed security but failed to provide it wasliable.  (Ironically, at least one major computer vendor declined to provide encryption

services for data communications and storage on the grounds that encryption would beprovided by AT&T.)  While today
Õs AT&T support for the PictureTel product line forvideoconferencing (which provides encryption capabilities) may suggest a different AT&T
perspective on the issue of who is responsible for providing security, companies will haveto decide for themselves their own tolerable thresholds of risk for liability.36The cost of vendor registration would be high in the case of certain software products.Specifically, products that are distributed by CD-ROM must be identical, because it wouldbe very expensive (relative to current costs) to ship CD-ROMs with unique serial numbersor keys.  To some extent, the same is true of products distributed by network
Ñit is highlyconvenient and desirable from the vendorÕs perspective to have just one file that can bedownloaded upon user request, although it is possible and more expensive to providenumbered copies of software distributed by network.37Under a site license, a corporation agrees with a vendor on a price for a certain (perhapsvariable) number of licenses to use a given software package.  Site licenses also include
agreements on and conditions for support and documentation.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYlargest portion of vendor sales in software.38  In a domestic context, cor-
porations are entities that are subject to legal processes in the United
States that permit law enforcement authorities to obtain information in
the course of a criminal investigation.  In a foreign context, exports to

certain foreign corporations can be conditioned on a requirement that the
foreign corporation be willing to escrow its key in such a manner that U.S.
law enforcement authorities would be able to have access to that informa-
tion under specified circumstances and in a manner to be determined by
a contract binding on the corporation.  (The use of contract law in this

manner is discussed further in Chapter 7.)  In short, sales of escrowed

encryption to foreign and domestic corporate users could be undertaken
in such a way that a very large fraction of the installed user base would in
fact be subject to legal processes for obtaining information on keys.Nongovernment escrow agents are subject to the laws of the govern-ment under whose jurisdiction they operate.  In addition, they raise other

separate questions.  For example, a criminal investigation may target the

senior officials of a corporation, who may themselves be the ones autho-
rized for access to customer-escrowed keys; they might then be notified of
the fact of being wiretapped.  The same would be true of end users con-

trolling their own copies of keys.  Private organizations providing key-

holding services might be infiltrated or even set up by criminal elements
that would frustrate lawful attempts to obtain keys or would even use the
keys in their possession improperly.  Private organizations may be less

responsive to government requests than government escrow agents.  Fi-

nally, private organizations motivated by profit and tempted to cut cor-
ners might be less responsible in their conduct.A second important issue regarding escrow agents deals with theirnumber.  Concentrating escrow arrangements in a few escrow agents may

make law enforcement access to keys more convenient, but it also focuses
the attention of those who may attempt to compromise those facilitiesÑthe Òbig, fat targetÓ phenomenon
Ñbecause the aggregate value of thekeys controlled by these few agents is, by assumption, large.39  On the
other hand, given a fixed budget, concentrating resources on a few es-
crow agents may enable them to increase the security against compro-38The dominance of corporate sales over sales to individuals was cited in Department ofCommerce and National Security Agency, A Study of the International Market for ComputerSoftware with Encryption, released January 11, 1996, p. III-2.39Note also that maintaining the physical security of escrow agents, especially govern-ment escrow agents, may be especially critical; sabotage or destruction of an escrow agentfacility might well be seen in some segments of society as a blow for freedom and liberty.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES193mise, whereas spreading resources among many escrow agents may leaveeach one much more open to compromise.  Indeed, the security of a well-

funded and well-supported escrow agent may be greater than that of the
party that owns the encryption keys; in this case, the incremental risk that
a key would be improperly compromised by the escrow agent would be
negligible.  Increasing the number of escrow agents so that each would be

responsible for a relatively small number of keys reduces the value of
compromising any particular escrow agent but increases the logistical
burdens, overhead, and expense for the nation.  The net impact on secu-

rity against compromise of keys is very scenario-dependent.405.9  RESPONSIBILITIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF ESCROW
AGENTS AND USERS OF ESCROWED ENCRYPTIONRegardless of who the escrow agents are, they will hold certain infor-mation and have certain responsibilities and obligations.41  Users of es-
crowed encryption also face potential liabilities.5.9.1  Partitioning Escrowed Information
Consider what precisely an escrow agent would hold.  In the simplest
case, a single escrow agent would hold all of the information needed to
provide exceptional access to encrypted information.  (In the Clipper case,

two escrow agents would be used to hold the unit keys to all EES-compli-
ant telephones.)A single escrow agent for a given key poses a significant risk of single-
point failureÑthat is, the compromise of only one party (the single es-crow agent) places at risk all information associated with that key.  The

Clipper/Capstone approach addresses this point by designating two ex-
ecutive branch agencies (Commerce and Treasury), each holding one com-
ponent (of two) of the unit key of a given Clipper/Capstone-compliant
device.  Reconstruction of a unit key requires the cooperation of both
40A similar issue arises with respect to certificate authorities for authentication.  As dis-
cussed in Chapter 2, a cryptography-based authentication of an individualÕs identity de-pends on the existence of an entityÑa certification authorityÑthat is trusted by third par-ties as being able to truly certify the identity of the individual in question.  Concentration of
certification authority into a single entity would imply that an individual would be vulner-
able to any penetration or malfeasance of the entity and thus to all of the catastrophiceffects that tampering with an individualÕs digital identity would imply.41Nothing in this discussion is intended to preclude the possibility that an organizationserving as an escrow agent might also have responsibilities as a certification authority (forauthentication purposes, as described in Chapter 2).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYagencies.  This approach was intended to give the public confidence that
their keys were secure in the hands of the government.In the most general case, an escrow system can be designed to sepa-rate keys into n components but with the mathematics of the separation
process arranged so that exceptional access would be possible if the third
party were able to acquire any k (for 
k less than or equal to 
n) of thesecomponents.42  This approach is known as the 
Òk-of-nÓ approach.  For the
single escrow agent, k  1 and 
n  1; for the Clipper/Capstone system, 
k 2 and n  2.  But it is possible to design systems where 
k is any number less
than n; for example, the consent of any three (k) of five (n) escrow agentscould be sufficient to enable exceptional access.  Obviously, the greater

the number of parties that are needed to consent, the more cumbersome
exceptional access becomes.It is a policy or business decision as to what the specific values of kand n should be, or if indeed the choice about specific values should be
left to users.  The specific values chosen for 
k and 
n reflect policy judg-
ments about needs for recovery of encrypted data relative to user con-
cerns about improper exceptional access.  Whose needs?  If a national

policy decision determines k and 
n, it is the needs of law enforcement andnational security weighed against user concerns.  If the user determines 
kand n, it is the needs of the user weighed against law enforcement andnational security concerns.5.9.2  Operational Responsibilities of Escrow Agents
For escrowed encryption to play a major role in protecting the infor-mation infrastructure of the nation and the information of businesses and
individuals, users must be assured about the operational obligations and
procedures of escrow agents.  Clear guidelines will be required to regu-

late the operational behavior of escrow agents, and clear enforcement
mechanisms must be set into place to ensure that the escrow agents com-
ply with those guidelines.  While these guidelines and mechanisms might

come into existence through normal market forces or cooperative agree-
ments within industries, they are more likely to require a legal setting that
would also include criminal penalties for malfeasance.Guidelines are needed to assure the public and law enforcement agen-cies of two points:42See, for example, Silvio Micali, ÒFair Public-Key Cryptosystems,Ó in 
Advances inCryptologyÑCrypto Ô92, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1993, pp. 113-138.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES195¥  That information relevant to exceptional access (the full key or a
key fragment) will be divulged upon proper legal request and that an
escrow agent will not notify the key owner of disclosure until it is legally
permissible to do so, and¥  That information relevant to exceptional access will be divulged
only upon proper legal request.Note that the fulfillment of the second requirement has both an Òabuseof authorityÓ component and a technical and procedural component.  The
first relates to an individual (an ÒinsiderÓ) who is in a position to give outrelevant information but also to abuse his position by giving out that
information without proper authorization.  The second relates to the fact

that even if no person in the employ of an escrow agent improperly gives
out relevant information, an ÒoutsiderÓ may be able to penetrate the secu-
rity of the escrow agent and obtain the relevant information without com-
promising any particular individual.  Such concerns are particularly rel-

evant to the extent that escrow agents are connected electronically, since
they would then be vulnerable in much the same ways that all other
parties connected to a network are vulnerable.  The security of networked

computer systems is difficult to assure with high confidence,43 and the
security level required of escrow agents must be high, given the value of
their holdings to unauthorized third parties.Thus, those concerned about breaches of confidentiality must be con-cerned about technical and procedural weaknesses of the escrow agent
infrastructure that would enable outsiders to connect remotely to these
sites and obtain keys, as well as about insiders abusing their positions of
trust.  Either possibility could lead not just to individual keys being com-
promised, but also to wholesale compromise of all of the keys entrusted
to escrow agents within that infrastructure.  From a policy standpoint, it

is necessary to have a contingency plan that would facilitate recovery
from wholesale compromise.Box 5.6 describes law enforcement views on the responsibilities of
escrow agents.  Box 5.7 describes draft Administration views on require-

ments for maintaining the integrity and security of escrow agents;  Box 5.8

describes draft Administration views on requirements for assuring access
to escrowed keys.43See, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchCouncil, Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Information Age,
 National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., 1991.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 5.6Law Enforcement Requirements for Escrow AgentsInformation Availability¥  The information necessary to allow law enforcement the ability to decrypt
communications and stored information is available.  KEAs [key escrow agents] should
maintain or be capable of generating all the necessary decrypt (key) information.¥  Key and/or related information needed to decrypt communications and stored
information is retained for extended time periods.  KEAs should be able to decrypt
information encrypted with a device or productÕs current and/or former key(s) for atime period that may vary depending on the application (e.g., voice vs. stored files).¥  A backup capability exists for key and other information needed to decrypt
communications and stored information.  Thus, a physically separate backup capa-

bility should be available to provide redundancy of resources should the primarycapability fail.Key Escrow Agent (KEA) Accessibility¥  KEAs should be readily accessible.  For domestic products, they should re-
side and operate in the United States.  They should be able to process proper re-
quests at any time; most requests will be submitted during normal business hours,but exigent circumstances (e.g., kidnappings, terrorist threats) may require submis-
sion of requests during nonbusiness hours.Information Release by KEAs¥  The information needed for decryption is expeditiously released upon receipt
of a proper request.  Since communications intercepts require the ability to decrypt

multiple conversations and data messages sent to or from the subject (i.e., access toeach session or message key) during the entire intercept period, only one initialaffirmative action should be needed to obtain the relevant information.  Exigent cir-

cumstances (e.g., kidnappings, terrorist threats) will require the release of decryptinformation within a matter of hours.Confidentiality and Safeguarding of Information¥  KEAs should safeguard and maintain the confidentiality of information per-
taining to the request for and the release of decrypt information.  KEAs should protect
the confidentiality of the person or persons for whom a key escrow agent holds keysor components thereof, and protect the confidentiality of the identity of the agency
requesting decrypt information or components thereof and all information concern-ing such agencyÕs access to and use of encryption keys or components thereof.For law enforcement requests, KEA personnel knowledgeable of an interceptionor decryption should be of good character and have not been convicted of crimes ofmoral turpitude or otherwise bearing on their trustworthiness.  For national security
requests, KEA personnel viewing and/or storing classified requests must meet the
applicable U.S. government requirements for accessing and/or storing classified in-formation.  Efforts are ongoing to examine unclassified alternatives.
¥  KEAs should be legitimate organizations without ties to criminal enterprises,and licensed to conduct business in the United States.  KEAs for domestic products
should not be a foreign corporation, a foreign country, or an entity thereof.
SOURCE:  Federal Bureau of Investigation, viewgraphs of presentation to Inter-national Cryptography Institute 1995 conference, September 22, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES197BOX 5.7Proposed U.S. Government Requirements for EnsuringEscrow Agent Integrity and Security1.Escrow agent entities shall devise and institutionalize policies, procedures,
and mechanisms to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of key es-
crow related information.a.Escrow agent entities shall be designed and operated so that a failure by a
single person, procedure, or mechanism does not compromise the confidentiality,
integrity or availability of the key and/or key components (e.g., two person control ofkeys, split keys, etc.)b.Unencrypted escrowed key and/or key components that are stored and/or
transmitted electronically shall be protected (e.g., via encryption) using approvedmeans.c.Unencrypted escrowed key and/or key components stored and/or trans-
ferred via other media/methods shall be protected using approved means (e.g., safes).
2.Escrow agent entities shall ensure due form of escrowed key access requests
and authenticate the requests for escrowed key and/or key components.3.Escrow agent entities shall protect against disclosure of information regard-
ing the identity of the person/organization whose key and/or key components isrequested, and the fact that a key and/or key component was requested or provided.4.Escrow agent entities shall enter keys/key components into the escrowed
key database immediately upon receipt.5.Escrow agent entities shall ensure at least two copies of any key and/or key
component in independent locations to help ensure the availability of such key and/or key components due to unforeseen circumstances.6.Escrow agent entities that are certified by the U.S. government shall work
with developers of key escrow encryption products and support a feature that allowsproducts to verify to one another that the productsÕ keys have been escrowed with aU.S.-certified agent.SOURCE:  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Draft Key EscrowAgent Criteria, December 1, 1995.  Reprinted from text available on-line at
http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow/criteria.txt.5.9.3  Liabilities of Escrow Agents
In order to assure users that key information entrusted to escrowagents remains secure and authorized third parties that they will be able
to obtain exceptional access to encrypted data when necessary, escrow
agents and their employees must be held accountable for improper be-
havior and for the use of security procedures and practices that are appro-
priate to the task of protection.Liabilities can be criminal or civil (or both).  For example, criminal
penalties could be established for the disclosure of keys or key compo-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 5.8Proposed Requirements for Ensuring Key Access7.An escrow agent entity shall employ one or more persons who possess a
SECRET clearance for purposes of processing classified (e.g., FISA) requests to obtainkeys and/or key components.8.Escrow agent entities shall protect against unauthorized disclosure of informa-
tion regarding the identity of the organization requesting the key or key components.9.Escrow agent entities shall maintain data regarding all key escrow requests
received, key escrow components released, database changes, system administra-tion accesses, and dates of such events, for purposes of audit by appropriate govern-ment officials or others.10.Escrow agent entities shall maintain escrowed keys and/or key components
for as long as such keys may be required to decrypt information relevant to a lawenforcement investigation.11.Escrow agent entities shall provide key/key components to authenticated
requests in a timely fashion and shall maintain a capability to respond more rapidlyto emergency requirements for access.12.Escrow agent entities shall possess and maintain a Certificate of Good Stand-
ing from the State of incorporation (or similar local/national authority).13.Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S. government a Dun & Brad-
street/TRW number or similar credit report pointer and authorization.14.Escrow agent entities shall possess and maintain an Errors & Omissions in-
surance policy.15.Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S. government a written copy of,
or a certification of the existence of a corporate security policy governing the keyescrow agent entityÕs operation.16.Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S. government a certification
that the escrow agent will comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws
concerning the provisions of escrow agent entity services.17.Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S. government a certification
that the escrow agent entity will transfer to another approved escrow agent the es-
crow agent entityÕs equipment and data in the event of any dissolution or othercessation of escrow agent entity operations.18.Escrow agent entities for products sold in the United States shall not be a
foreign country or entity thereof, a national of a foreign country, or a corporation ofwhich an alien is an officer or more than one-fourth of the stock which is owned byaliens or which is directly or indirectly controlled by such a corporation.  Foreign

escrow agent entities for products exported from the United States will be approvedon a case by case basis as law enforcement and national security agreements can benegotiated.19.Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S. government a certification
that the escrow agent entity will notify the U.S. government in writing of any changesin the forgoing information.20.Fulfillment of these and the other criteria are subject to periodic recertifica-
tion.NOTE:  The material reprinted in this box is a continuation of the require-
ments listed in Box 5.7 and is extracted from the same source.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES199nents to unauthorized parties or for the refusal to disclose such informa-tion to appropriately authorized parties.  It is worth noting that the imple-

menting regulations accompanying the EES proposal run counter to this
position in the sense that they do not provide specific penalties for failure
to adhere to the procedures for obtaining keys (which only legislation
could do).  The implementing regulations specifically state that 
Òtheseprocedures do not create, and are not intended to create, any substantive
rights for individuals intercepted through electronic surveillance, and
noncompliance with these procedures shall not provide the basis for any
motion to suppress or other objection to the introduction of electronic
surveillance evidence lawfully acquired.Ó44Questions of civil liability are more complex.  Ideally, levels of civil
liability for improper disclosure of keys would be commensurate with the
loss that would be incurred by the damaged party.  For unauthorized

disclosure of keys that encrypt large financial transactions, this level is
potentially very large.45  On the other hand, as a matter of public policy, it
is probably inappropriate to allow such levels of damages.  More plau-

sible may be a construct that provides what society, as expressed through
Congress, thinks is reasonable (Box 5.9).  Users of escrow agents might

also be able to buy their own insurance against unauthorized disclosure.
Note that holding government agencies liable for civil damages might
require an explicit change in the Federal Tort Claims Act that waives
sovereign immunity in certain specified instances, or other legislative
changes.On the other hand, the amount of liability associated with compro-mising information related to data communications is likely to dwarf the
analogous volume for voice communications.  If escrowed encryption is

adopted widely in data communications, compromise of escrow agents
holding keys relevant to network encryption may be catastrophic, and
may become easier as the number of access points that can be penetrated
becomes larger.Note that liability of escrow agents may be related to the voluntaryuse of escrow.  A party concerned about large potential losses would have

alternatives to escrowed encryptionÑnamely, unescrowed encryptionÑthat would protect the user against the consequences of improper key
disclosure.  Under these circumstances, a user whose key was compro-
44U.S. Department of Justice, Authorization Procedures for Release of Encryption Key Compo-nents in Conjunction with Intercepts Pursuant to Title III and FISA, February 4, 1994.  Reprinted
in Hoffman (ed.), Building in Big Brother, 1995, pp. 243-246.
45Even if these transactions are authenticated (as most large transactions would be), largetransactions that are compromised could lead to loss of bids and the like by the firmsinvolved in the transaction.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 5.9Statutory Limitations on LiabilityGovernment can promote the use of specific services and products by assumingsome of the civil liability risks associated with them.  Three examples follow:
¥  The Atomic Energy Damages Act, also called the Price-Anderson Act, limits
the liability of nuclear power plant operators for harm caused by a nuclear incident(such as an explosion or radioactive release).  To operate a nuclear power plant, a

licensee must show the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (U.S. NRC) that itmaintains financial protection (such as private insurance, self-insurance, or otherproof of financial responsibility) equal to the maximum amount of insurance avail-
able at reasonable cost and reasonable terms from private sources, unless the U.S.NRC sets a lower requirement on a case-specific basis.  The U.S. NRC indemnifies
licensees from all legal liability arising from a nuclear incident, including a precau-
tionary evacuation, which is in excess of the required financial protection, up to amaximum combined licensee-and-government liability of $560 million.  Incidents
that cause more than $560 million in damage will trigger review by the Congress to
determine the best means to compensate the public, including appropriating funds.¥  The Commercial Space Launch Act provides similar protection to parties
licensed to launch space vehicles or operate launch sites, but with a limit on the total
liability the United States accepts.  The licensee must obtain financial protection
sufficient to compensate the maximum probable loss that third parties could claimfor harm or damage, as determined by the secretary of transportation.  The most that

can be required is $500 million or the maximum liability insurance available fromprivate sources, whichever is lower.  The United States is obligated to pay successful
claims by third parties in excess of the required protection, up to $1.5 billion, unlessthe loss is related to the licenseeÕs willful misconduct.  The law also requires licens-ees to enter into reciprocal waivers of claims with their contractors and customers,
under which each party agrees to be responsible for losses it sustains.¥  The swine flu vaccination program of 1976 provides an example in which
the United States accepted open-ended liability and paid much more than expected.
Doctors predicted a swine flu epidemic, and Congress appropriated money for theDepartment of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) to pay four pharmaceuticalmanufacturers for vaccines to be distributed nationwide.  The manufacturers
Õ inabil-
ity to obtain liability insurance delayed the program until Congress passed legislation(P.L. 94-380) in which the United States assumed all liability other than manufactur-er negligence.  The government
Õs liability could thus include, for example, harmfulside effects.  Claims against the United States would be processed under the FederalTort Claims Act (which provides for trial by judge rather than jury and no punitivedamages, among other distinctions).  Some of the 45 million people who were im-

munized developed complications, such as Guillain-Barre syndrome; consequently,the program was canceled.  By September 1977, 815 claims had been filed.  The
United States ultimately paid more than $100 million to settle claims, and some
litigation is still pending today.  Manufacturers, who by law were liable only for
negligence, were not sued.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES201mised could be held responsible for his loss because he did not choose touse unescrowed encryption; an escrow agent
Õs exposure to liability would
be limited to the risks associated with parties that use its services.  On the

other hand, if escrowed encryption were the only cryptography permit-
ted to be used, then by assumption the user would have no alternatives,
and so in that case an escrow agent would shoulder a larger liability.Another aspect of liability could arise if the escrow agents were alsocharged with the responsibilities of certificate authorities.  Under some

circumstances, it might be desirable for the functions of escrow agents
and certificate authorities to be carried out by the same organization.
Thus, these dual-purpose organizations would have all of the liabilities
carried by those who must certify the authenticity of a given party.5.10  THE ROLE OF SECRECY IN ENSURING
PRODUCT SECURITYThe fact that EES and the Fortezza card involve classified algorithmshas raised the general question of the relationship between secrecy and
the maintenance of a productÕs trustworthiness in providing security.Specifically, the Clipper/Capstone approach is based on a secret (classi-
fied) encryption algorithm known as Skipjack.  In addition, the algorithm

is implemented in hardware (a chip) whose design is classified.  The

shroud of secrecy surrounding the hardware and algorithms needed to
implement EES and Fortezza makes skeptics suspect that encrypted com-
munications could be decrypted through some secret Òback doorÓ (i.e.,
without having the escrowed key).46Logically, secrecy can be applied to two aspects of an encryptionsystem: the algorithms used and the nature of the implementation of
these algorithms.  Each is addressed in turn below.   Box 5.10 describes a

historical perspective on cryptography and secrecy that is still valid to-
day.5.10.1  Algorithm Secrecy
The use of secret algorithms for encryption has advantages and disad-vantages.  From an information security standpoint, a third party who
46A kind of de facto secret back door can result from the fact that vendors of securityproducts employing Clipper or Capstone technology are not likely to advertise the fact thatthe relevant encryption keys are escrowed with the U.S. government.  Thus, even if the
escrowing capability is ÒopenÓ in the sense that no one involved makes any attempt to hide
that fact, a user that does not know enough to ask about the presence or absence of escrowingfeatures may well purchase such products without realizing their presence.  Functionally,
escrowing of which the user is ignorant is equivalent for that user to a ÒsecretÓ back door.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 5.10Perspectives on Secrecy and System SecurityThe distinction between the general system (i.e., a product) and the specific key(of an encrypted message) was first articulated by Auguste Kerckhoffs in his historicbook La Cryptographie Militaire, published in 1883.  Quoting David Kahn in 
TheCodebreakers:Kerckhoffs deduced [that] . . . compromise of the system should not inconve-nience the correspondents. . . .  Perhaps the most startling requirement, at first
glance, was the second . . . .  Kerckhoffs explained that by 
ÒsystemÓ he meant
Òthe material part of the system; tableaux, code books, or whatever mechan-ical apparatus may be necessary,Ó and not 
Òthe key proper.Ó Kerckhoffs here
makes for the first time the distinction, now basic to cryptology, between thegeneral system and the specific key.  Why must the general system 
Ònot re-quire secrecyÓ? . . . ÒBecause,Ó Kerckhoffs said, 
Òit is not necessary to conjureup imaginary phantoms and to suspect the incorruptibility of employees orsubalterns to understand that, if a system requiring secrecy were in the hands
of too large a number of individuals, it could be compromised at each en-gagement. . . . This has proved to be true, and KerckhoffsÕ second requirement
has become widely accepted under a form that is sometimes called the funda-
mental assumption of military cryptography:  that the enemy knows the gen-
eral system. But he must still be unable to solve messages in it without know-ing the specific key. In its modern formulation, the Kerckhoffs doctrine states
that secrecy must reside solely in the keys.Ó1A more modern expression of this sentiment is provided by Dorothy Denning:The security of a cryptosystem should depend only on the secrecy of the keysand not on the secrecy of the algorithms. . . .  This requirement implies the

algorithms must be inherently strong; that is, it should not be possible to breaka cipher simply by knowing the method of encipherment.  This requirement is
needed because the algorithms may be in the public domain, or known to a
cryptanalyst.21David Kahn, The Codebreakers, MacMillan, New York, 1967, p. 235.2Dorothy Denning, Cryptography and Data Security, Addison-Wesley, Read-ing, Mass., 1982, p. 8.knows the algorithm associated with a given piece of ciphertext has anenormous advantage over one who does notÑif the algorithm is unknown,cryptanalysis is much more difficult.  Thus, the use of a secret algorithm by

those concerned about information security presents an additional (and
substantial) barrier to those who might be eavesdropping.  From a signals

intelligence (SIGINT) standpoint, it is advantageous to keep knowledge of
good encryption out of the hands of potential SIGINT targets.  Thus, if an
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES203algorithm provides good cryptographic security, keeping the algorithmsecret prevents the SIGINT target from implementing it.  In addition, if an

algorithm is known to be good, studying it in detail can reveal a great deal
about what makes any algorithm good or bad.  Algorithm secrecy thus

helps to keep such information out of the public domain.47On the other hand, algorithm secrecy entails a number of disadvan-tages as well.  One is that independent analysis of a secret algorithm by

the larger community is not possible.  Without such analysis, flaws may

remain in the algorithm that compromise the security it purports to pro-
vide.  If these flaws are kept secret, users of the algorithm may unknow-

ingly compromise themselves.  Even worse, sophisticated users who need

high assurances of security are unable to certify for themselves the secu-
rity it provides (and thus have no sense of the risks they are taking if they
use it).  In most cases, the real issue is whether the user chooses to rely on

members of the academic cryptography communities publishing in the
open literature, or on members of the classified military community or
members of the commercial cryptography community who are unable to
fully disclose what they know about a subject because it is classified or
proprietary.A second disadvantage of algorithm secrecy is the fact that if a cryp-tographic infrastructure is based on the assumption of secrecy, public
discovery of those secrets can compromise the ends to be served by that
infrastructure.  For example, if a cryptographic infrastructure based on a

secret algorithm were widely deployed, and if that algorithm contained a
secret and unannounced Òback doorÓ that allowed those with knowledge
of this back door easy access to encrypted data, that infrastructure would
be highly vulnerable and could be rendered untrustworthy in short order
by the public disclosure of the back door.A third disadvantage is that a secret algorithm cannot be implementedin software with any degree of assurance that it will remain secret.  Soft-

ware, as it exists ready for actual installation on a computer (so-called
object code or executable code), can usually be manipulated with special
software tools to yield an alternate form (namely, source code) reflecting
the way the creating programmer designed it, and therefore revealing
many, even most, of its operational details, including any algorithm em-47Of course, if other strong algorithms are known publicly, the force of this argument isweakened from a practical standpoint.  For example, it is not clear that the disclosure of
Skipjack would be harmful from the standpoint of making strong algorithms public, be-cause triple-DES is already publicly known, and triple-DES is quite strong.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY48As one example, the RC2 encryption algorithm, nominally a trade secret owned by RSAData Security Inc. was posted to the Internet in early 1996, apparently as the result of anapparent ÒdisassemblyÓ of a product embedding that algorithm (personal communication,
Robert Baldwin, RSA Data Security Inc., May 16, 1996).bedded within it.  This process is known as ÒdecompilingÓ or Òdisassem-blyÓ and is a standard technique in the repertoire of software engineers.
48All of the previous comments apply to secrecy whether it is the resultof government classification decisions or vendor choices to treat an algo-
rithm as a trade secret.  In addition, vendors may well choose to treat an

algorithm as a trade secret to obtain the market advantages that propri-
etary algorithms often bring.  Indeed, many applications of cryptography

for confidentiality in use today are based on trade-secret algorithms such
as RC2 and RC4.5.10.2  Product Design and Implementation Secrecy
Product design and implementation secrecy has a number of advan-tages.  For example, by obscuring how a product has been designed,

secrecy makes it more difficult for an outsider to reverse-engineer the
product in such a way that he could understand it better or, even worse,
modify it in some way.  Since vulnerabilities sometimes arise in imple-

mentation, keeping the implementation secret makes it harder for an at-
tacker to discover and then exploit those vulnerabilities.  Design and

implementation secrecy thus protects any secrets that may be embedded
in the product for a longer time than if they were to be published openly.On the other hand, it is taken as an axiom by those in the securitycommunity that it is essentially impossible to maintain design or imple-
mentation secrecy indefinitely.  Thus, the question of the time scale of

reverse engineering is relevantÑgiven the necessary motivation, howlong will it take and how much in resources will be needed to reverse-
engineer a chip or a product?¥  For software, reverse engineering is based on decompilation or
disassembly (as described in Section 5.10.1).  The larger the software prod-

uct, the longer it takes to understand the original program; even a small
one can be difficult to understand, especially if special techniques have
been used to obscure its functionality.  Modification of the original pro-

gram can present additional technical difficulties (the product may be
designed in such a way that disassembling or decompiling the entire
product is necessary to isolate critical features that one might wish to
modify).  Certain techniques can be used to increase the difficulty of
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES205making such modifications,49 but there is virtual unanimity in the com-
puter community that modification cannot be prevented forever.  How

robust must these anti-reverse-engineering features be?  The answer is

that they must be robust enough that the effort needed to overcome them
is greater than the effort needed to develop an encryption system from
scratch.¥  For hardware, reverse engineering takes the form of physical disas-
sembly and/or probing with x-rays of the relevant integrated circuit chips.
Such chips can be designed to resist reverse engineering in a way that
makes it difficult to understand what various components on the chip do.
For example, the coating on a die used to fabricate a chip may be designed
so that removal of the coating results in removal of one or more layers of
the chip, thus destroying portions of what was to be reverse-engineered.
The chip may also be fabricated with decoy or superfluous elements that
would distract a reverse engineer.  For all of these reasons, reverse engi-

neering for understanding a chipÕs functions is difficult.  However, it is
not impossible, and under some circumstances, it is possible to modify a
chip.  In general, reverse engineering of the circuits and devices inside a

chip requires significant expertise and access to expensive tools.50An important factor that works against implementation secrecy is thewide distribution of devices or products whose implementation is secret.
It is difficult to protect a device against reverse engineering when millions
of those devices are distributed around the world without any physical
barriers (except those on the implementation itself) to control access to
them.  Everyone with an EES-compliant telephone or a Foretzza card, for49For example, Trusted Information Systems Inc. of Glenwood, Md., has advocated anapproach to preventing modification that relies on the placement of integrity checks atstrategic locations.  With such an approach, a change to the disassembled source code
would have to be reflected properly in all relevant integrity checks; doing so might well
involve disassembly of an entire product rather than of just one module of the product.Nevertheless, such an approach cannot prevent modification, although it can make modifi-cation more difficult.  Such anti-reverse-engineering features may also increase the diffi-

culty of vendor maintenance of a product.  Increased difficulty may be a price vendors
must pay in order to have more secure software implementations.50Estimates of the cost to reverse-engineer the Clipper chip nondestructively cover awide range, from Òdoable in university laboratories with bright graduate students andtraditions of reverse engineeringÓ (as estimated by a number of electrical engineers in
academia with extensive experience in reverse engineering) to as much as $30 million to $50
million (as estimated in informal conversations between JASON members and DOD engi-neers).  The cost may well be lower if large numbers of chips are available for destructive
inspection.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYexample, will have access to the chip that provides encryption and keyescrow services.The comments above refer to the feasibility of maintaining implemen-tation secrecy.  But there are issues related to its desirability as well.  For

example, implementation secrecy implies that only a limited number of
vendors can be trusted to produce a given implementation.  Thus, foreign

production of Clipper/Capstone-compliant devices under classification
guidelines raises problems unless foreign producers are willing to abide
by U.S. security requirements.A more important point is that implementation secrecy also demandstrust between user and supplier/vendor.  Users within government agen-

cies generally trust other parts of the government to provide adequate
services as a supplier.  But in the private sector, such trust is not necessar-

ily warranted.  Users that are unable to determine for themselves what

algorithms are embedded in computer and communications products
used must trust the vendor to have provided algorithms that do what the
user wants done, and the vast majority of users fall into this category.
Such opacity functions as a de facto mechanism of secrecy that also im-
pedes user knowledge about the inner workings and that is exploited by
the distributors of computer viruses and worms.  As a result, choosing

between self-implemented source code and a prepackaged program for
use in performing certain functions is in many ways analogous to choos-
ing between unclassified and classified algorithms.An information security manager with very high security needs mustmake trade-offs in assurance vs. cost.  In general, the only way to be

certain that the algorithms used are the ones claimed to be used is to
implement them on oneÕs own.  Yet if a manager lacks the necessary
knowledge and experience, a self-implementation may not be as secure or
as capable as one developed by a trusted vendor.  A self-implementer also

carries the considerable burden of development costs that a commercial
vendor can amortize over many sales.As a result, security-conscious users of products whose inner work-ings are kept secret must (1) trust the vendor implicitly (based on factors
such as reputation), or (2) face the possibility of various extreme sce-
narios.  Here are two:
¥  The hardware of a secret device can be dynamically modified; for
example, electrically erasable read-only memories can direct the opera-
tion of a processor.  One possible scenario with secret hardware is that a

chip that initially provides Clipper-chip functionality might be repro-
grammed when it first contacts a Clipper/Capstone-compliant device to
allow nonescrowed but unauthorized access to it; such a means of Òinfec-tionÓ is common with computer viruses.  In other words, the Skipjack
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES207algorithm may have been embedded in the chip when it was first shipped,but after the initial contact, the algorithm controlling the chip is no longer
Skipjack.¥  An algorithm that is not Skipjack is embedded by the manufacturer
in chips purporting to be Clipper or Capstone chips.  Since the utility of a

vector test depends on the availability of an independent implementation
of the algorithm, it is impossible for the user to perform this test indepen-
dently if the user has no reference point.  As a result, the user has no

access to an independent test of the chip that is in the userÕs ÒClipper/Capstone-compliantÓ device, and so any algorithm might have been em-
bedded.51Any technically trained person can invent many other such scenarios.Thus, public trust in the technical desirability of the EES and Fortezza for
exceptional access depends on a high degree of trust in the government,
entirely apart from any fears about compromising escrow agents wher-
ever they are situated.Of course, some of the same considerations go beyond the Skipjackalgorithm and the Clipper/Capstone approach.  In general, users need

confidence that a given product with encryption capabilities indeed imple-
ments a given algorithm.  Labeling a box with the letters 
ÒDESÓ does not
ensure that the product inside really implements DES.  In this case, the

fact that the DES algorithm is publicly known facilitates testing to verify
that the algorithm is implemented correctly.52  If its source code is avail-
able for inspection, other security-relevant aspects of a software product
can be examined to a certain extent, at least up to the limits of the exper-
tise of the person checking the source code.  But for software products

without source code, and especially for hardware products that cannot
easily be disassembled, and even more so for hardware products that are
specifically designed to resist disassembly, confidence in the non-
algorithm security aspects of the product is more a matter of trusting the
vendor than of the user making an independent technical verification of51According to Dorothy Denning, the review team for Skipjack (see footnote 5 of thischapter) compared the output from Clipper chips with output from the software version ofSkipjack that the review team obtained for review to verify that the algorithm on the chips
was the same as the software version (personal communication, Dorothy Denning,Georgetown University, March 1996).52As described in Chapter 4, the product tester can use the product to encrypt a randomlychosen set of values with a randomly chosen key, and compare the encrypted output to theknown correct result obtained through the use of a product known to implement the algo-rithm correctly.  This is known as a vector test.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYan implementation.53  In some sectors (e.g., banking, classified military
applications), however, independent technical verification is regarded as
essential.Finally, a given product may properly implement an algorithm butstill be vulnerable to attacks that target the part of the product surround-
ing the implementation of the algorithm.  Such vulnerabilities are most

common in the initial releases of products that have not been exposed to
public test and scrutiny.  For example, a security problem with the

Netscape NavigatorÕs key-generation facility could have been found hadthe implementation in which the key generator was embedded been avail-
able for public examination prior to its release, even though the encryp-
tion algorithm itself was properly implemented.545.11  THE HARDWARE-SOFTWARE CHOICE IN
PRODUCT IMPLEMENTATIONAfter the Clipper initiative was announced, and as the debate overescrowed encryption broadened to include the protection of data commu-
nications and stored data, the mass market software industry emphasized
that a hardware solution to cryptographic securityÑas exemplified bythe Clipper chipÑwould not be satisfactory.  The industry argued with
some force that only a software-based approach would encourage the
widespread use of encryption envisioned for the worldÕs electronic fu-ture, making several points:¥  Customers have a strong preference for using integrated crypto-
graphic products.  While stand-alone products with encryption capabili-

ties could be made to work, in general they lack operational convenience
for the applications that software and systems vendors address.¥  Compared to software, hardware is expensive to manufacture.  In
particular, the relevant cost is not simply the cost of the hardware encryp-
tion device compared to a software encryption package,55 but also the
cost of any modifications to the hardware environment needed to accept53Such a comment is not meant to preclude the possibility of an independent certifyingauthority, a kind of ÒConsumersÕ Union
Ó for cryptography equipment and products.  Such
organizations have been proposed to evaluate and certify computer security, and as of this
writing, three U.S. firm have received NIST approval to evaluate the conformance of prod-ucts to FIPS 140-1, the FIPS for cryptography modules.54This security problem is referenced in footnote 34, Chapter 2.  The lack of prior vetting
for Netscape Navigator is described by Kathleen Murphy, ÒA Second Security Breach,Ó WebWeek, Volume 1(6), October 1995, p. 8.55In a recent contract, a vendor agreed to provide Fortezza cards at $69 per card.  See Paul
Constance, ÒAfter Complaining $99 Was Too Low, Fortezza Vendors Come in at $69,ÓGovernment Computer News, October 2, 1995, p. 6.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES209the hardware encryption device.
56  For example, one major company
noted to the committee that adoption of the Fortezza card, a card that fits
into the PC-card slots available on most laptop computers, would be very
expensive in its desktop computing environment, because most of its
desktop computers do not have a PC-card slot and would have to be
modified to accept the Fortezza card.  By contrast, a software encryption

product can simply be loaded via common media (e.g., a CD-ROM or a
floppy disk) or downloaded via a network.¥  The fact that hardware is difficult to change means that problems
found subsequent to deployment are more difficult to fix.  For example,

most users would prefer to install a software fix by loading a CD-ROM
into their computers than to open up their machines to install a new chip
with a hardware fix.¥  Hardware-based security products have a history of being market-
unfriendly.  Hardware will, in general, be used only to the extent that the

required hardware (and its specific configuration) is found in user instal-
lations.  Moreover, hardware requirements can be specified for software

only when that hardware is widely deployed.  For example, a technical

approach to the software piracy problem has been known for many years;
the approach requires the installation of special-purpose hardware that is
available only to those who obtain the software legitimately.  This 
Òsolu-tionÓ has failed utterly in the marketplace, and software piracy remains a
multibillion-dollar-per-year problem.¥  Hardware for security consumes physical space and power in prod-
ucts.  For example, a hardware-based encryption card that fits into an

expansion slot on a computer takes up a slot permanently, unless the user
is willing to install and deinstall the card for every use.  It also creates an

additional power demand on electronic devices where power and battery
life are limited.In general, products with encryption capabilities today use softwareor hardware or both to help ensure security.57  The crux of the hardware-56 One vendor is manufacturing a circuit board for encryption that fits into a 3.5" floppydisk drive.  However, this device does not employ the Capstone/Foretzza approach.  See
Elizabeth Sikorovsky, ÒDevice Offers Alternative to PC Card-Based Encryption,Ó FederalComputer Week, November 13, 1995, pp. 29 and 35.57Note that the dividing line between hardware and software is not always clear.  In
particular, product designers use the term ÒfirmwareÓ to refer to a design approach that
enters software into a special computer memory (an integrated circuit chip) that usually issubsequently unchangeable (read-only memory; ROM).  Sometimes an alternate form of
memory is used that does permit changes under controlled conditions (electrically pro-
grammable ROM; EPROM).  Such software-controlled hardware (microprogrammed hard-
ware) has the convenience that the functionality of the item can be updated or changedwithout redesign of the hardware portion.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYsoftware debate is what is good enough to ensure security.  The security
needed to manage electronic cash in the international banking system
needs to be much stronger than the security to protect word processing
files created by private individuals.  Thus, software-based cryptography

might work for the latter, while hardware-based cryptography might be
essential for the former.Products with encryption capabilities must be capable of resistingattack.  But since such products are often embedded in operating environ-

ments that are themselves insecure, an attacker may well choose to attack
the environment rather than the product itself.  For example, a product

with encryption capabilities may be hardware-based, but the operating
environment may leave the encryption keys or the unencrypted text ex-
posed.58  More generally, in an insecure environment, system security
may well not depend very much on whether the cryptography per se is
implemented in hardware or software or whether it is weak or strong.In the context of escrowed encryption, a second security concernarisesÑa user of an escrowed encryption product may wish to defeat theescrow mechanism built into the product.  Thus, the escrow features of

the product must be bound to the product in a way that cannot be by-
passed by some reverse-engineered modification to the product.  This

particular problem is known as binding or, more explicitly, escrow bind-
ing; escrow binding is an essential element of any escrow scheme that is
intended to provide exceptional access.Concern over how to solve the escrow binding problem was the pri-mary motivation for the choice of a hardware approach to the Clipper
initiative.  As suggested in Section 5.10, the functionality of a hardware

system designed to resist change is indeed difficult to change, and so
hardware implementations have undeniable advantages for solving the
escrow binding problem.59  An EES-compliant device would be a tele-
phone without software accessible to the user, and would provide high
assurance that the features for exceptional access would not be bypassed.As the debate has progressed, ideas for software-based escrow pro-cesses have been proposed.  The primary concern of the U.S. government

about software implementations is that once a change has been designed
and developed that can bypass the escrow features (Òbreak the escrowbindingÓ), such a change can be easily propagated through many differentchannels and installed with relatively little difficulty.  In the committee
Õsview, the important question is whether software solutions to the escrow58Peter G. Neumann, Can Systems Be Trustworthy with Software-Implemented Cryptogra-phy?, SRI International, Menlo Park, Calif., October 28, 1994.59A device controlled by software stored in read-only memory is for all intents and pur-poses the same as Òpure hardwareÓ in this context.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES211binding problem can provide an acceptable level of protection against re-verse engineering.  Whether an escrowed encryption product is imple-

mented in software (or hardware for that matter), the critical threshold is
the difficulty of breaking the escrow binding (i.e., bypassing the escrow-
ing features) compared to the effort necessary to set up an independent
unescrowed encryption system (perhaps as part of an integrated prod-
uct).  If it is more difficult to bypass the escrow features than to build an

unescrowed system, then ÒroguesÓ who want to defeat exceptional access
will simply build an unescrowed system.  The bottom line is that an

escrowed encryption product does not have to be perfectly resistant to
breaking the escrow binding.A possible mitigating factor is that even if a software ÒpatchÓ is devel-
oped that would break the escrow binding of an escrowed encryption
software product, it may not achieve wide distribution even among the
criminals who would have the most to gain from such a change.  Experi-

ence with widely deployed software products (e.g., operating systems)
indicates that even when a software fix is made available for a problem in
a product, it may not be implemented unless the anomalous or incorrect
software behavior is particularly significant to an end user.  If this is the

case for products that are as critical as operating systems, it may well be
true for products with more specialized applications.  On the other side of

the coin, many parties (e.g., criminals) may care a great deal about the
presence of escrowing and thus be highly motivated to find ÒfixesÓ that
eliminate escrowing.5.12  RESPONSIBILITY FOR GENERATION OF UNIT KEYS
Key generation is the process by which cryptographic keys are gener-ated.  Two types of keys are relevant:
¥  A session key is required for each encryption of plaintext into
ciphertext; this is true whether the information is to be stored or commu-
nicated.  Ultimately, the intended recipients of this information (those

who retrieve it from storage or those who receive it at the other end of a
communications channel) must have the same session key.  For maximum

information security, a new session key is used with every encryption.
(See footnote 7  of this chapter for more discussion.)
¥  A unit key is a cryptographic key associated with a particular
product or device owned or controlled by a specific individual.  Unit keys

are often used to protect session keys from casual observation in escrowed

encryption products, but precisely how they are used depends on the
specifics of a given product.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYIn the most general case, the session key is a random number, and adifferent one is generated anew for each encryption.  But the unit key is a

cryptographic variable that typically changes on a much longer time scale
than does the session key.  In many escrowed encryption schemes, knowl-

edge of the unit key enables a third party to obtain the session key associ-
ated with any given encryption.The Clipper/Capstone approach requires that the unit key be gener-ated by the manufacturer at the time of manufacture (Òat birthÓ) and thenregistered prior to sale with escrow agents in accordance with established
procedures.  Such an approach has one major advantage from the stand-

point of those who may require exceptional access in the futureÑit guar-antees registration of keys, because users need not take any action to
ensure registration.At the same time, since the Clipper/Capstone approach is based on ahardware-based implementation that is not user-modifiable, a given de-
vice has only one unit key for its entire lifetime, although, at some cost,
the user may change the Clipper chip embedded in the device.60  If the
unit key is compromised, the userÕs only recourse is to change the chip.  A
user who does not do so violates one basic principle of information secu-
rityÑfrequent changing of keys (or passwords).61  In addition, the fact
that all unit keys are known at the time of manufacture raises concerns
that all keys could be kept (perhaps surreptitiously) in some master
databank that would be accessible without going to the designated es-
crow agents.  The implication is that the user is forced to trust several

organizations and individuals involved with the manufacturing process.
Such trust becomes an implicit aspect of the secrecy associated with EES-
compliant devices.One alternative to unit key generation at birth is the generation (orinput) of a new unit key at user request.  This approach has the advantage

that the user can be confident that no one else retains a copy of the new
key without his or her knowledge.  The disadvantage is that escrow of

that key would require explicit action on the userÕs part for that purpose.An alternative that has some of the advantages of each approach is toinstall and register a unit key at birth, but to design the product to allow
the user to change the unit key later.  Thus, all products designed in this

manner would have ÒdefaultÓ unit keys installed by the manufacturer
60A Clipper chip costs about $10 when bought in large lots (personal communication,Jimmy Dolphin, Mykotronx, March 22, 1996).  Even when including retail mark-up costs
and labor, the cost of changing a Clipper chip is likely to be less than $100.61However, since the Skipjack algorithm is classified, simple knowledge of the unit key(or the session key) would enable only those with knowledge of the algorithm to decryptthe session key (or the session).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES213and recorded with some escrow agent; each of these keys would be differ-ent.  Users who took the trouble to install a new unit key would have to

take an explicit action to escrow it, but in many cases the inconvenience
and bother of changing the unit key would result in no action being taken.
Thus, valid unit keys would be held by escrow agents in two casesÑforproducts owned by users who did not change the unit key, and for prod-
ucts owned by users who chose to register their new keys with escrow
agents.Who is responsible for the collection of unit keys?  Under the Clip-
per/Capstone approach, the responsible party is the U.S. government.
But if nongovernment agencies were to be responsible for escrowing keys
(see Section 5.8), a large market with many vendors producing many
different types of encryption products in large volume could result in a
large administrative burden on these vendors.The specific implementation of EES also raises an additional point.As proposed, EES requires that unit keys be given to government authori-
ties upon presentation of legal authorization.  If these keys are still avail-

able to the authorities after the period of legal authorization has expired,
the EES device is forever open to government surveillance.  To guard

against this possibility, Administration plans for the final Clipper key
escrow system provide for automatic key deletion from the decrypting
equipment upon expiration of the authorized period.  Key deletion is to

be implemented on the tamper-resistant device that law enforcement au-
thorities will use to decrypt Clipper-encrypted traffic.  However, by early

1996, the deployed interim key escrow system had not been upgraded to
include that feature.5.13  ISSUES RELATED TO THE ADMINISTRATION PROPOSAL
TO RELAX EXPORT CONTROLS ON 64-BIT ESCROWEDENCRYPTION IN SOFTWAREAs noted in Chapter 4, the Administration has proposed to treat soft-ware products with 64-bit encryption using any algorithm as it currently
treats products that are based on 40-bit RC2/RC4 algorithms, providing
that products using this stronger encryption are Òproperly escrowed.ÓThis change is intended to make available to foreign customers of U.S.
software products stronger cryptographic protection than they currently
have today.  This proposal has raised several issues.
5.13.1  The Definition of 
ÒProper EscrowingÓThe definition of Òproper escrowingÓ (as the phrase is used in the
AdministrationÕs proposed new export rules in Box 5.3) is that keys should
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYbe escrowed only with Òescrow agent(s) certified by the U.S. Government,or certified by foreign governments with which the U.S. Government has
formal agreements consistent with U.S. law enforcement and national
security requirements.Ó  These agents would not necessarily be govern-
ment agencies, although in principle they could be.The obvious question is whether foreign consumers will be willing topurchase U.S. products with encryption capabilities when it is openly
announced that the information security of those products could be com-
promised by or with the assistance of escrow agents certified by the U.S.
government.  While the draft definition does envision the possibility that
escrow agents could be certified by foreign governments (e.g., those in the
country of sale), formal agreements often take a long time to negotiate,
during which time U.S. escrow agents would hold the keys, or the market
for such products would fail to develop.For some applications (e.g., U.S. companies doing business with for-eign suppliers), interim U.S. control of escrow agents may prove accept-
able.  But it is easy to imagine other applications for which it would not,

and in any case a larger question is begged: What would be the incentive
for foreign users to purchase such products from U.S. vendors if compa-
rably strong but unescrowed foreign products with encryption capabili-
ties were available?  As the discussion in Chapter 2 points out, integrated

products with encryption capabilities are generally available today from
U.S. vendors.  However, how long the U.S. monopoly in this market will

last is an open question.The issue of who holds the keys in an international context is ex-plored further in Appendix G.5.13.2  The Proposed Limitation of Key Lengths to 64 Bits or Less
The most important question raised by the 64-bit limitation is this: Ifthe keys are escrowed and available to law enforcement and national
security authorities, why does it matter how long the keys are?  In re-

sponse to this question, senior Administration officials have said that the
limitation to 64 bits is a way of hedging against the possibility of finding
easily proliferated ways to break the escrow binding built into software,
with the result that U.S. software products without effective key escrow
would become available worldwide.  Paraphrasing the remarks of a se-

nior Administration official at the International Cryptography Institute
1995  conference, 
ÒThe 64-bit limit is there because we might have a chanceof dealing with a breakdown of software key escrow 10 to 15 years down
the line; but if the key length implied a work factor of something like
triple-DES, we would never [emphasis in original] be able to do it.
ÓTwo factors must be considered in this argument.  One is the likeli-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION AND RELATED ISSUES215hood that software key escrow can in fact be compromised.  This subject
is considered in Sections 5.10.2 and 5.11.  But a second point is the fact that

the 64-bit limit is easily circumvented by multiple encryption under some
circumstances.  Specifically, consider a stand-alone security-specific prod-

uct for file encryption that is based on DES and is escrowed.  Such a

productÑin its unaltered stateÑmeets all of the proposed draft criteriafor export.  But disassembly of the object code of the program (to defeat

the escrow binding) may also reveal the code for DES encryption in the
product.  Once the source code for the DES encryption is available, it is a

technically straightforward exercise to implement a package that will use
the product to implement a triple-DES encryption on a file.5.14  RECAP
Escrowed encryption is one of several approaches to providing ex-ceptional access to encrypted information.  The U.S. government has ad-

vanced a number of initiatives to support the insertion of escrow features
into products with encryption capabilities that will become available in
the future, including the Escrowed Encryption Standard, the Capstone/
Fortezza initiative, and a proposal to liberalize export controls on prod-
ucts using escrowed encryption.  Its support of escrowed encryption em-
bodies the governmentÕs belief that the benefit to law enforcement andnational security from exceptional access to encrypted information out-
weighs the damage owing to loss of confidentiality that might occur with
the failure of procedures intended to prevent unauthorized access to the
escrow mechanism.Escrowed encryption provides more confidentiality than leaving in-
formation unprotected (as most information is today), but less confidenti-
ality than what could be provided by good implementations of
unescrowed cryptography.  On the other hand, escrowed encryption pro-

vides more capability for exceptional access under circumstances of key
loss or unavailability than does unescrowed encryption.  All users will

have to address this trade-off between level of confidentiality and key
unavailability.The central questions with respect to escrowed encryption are thefollowing:¥  With what degree of confidence is it possible to ensure that third
parties will have access to encrypted information only under lawfully
authorized circumstances?¥  What is the trade-off for the user between potentially lower levels
of confidentiality and higher degrees of confidence that encrypted data
will be available when necessary?Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY2166Other Dimensions of NationalCryptography PolicyIn addition to export controls and escrowed encryption, current na-tional policy on cryptography is affected by government use of a large
number of levers available to it, including the Communications Assis-
tance for Law Enforcement Act, the standards-setting process, R&D fund-
ing, procurement practices, education and public jawboning, licenses and
certification, and arrangements both formal and informal with various
other governments (state, local, and foreign) and organizations (e.g., spe-
cific private companies).  All of these are controversial because they em-

body judgments about how the interests of law enforcement and national
security should be reconciled against the needs of the private sector.  In

addition, the international dimensions of cryptography are both critical
(because cryptography affects communications and communications are
fundamentally international) and enormously difficult (because national
interests differ from government to government).6.1  THE COMMUNICATIONS ASSISTANCE
FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTThe Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA)was widely known as the Òdigital telephonyÓ bill before its formal pas-
sage.  The CALEA is not explicitly connected to national cryptography

policy, but it is an important aspect of the political context in which na-
tional cryptography policy has been discussed and debated.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY2176.1.1  Brief Description of and Stated Rationale for the CALEA
General DescriptionThe Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA)was passed in October 1994.  The act imposes on telecommunications

carriers four requirements in connection with those services or facilities
that allow customers to originate, terminate, or direct communications:¥To expeditiously isolate and enable the government to intercept,pursuant to court order or other lawful authorization, all wire and elec-
tronic communications in the carrierÕs control to or from the equipment,facilities, or services of a subscriber, in real time or at any later time
acceptable to the government.  Carriers are not responsible for decrypting

encrypted communications that are the subject of court-ordered wiretaps,
unless the carrier provided the encryption and can decrypt it.  Moreover,
carriers are not prohibited from deploying an encryption service for which
it does not retain the ability to decrypt communications for law enforce-
ment access.¥To expeditiously isolate and enable the government to access, pur-suant to court order or other lawful authorization, reasonably available
call-identifying information about the origin and destination of commu-
nications. Access must be provided in such a manner that the information
may be associated with the communication to which it pertains and is
provided to the government before, during, or immediately after the
communicationÕs transmission to or from the subscriber.¥To make intercepted communications and call-identifying infor-mation available to government, pursuant to court order or other lawful

authorization, so that they may be transmitted over lines or facilities leased
or procured by law enforcement to a location away from the carrierÕs pre-mises.¥To meet these requirements with a minimum of interference withthe subscriberÕs service and in such a way that protects the privacy ofcommunications and call-identifying information that are not targeted by
electronic surveillance orders, and that maintains the confidentiality of
the governmentÕs interceptions.The CALEA also authorizes federal money for retrofitting commoncarrier systems to comply with these requirements.  As this report is

being written, no money has yet been appropriated for this task.The CALEA requirements apply only to those services or facilitiesthat enable a subscriber to make, receive, or direct calls.  They do not

apply to information services, such as the services of electronic mail pro-
viders; on-line services such as Compuserve or America Online; orCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYInternet access providers; or to private networks or services whose solepurpose is to interconnect carriers.  Furthermore, the CALEA requires

law enforcement authorities to use carrier employees or personnel to acti-
vate a surveillance.  The CALEA also provides that a warrant is needed to

tap a cordless telephone; wiretaps on cellular telephones are already gov-
erned by Title III or the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.The Stated Rationale for the CALEAHistorically, telecommunications service providers have cooperatedwith law enforcement officials in allowing access to communications upon
legal authorization.  New telecommunications services (e.g., call forward-

ing, paging, cellular calls) and others expected in the future have dimin-
ished the ability of law enforcement agencies to carry out legally autho-
rized electronic surveillance.  The primary rationale for the CALEA is to

ensure that within 4 years, telecommunications service providers will still
be able to provide the assistance necessary to law enforcement officials to
conduct surveillance of wire and electronic communications (both con-
tent and call-identifying information) controlled by the carrier, regardless
of the nature of the particular services being offered.6.1.2  Reducing Resource Requirements for Wiretaps
Once a surveillance order has been approved judicially, it must beimplemented.  In practice, the implementation of a surveillance order

requires the presence of at least two agents around the clock.  Such a

presence is required if real-time minimization requirements are to be met.1As a result, personnel requirements are the most expensive aspect of
electronic surveillance.  The average cost of a wiretap order is $57,000

(Appendix D), or approximately one-half of a full-time-equivalent agent-
year.  Such costs are not incurred lightly by law enforcement agencies.
1Minimization refers to the practice, required by Title III, of monitoring only those por-tions of a conversation that are relevant to the crime under investigation.  If a subject

discusses matters that are strictly personal, such discussions are not subject to monitoring.In practice, a team of agents operate a tape recorder on the wiretapped line.  Minimization
requires agents to turn off the tape recorder and to cease monitoring the conversation for a
short period of time if they overhear nonrelevant discussions.  At the end of that time
period, they are permitted to resume monitoring.  For obvious reasons, this practice is
conducted in real time.  When agents encounter a foreign language with which they are

unfamiliar, they are allowed to record the entire conversation; the tape is then ÒminimizedÓafter the fact of wiretapping.  Additional discussion of the requirements imposed on wire-
tapping by Title III is contained in Appendix D.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY219Under these circumstances, procedures and/or technologies that couldreduce the labor required to conduct wiretaps pose a potential problem for
individuals concerned about excessive use of wiretaps.  Specifically, these

individuals are concerned that the ability to route wiretapped calls to a
central location would enable a single team of agents to monitor multiple
conversations.2  Such time sharing among monitoring teams could lower
wiretap costs significantly.  From the standpoint of law enforcement, these

savings could be used for other law enforcement purposes, and they
would have the additional effect of eliminating an operational constraint
on the frequency with which wiretap authority is sought today.Technologies that would enable minimization without human assis-tance are in their infancy today.  For example, the technology of speech

recognition for the most part cannot cope with speech that is speaker-
independent and continuous, and artificial intelligence programs today
and for the foreseeable future will be unable to distinguish between the
criminally relevant and nonrelevant parts of a conversation.  Human

agents are an essential component of a wiretap, and law enforcement
officials have made three key points in response to the concern raised
above:¥Most importantly, todayÕs wiretaps are performed generally withlaw enforcement agencies paying telecommunications service providers
for delivering the intercepted communications to a point of law enforce-
mentÕs choosing.¥From an operational standpoint, the real-time minimization ofwiretapped conversations requires agents who are personally familiar
with the details of the case under investigation, so that they know when
the subjects are engaged in conversations related to the caseÑagents ex-ceed their authority if they monitor unrelated conversations.¥Procedural rules require that all evidence be maintained through aproper chain of custody and in a manner such that the authenticity of
evidence can be established.  Law enforcement officials believe that the
2For example, such a concern was raised at the Fifth Conference on Computers, Freedom,and Privacy held in San Francisco in March 1995.  The argument goes as follows.  While the
CALEA authorizes $500 million to pay for existing in-place telephone switch conversions toimplement the capabilities desired by law enforcement, this amount is intended as a one-
time cost; upgrades of switching systems are expected to implement these capabilities with-out government subsidy.   The point is that additional wiretap orders would not pose an
additional incremental cost (though the original cost of $57,000 would still obtain), and the
barrier of incremental cost would not impede more wiretap orders.  In short, critics argue
that it would make good economic sense to make additional use of resources if such use canÒpiggybackÓ on an already-made investment.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYuse of one team to monitor different conversations could call into ques-tion the ability to establish a clear chain of custody.6.1.3  Obtaining Access to Digital Streams in the Future
In the conduct of any wiretap, the first technical problem is simplygaining access to the relevant traffic itself, whether encrypted or not.  For

law enforcement, products with encryption capabilities and features that
allow exceptional access are useless without access to the traffic in question.
The CALEA was an initiative spearheaded by law enforcement to deal with
the access problem created by new telecommunications services.The problems addressed by the CALEA will inevitably resurface asnewer communications services are developed and deployed for use by
common carriers and private entities (e.g., corporations) alike.  It is axi-

omatic that the complexity of interactions among communications sys-
tems will continually increase, both as a result of increased functionality
and the need to make more efficient use of available bandwidth.  Conse-

quently, isolation of the digital streams associated with the party or par-
ties targeted by law enforcement will become increasingly difficult if the
cooperation of the service provider is not forthcoming, for all of the rea-
sons described in Chapter 2.  (It is for this reason that the CALEA applies

to parties that are not common carriers today upon appropriate designa-
tion by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).)Moreover, even when access to the digital stream of an application isassured, the structure of the digital stream may be so complex that it
would be extremely costly to determine all of the information present
without the assistance of the application developer.  Tools designed to

isolate the relevant portions of a given digital stream transmitted on open
systems will generally be less expensive than tools for proprietary sys-
tems, but since both open and proprietary systems will be present in any
future telecommunications environment, law enforcement authorities will
need tools for both.  The development of such tools will require consider-

able technical skill, skill that is most likely possessed by the application
developers; cooperation with product developers may decrease the cost
of developing these tools.Finally, as the telecommunications system becomes more and moreheterogeneous, even the term Òcommon carrierÓ will become harder to
define or apply.  The routing of an individual data communication through

the ÒnetworkÓ will be dynamic and may take any one of a number of paths,
decisions about which are not under the userÕs control.  While only one link
in a given route need be a common carrier for CALEA purposes, identify-
ing that common carrier in practice may be quite difficult.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY2216.1.4  The CALEA Exemption of Information Service Providers
and Distinctions Between Voice and Data ServicesAt present, users of data communications services access networkssuch as the Internet either through private networks (e.g., via their em-
ployers) or through Internet service providers that provide connections
for a variety of individuals and organizations.  Both typically make use of

lines owned and operated by telecommunications service providers.  In

the former case, law enforcement access to the digital stream is more or
less the same problem as it is for the employer (and law enforcement has
access through the legal process to the employer).  In the latter case, the

CALEA requires the telephone service provider to provide to law en-
forcement authorities a copy of the digital stream being transported.The CALEA exempts on-line information service providers such asAmerica Online and Compuserve from its requirements.  In the future,

other CALEA issues may arise as the capabilities provided by advanced
information technologies grow more sophisticated.  For example, the tech-

nological capability exists to use Internet-based services to supply real-
time voice communications.3  Even today, a number of Internet and net-
work service providers are capable of supporting (or are planning to
support) real-time Òpush-to-talkÓ voice communications.  The CALEA
provides that a party providing communications services that in the judg-
ment of the FCC are Òa replacement for a substantial portion of the localtelephone exchange serviceÓ may be deemed a carrier subject to the re-
quirements of the CALEA.  Thus, one possible path along which telecom-

munications services may evolve could lead to the imposition of CALEA
requirements on information service providers, even though they were
exempted as an essential element of a legislative compromise that en-
abled the CALEA to pass in the first place.These possibilities are indicative of a more general problem: the factthat lines between ÒvoiceÓ and 
ÒdataÓ services are being increasingly
blurred.  This issue is addressed in greater detail in Chapter 7.
6.2  OTHER LEVERS USED IN NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY
The government has a number of tools to influence the possessionand use of cryptography domestically and abroad.  How the government

uses these tools in the context of national cryptography policy reflects the
governmentÕs view of how to balance the interests of the various stake-holders affected by cryptography.3Fred Hapgood, ÒIPHONE,Ó Wired, October 1995, p. 140; and Lawrence M. Fisher, ÒLong-Distance Phone Calls in the Internet,Ó New York Times, March 14, 1995, p. D6.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY6.2.1  Federal Information Processing Standards
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPSs) are an importantelement of national cryptography policy, and all federal agencies are en-
couraged to cite FIPSs in their procurement specifications.  (Box 6.1 con-

tains a brief description of all FIPSs related to cryptography.)  The Na-

tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is responsible for
issuing FIPSs.FIPSs can have enormous significance to the private sector as well,despite the face that the existence of a FIPS does not legally compel a
private party to adopt it.  One reason is that to the extent that a FIPS is

based on existing private sector standards (which it often is), it codifies
standards of existing practice and contributes to a planning environment
of greater certainty.  A second reason is that a FIPS is often taken as a

government endorsement of the procedures, practices, and algorithms
contained therein, and thus a FIPS may set a de facto Òbest practicesÓstandard for the private sector.  A third reason is related to procurements

that are FIPS-compliant as discussed in the next section.NIST has traditionally relied on private sector standards-setting pro-cesses when developing FIPSs.  Such practice reflects NIST
Õs recognitionof the fact that the standards it sets will be more likely to succeedÑinterms of reducing procurement costs, raising quality, and influencing the
direction of information technology market developmentÑif they are sup-ported by private producers and users.4The existence of widely accepted standards is often an enormousboon to interoperability of computers and communication devices, and
the converse is generally true as well: the absence of widely accepted
standards often impedes the growth of a market.In the domain of cryptography, FIPSs have had a mixed result.  The
promulgation of FIPS 46-1, the Data Encryption Standard (DES) algo-
rithm for encrypting data, was a boon to cryptography and vendors of
cryptographic products.  On the other hand, the two cryptography-

related FIPSs most recently produced by NIST (FIPS 185, the Escrowed
Encryption Standard (EES), and FIPS 186, the Digital Signature Standard
(DSS)) have met with a less favorable response.  Neither was consistent

with existing de facto industry standards or practice, and both met with
significant negative response from private industry and users.54Carl F. Cargill, Information Technology Standardization, Digital Press, Bedford, Mass., 1989,p. 213.5The story of resistance to the EES is provided in Susan Landau et al., Codes, Keys, andConflicts, Association for Computing Machinery Inc., Washington, D.C., June 1994, p. 48; toDSS, in Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, pp. 41-43.  In the case of DSS, a de
facto industry standard had already emerged based on RSA Data Security Inc.Õs public-keyalgorithm.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY223BOX 6.1Cryptography-related Federal Information Processing Standards¥FIPS 46, 46-1 and 46-2: Data Encryption Standard (DES).  Specification of
DES algorithm and rules for implementing DES in hardware.  FIPS 46-1 recertifies
DES and extends it for software implementation.  FIPS 46-2 reaffirms the Data En-

cryption Standard algorithm until 1998 and allows for its implementation in soft-ware, firmware or hardware.  Several other FIPSs address interoperability and secu-
rity requirements for using DES in the physical layer of data communications (FIPS
139) and in fax machines (FIPS 141), guidelines for implementing and using DES(FIPS 74), modes of operation of DES (FIPS 81), and use of DES for authenticationpurposes (FIPS 113).¥FIPS 180-1: Secure Hash Standard.  This standard specifies a Secure Hash
Algorithm (SHA) that can be used to generate a condensed representation of a mes-sage called a message digest.  The SHA is required for use with the Digital Signature

Algorithm (DSA) as specified in the Digital Signature Standard (DSS) and whenever asecure hash algorithm is required for federal applications.  The SHA is used by both
the transmitter and intended receiver of a message in computing and verifying a
digital signature.¥FIPS 186: Digital Signature Standard.  This standard specifies a Digital Sig-
nature Algorithm (DSA) appropriate for applications requiring a digital rather than a
written signature.  The DSA digital signature is a pair of large numbers represented in
a computer as strings of binary digits.  The digital signature is computed using a set
of rules (i.e., the DSA) and a set of parameters such that the identity of the signatory
and integrity of the data can be verified.  The DSA provides the capability to generate
and verify signatures.¥FIPS 140-1: Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules.  This stan-
dard provides specifications for cryptographic modules which can be used withincomputer and telecommunications systems to protect unclassified information in a
variety of different applications.¥FIPS 185: Escrowed Encryption Standard (see main text).
¥FIPS 171: Key Management Using ANSI X9.17.  This standard specifies a
selection of options for the automated distribution of keying material by the federalgovernment when using the protocols of ANSI X9.17.  The standard defines proce-
dures for the manual and automated management of keying materials and contains a
number of options.  The selected options will allow the development of cost-effec-
tive systems that will increase the likelihood of interoperability.Other FIPSs that address matters related more generally to computer securityinclude the following:¥FIPS 48:  Guidelines on Evaluation of Techniques for Automated Personal
Identification,¥FIPS 83:  Guidelines on User Authentication Techniques for Computer Net-
work Access Control,¥FIPS 112:  Password Usage,
¥FIPS 113:  Computer Data Authentication, and
¥FIPS 73:  Guidelines for Security of Computer Applications.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYThe promulgation of the EES and the DSS, as well as current Admin-istration plans to promulgate a modification of the EES to accommodate
escrowed encryption for data storage and communications and another
FIPS for key escrow to performance requirements for escrow agents and
for escrowed encryption products, has generated a mixed market reac-
tion.  Some companies see the promulgation of these standards as a mar-

ket opportunity, while others see these standards as creating yet more
confusion and uncertainty in pushing escrowed encryption on a resistant
market.Appendix M contains a general discussion of FIPSs and the stan-dards-setting process.6.2.2  The Government Procurement Process
Government procurement occurs in two domains.  One domain is
special-purpose equipment and products, for which government is the
only consumer.  Such products are generally classified in certain ways;

weapons and military-grade cryptography are two examples.  The other

domain is procurement of products that are useful in both the private and
public sectors.Where equipment and products serve both government and privatesector needs, in some instances the ability of the government to buy in
bulk guarantees vendors a large enough market to take advantage of
mass production, thereby driving down for all consumers the unit costs
of a product that the government is buying in bulk.  Through its market

power, government has some ability to affect the price of products that
are offered for sale on the open market.  Furthermore, acceptance by the

government is often taken as a Òseal of approvalÓ for a given product that
reassures potential buyers in the private sector.History offers examples with variable success in promoting the wide-spread public use of specific information technologies through the use of
government standards.¥The DES was highly successful.  DES was first adopted as a crypto-
graphic standard for federal use in 1975.  Since then, its use has become

commonplace in cryptographic applications around the world, and many
implementations of DES now exist worldwide.¥A less successful standard is GOSIP, the Government OSI Profile,FIPS 146.6  The GOSIP was intended to specify the details of an OSI
configuration for use in the government so that interoperable OSI net-6OSI refers to Open Systems Interconnect, a standardized suite of international network-ing protocols developed and promulgated in the early 1980s.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY225work products could be procured from commercial vendors and to en-courage the market development of products.  GOSIP has largely failed in

this effort, and network products based on the TCP/IP protocols now
dominate the market.7In the case of the EES, the government chose not to seek legislationoutlawing cryptography without features for exceptional access, but chose
instead to use the EES to influence the marketplace for cryptography.  This
point was acknowledged by Administration officials to the committee on a
number of occasions.  Specifically, the government hoped that the adoption

of the EES to ensure secure communications within the government and for
communications of other parties with the federal government would lead
to a significant demand for EES-compliant devices, thus making possible
production in larger quantities and thereby driving unit costs down and
making EES-compliant devices more attractive to other users.  A secondary

effect would be the fact that two nongovernmental parties wishing to en-
gage in secure communications would be most likely to use EES-compliant
devices if they already own them rather than purchase other devices.  As

part of this strategy to influence the market, the government persuaded
AT&T in 1992 to base a secure telephone on the EES.In the case of the Fortezza card, the large government procurementfor use with the Defense Messaging System may well lower unit costs
sufficiently that vendors of products intended solely for the commercial
nondefense market will build support for the Fortezza card into their
products.8  Given the wide availability of PC-Card slots on essentially all
notebook and laptop computers, it is not inconceivable that the security
advantages offered by hardware-based authentication would find a wide
commercial market.  At the same time, the disadvantages of hardware-

based cryptographic functionality discussed in Chapter 5 would remain
as well.6.2.3  Implementation of Policy: Fear, Uncertainty,
Doubt, Delay, ComplexityThe implementation of policy contributes to how those affected bypolicy will respond to it.  This important element is often unstated, and it

refers to the role of government in creating a climate of predictability.  A
7See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Real-izing the Information Future:  The Internet and Beyond
, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., 1994, Chapter 6.8In a recent contract, a vendor agreed to provide Fortezza cards at $69 per card.  See PaulConstance, ÒAfter Complaining $99 Was Too Low, Fortezza Vendors Come in at $69,ÓGovernment Computer News, October 2, 1995, p. 6.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYgovernment that speaks with multiple voices on a question of policy, orone that articulates isolated elements of policy in a piecemeal fashion, or
one that leaves the stakeholders uncertain about what is or is not permis-
sible, creates an environment of fear, uncertainty, and doubt that can
inhibit action.  Such an environment can result from a deliberate choice on

the part of policy makers, or it can be inadvertent, resulting from overlap-
ping and/or multiple sources of authority that may have at least partial
responsibility for the policy area in question.  Decisions made behind

closed doors and protected by government security classifications tend to
reinforce the concerns of those who believe that fear, uncertainty, and
doubt are created deliberately rather than inadvertently.The committee observes that cryptography policy has indeed beenshrouded in secrecy for many years and that many agencies have partial
responsibility in this area.  It also believes that fear, uncertainty, and

doubt are common in the marketplace.  For example, the introduction of

nonmarket-driven standards such as the DSS and the EES may have cre-
ated market uncertainty that impeded the rapid proliferation of high-
quality products with encryption capabilities both internationally and
domestically.  Uncertainty over whether or not the federal government

would recertify the DES as a FIPS has plagued the marketplace in recent
years, because withdrawal of the DES as a FIPS could cause considerable
consternation among some potential buyers that might suddenly be using
products based on a decertified standard, although in fact the govern-
ment has recertified the DES in each case.  On the other hand, the DES is

also a standard of the American National Standards Institute and the
American Banking Association, and if these organizations continue to
endorse it, the DES will arguably represent a viable algorithm for a wide
range of products.Many parties in industry believe that the complexity and opacity ofthe decision-making process with respect to cryptography are major con-
tributors to this air of uncertainty.  Of course, the creation of uncertainty

may be desirable from the perspective of policy makers if their goal is to
retard action in a given area.  Impeding the spread of high-quality prod-

ucts with encryption capabilities internationally is the stated and explicit
goal of export controls; on the domestic front, impeding the spread of
high-quality products with encryption capabilities has been a desirable
outcome from the standpoint of senior officials in the law enforcement
community.A very good example of the impact of fear, uncertainty, and doubt onthe marketplace for cryptography can be found in the impact of govern-
ment action (or more precisely, inaction) with respect to authentication.
As noted in Chapter 2, cryptography supports digital signatures, a tech-
nology that provides high assurance for both data integrity and user au-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY227thentication.  However, federal actions in this area have led to consider-
able controversy.  One example is that the federal government failed to

adopt what was (and still is) the de facto commercial standard algorithm
on digital signatures, namely the RSA algorithm.  Government sources

told the committee that the fact that the RSA algorithm is capable of
providing strong confidentiality as well as digital signatures was one
reason that the government deemed it inappropriate for promulgation as
a FIPS.9  Further, the government
Õs adoption of the Digital SignatureStandard10 in 1993 occurred despite widespread opposition from indus-
try to the specifics of that standard.6.2.4  R&D Funding
An agency that supports research (and/or conducts such research onits own in-house) in a given area of technology is often able to shape the
future options from which the private sector and policy makers will
choose.  For example, an agency that wishes to maintain a monopoly of

expertise in a given area may not fund promising research proposals that
originate from outside.  Multiple agencies active in funding a given area

may thus yield a broader range of options for future policy makers.In the context of cryptography and computer and communicationssecurity, it is relevant that the National Security Agency (NSA) has been
the main supporter and performer of R&D in this area.11  The NSA
Õs R&D9The specific concern was that widespread adoption of RSA as a signature standard wouldresult in an infrastructure that could support the easy and convenient distribution of DES
keys.  The two other reasons for the government
Õs rejection of RSA were the desire topromulgate an approach to digital signatures that would be royalty-free (RSA is a patentedalgorithm) and the desire to reduce overall system costs for digital signatures.  For a discus-

sion of the intellectual issues involved in the rejection of the RSA algorithm and the concernover confidentiality, see Office of Technology Assessment, Information Security and Privacyin Network Environments, OTA-TCT-606, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,D.C., September 1994, pp. 167-168 and pp. 217-222.10The DSS is based on an unclassified algorithm known as the Digital Signature Algo-rithm that does not explicitly support confidentiality.  However, the DSS and its supporting

documentation do amount to U.S. government endorsement of a particular one-way hashfunction, and document in detail how to generate the appropriate number-theoretic con-stants needed to implement it.  Given this standard, it is possible to design a confidentiality
standard that is as secure as the DSS.  In other words, the DSS is a road map to a confiden-
tiality standard, although it is not such a standard explicitly.  Whether an ersatz confidenti-ality standard would pass muster in the commercial market remains to be seen.11It is important to distinguish between R&D undertaken internally and externally toNSA.  Internal R&D work can be controlled and kept private to NSA; by contrast, it is much
more difficult to control the extent to which external R&D work is disseminated.  Thus,

decisions regarding specific external cryptography-related R&D projects could promote orinhibit public knowledge of cryptography.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYorientation has been, quite properly, on technologies that would help it toperform more effectively and efficiently its two basic missions: (1) defend-

ing national security by designing and deploying strong cryptography to
protect classified information and (2) performing signals intelligence against
potential foreign adversaries.  In the information security side of the opera-

tion, NSA-developed technology has extraordinary strengths that have
proven well suited to the protection of classified information relevant to
defense or foreign policy needs.How useful such technologies will prove for corporate informationsecurity remains to be seen.  Increasing needs for information security in

the private sector suggest that NSA technology may have much to offer,
especially if such technology can be made available to the private sector
without limitation.  At the same time, the environment in which private

sector information security needs are manifested may be different enough
from the defense and foreign policy worlds that these technologies may
not be particularly relevant in practice to the private sector.  Furthermore,

the rapid pace of commercial developments in information technology
may make it difficult for the private sector to use technologies developed
for national security purposes in a less rapidly changing environment.These observations suggest that commercial needs for cryptographictechnology may be able to draw on NSA technologies for certain applica-
tions, and most certainly will draw on nonclassified R&D work in cryp-
tography (both in the United States and abroad); even the latter will have
a high degree of sophistication.  Precisely how the private sector will

draw on these two sources of technology will depend on policy decisions
to be made in the future.  Finally, it is worth noting that nonclassified

research on cryptography appearing in the open literature has been one
of the most important factors leading to the dilemma that policy makers
face today with respect to cryptography.6.2.5  Patents and Intellectual Property
A number of patents involving cryptography have been issued.  Pat-
ents affect cryptography because patent protection can be used by both
vendors and governments to keep various patented approaches to cryp-
tography out of broad use in the public domain.12The DES, first issued in 1977, is an open standard, and the algorithmit uses is widely known.  According to NIST, devices implementing the

DES may be covered by U.S. and foreign patents issued to IBM (although
the original patents have by now expired).13  However, IBM granted
12See footnote 9.13National Institute of Standards and Technology, ÒFIPS 46-2: Announcing the Data En-cryption Standard,Ó NIST, Gaithersburg, Md., December 30, 1993.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY229nonexclusive, royalty-free licenses under the patents to make, use, andsell apparatus that complies with the standard.RSA Data Security Inc. (RSA) holds the licensing rights to RC2, RC4,and RC5, which are variable-key-length ciphers developed by Ronald
Rivest.14  RC2 and RC4 are not patented, but rather are protected as trade
secrets (although both algorithms have been published on the Internet
without RSAÕs approval).  RSA has applied for a patent for RC5 and has
proposed it as a security standard for the Internet.  Another alternative

for data encryption is IDEA, a block cipher developed by James Massey
and Xueija Lai of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich.
The patent rights to IDEA are held by Ascom Systec AG, a Swiss firm.
IDEA is implemented in the software application PGP.In addition to the above patents, which address symmetric-key encryp-tion technologies, there are several important patent issues related to pub-
lic-key cryptography.  The concept of public-key cryptography, as well as

some specific implementing methods, is covered by U.S. Patents 4,200,770

(M. Hellman, W. Diffie, and R. Merkle, 1980) and 4,218,582 (M. Hellman
and R. Merkle, 1980), both of which are owned by Stanford University.  The

basic patent for the RSA public-key crypto-system, U.S. Patent 4,405,829 (R.
Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adelman, 1983), is owned by the Massachusetts

Institute of Technology.  The 4,218,582 patent has counterparts in several

other countries.  These basic public-key patents and related ones have been

licensed to many vendors worldwide.  With the breakup of the partnership

that administered the licensing of Stanford UniversityÕs and MITÕs patents,the validity of the various patents has become the subject of current litiga-
tion.  In any event, the terms will expire in 1997 for the first two of the above

patents and in 2000 for the third.15In 1994, NIST issued the Digital Signature Standard, FIPS 186.  The
DSS uses the NIST-developed Digital Signature Algorithm, which accord-
ing to NIST is available for use without a license.  However, during the

DSSÕs development, concern arose about whether the DSS might infringeon the public-key patents cited above, as well as a patent related to signa-
ture verification held by Claus Schnorr of Goethe University in Frankfurt,
Germany.16  NIST asserts that the DSS does not infringe on any of these
14See RSA Data Security Inc. home page at http://www.rsa.com.15In 1994, Congress changed patent terms from 17 years after issuance to 20 years fromthe date of filing the patent application; however, applications for these patents were filed
in or before 1977, and so they will not be affected.16See Office of Technology Assessment, Information Security and Privacy in Network Envi-ronments, 1994, p. 220.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYpatents.17  At the least, U.S. government users have the right to use pub-
lic-key cryptography without paying a license fee for the Stanford and MIT

patents because the concepts were developed at these universities with
federal research support.  However, there remains some disagreement

about whether commercial uses of the DSS (e.g., in a public-key infrastruc-

ture) will require a license from one or more of the various patent holders.A potential patent dispute regarding the key-escrow features of theEES may have been headed off by NISTÕs negotiation of a nonexclusivelicensing agreement with Silvio Micali in 1994.18  Micali has patents that
are relevant to dividing a key into components that can be separately
safeguarded (e.g., by escrow agents) and later combined to recover the
original key.A provision of the U.S. Code (Title 35, U.S.C., Section 181) allows thePatent and Trademark Office (PTO) to withhold a patent and order that
the invention be kept secret if publication of the patent is detrimental to
national security.  Relevant to cryptography is the fact that a patent appli-

cation for the Skipjack encryption algorithm was filed on February 7,
1994.  This application was examined and all of the claims allowed, and

notification of the algorithmÕs patentability was issued on March 28, 1995.Based on a determination by NSA, the Armed Services Patent Advisory
Board issued a secrecy order for the Skipjack patent application; the effect
of the secrecy order is that even though Skipjack can be patented, a patent
will not be issued until the secrecy order is rescinded.  Since applications

are kept in confidence until a patent is issued, no uninvolved party can
find out any information concerning the application.  In this way, the

patentability of the algorithm has been established without having to
disclose the detailed information publicly.19  Since 35 U.S.C. 181 also pro-
vides that the PTO can rescind the secrecy order upon notification that
publication is no longer detrimental to national security, compromise and
subsequent public revelation of the Skipjack algorithm (e.g., through re-
verse engineering of a Clipper chip) might well cause a patent to be is-
sued for Skipjack that would give the U.S. government control over its
subsequent use in products.17National Institute of Standards and Technology, ÒDigital Signature Standard,Ó Com-
puter Systems Laboratory (CSL) Bulletin, NIST, Gaithersburg, Md., November 1994.  Avail-
able on-line at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/nistbul/csl94-11.txt.18National Institute of Standards and Technology press release, ÒPatent Agreement Re-moves Perceived Barrier to Telecommunications Security System,Ó NIST, Gaithersburg, Md.,
July 11, 1994.  Available on-line at gopher://rigel.nist.gov:7346/0/.docs/.releases/N94-
28.REL.19Clinton C. Brooks, National Security Agency, provided this information to the commit-tee in an e-mail message dated May 23, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY2316.2.6  Formal and Informal Arrangements with Various Other
Governments and OrganizationsInternational agreements can be an important part of national policy.For example, for many years the Coordinating Committee (CoCom) na-
tions cooperated in establishing a common export control policy on mili-
tarily significant items with civilian purposes, including cryptography
(Appendix G has more details).International agreements can take a variety of different forms.  The
most formal type of agreement is a treaty between (or among) nations
that specifies the permissible, required, and prohibited actions of the vari-
ous nations.  Treaties require ratification by the relevant national political

bodies as well as signature before entry into force.  In the United States

treaties must be approved by the U.S. Senate by a two-thirds vote.  Some-

times treaties are self-executing, but often they need to be followed by
implementing legislation enacted by the Congress in the normal manner
for legislation.Another type of agreement is an executive agreement.  In the United
States, executive agreements are, as the name implies, entered into by the
executive branch.  Unlike the treaty, no Senate ratification is involved, but

the executive branch has frequently sought approval by a majority of both
houses of the Congress.  For all practical purposes executive agreements

with other countries bind the United States in international law just as
firmly as treaties do, although a treaty may carry greater weight inter-
nally due to the concurrence by a two-thirds vote of the Senate.  Executive

agreements can also be changed with much greater flexibility than trea-
ties.Finally, nations can agree to cooperate through diplomacy.  Even
though cooperation is not legally required under such arrangements, in-
formal understandings can work very effectively so long as relationships
remain good and the countries involved continue to have common goals.
In fact, informal understanding is the main product of much diplomacy
and is the form that most of the worldÕs business between governmentstakes.  For example, although the United States maintains formal mutual

legal assistance treaties with a number of nations, U.S. law enforcement
agencies cooperate (sometimes extensively) with foreign counterparts in
a much larger number of nations.  Indeed, in some instances, such coop-

eration is stronger, more reliable, and more extensive than is the case with
nations that are a party to a formal mutual legal assistance treaty with the
United States.Note that the more formal the agreement, the more public is the sub-stance of the agreement; such publicity often leads to attention that may
compromise important and very sensitive matters, such as the extent toCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYwhich a nation supports a given policy position or the scope and nature ofa nationÕs capabilities.  When informal arrangements are negotiated and
entered into force, they may not be known by all citizens or even by all
parts of the governments involved.  Because they are less public, informal

arrangements also allow more latitude for governments to make deci-
sions on a case-by-case basis.  In conducting negotiations that may in-

volve sensitive matters or agreements that may require considerable flex-
ibility, governments are often inclined to pursue more informal avenues
of approach.6.2.7  Certification and Evaluation
Analogous to Good Housekeeping seals of approval or 
Òcheck ratingsÓfor products reviewed in Consumer Reports, independent testing and certi-fication of products can provide assurance in the commercial marketplace
that a product can indeed deliver the services and functionality that it
purports to deliver.  For example, the results of government crash tests of

automobiles are widely circulated as data relevant to consumer purchases
of automobiles.  Government certification that a commercial airplane is

safe to fly provides significant reassurance to the public about flight safety.
At the same time, while evaluation and certification would in principle
help users to avoid products that implement a sound algorithm in a way
that undermines the security offered by the algorithm, the actual behavior
of users demonstrates that certification of a product is not necessarily a
selling point.  Many of the DES products in the United States have never

been evaluated relative to FS 1027 or FIPS 140-1, and yet such products
are used by many parties.The government track record in the cryptography and computer se-curity domain is mixed.  For example, a number of DES products were

evaluated with respect to FS 1027 (the precursor to FIPS 140-1) over sev-
eral years and a number of products were certified by NSA.  For a time,

government agencies purchased DES hardware only if it met FS 1027, or
FIPS 140.  Commercial clients often required compliance because it pro-

vided the only assurance that a product embodying DES was secure in a
broader sense.  In this case, the alignment between government and com-

mercial security requirements seems to have been reasonably good, and
thus this program had some success.  Two problems with this evaluation
program were that it addressed only hardware and that it lagged in al-
lowing use of public-key management technology in products (in the
absence of suitable standards).A second attempt to provide product evaluation was represented bythe National Computer Security Center (NCSC), which was established
by the Department of Defense (DOD) for the purpose of certifying vari-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY233ous computer systems for security.  The theory underlying the center was
that the government needed secure systems but could not afford to build
them.  The quid pro quo was that industry would design and implement

secure operating systems that the government would test and evaluate at
no cost to industry; systems meeting government requirements would
receive a seal of approval.Although the NCSC still exists, the security evaluation program itsponsors, the Trusted Product Evaluation Program (TPEP), has more or
less lapsed into disuse.  In the judgment of many, the TPEP was a relative

failure because of an underlying premise that the information security
problems of the government and the private sector were identical to those
of the defense establishment.  In fact, the private sector has for the most

part found that a military approach to computer security is inadequate
for its needs.  A second major problem was that the time scale of the

evaluation process was much longer than the private sector could toler-
ate, and products that depended on NCSC evaluation would reach mar-
ket already on the road to obsolescence, perhaps superseded by a new
version to which a given evaluation would not necessarily apply.  In late

1995, articles in the trade press reported that the DOD was attempting to
revive the evaluation program in a way that would involve private con-
tractors.20A recent attempt to provide certification services is the CryptographicModule Validation Program (CMVP) to test products for conformance to
FIPS 140-1, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules.21  FIPS 140-1
provides a broad framework for all NIST cryptographic standards, specify-
ing design, function, and documentation requirements for cryptographic
modulesÑincluding hardware, software, Òfirmware,Ó and combinations
thereofÑused to protect sensitive, unclassified information in computerand telecommunication systems.22  The CMVP was established in July 1995
by NIST and the Communications Security Establishment of the govern-
ment of Canada.The validation program is currently optional: agencies may purchaseproducts based on a vendorÕs written assurance of compliance with thestandard.  However, beginning in 1997, U.S. federal procurement will

require cryptographic products to be validated by an independent, third20See, for example, Paul Constance, ÒSecure Products List Gets CPR,Ó Government Com-puting News, November 13, 1995, p. 40.21National Institute of Standards and Technology press release, ÒCryptographic ModuleValidation Program Announced,Ó NIST, Gaithersburg, Md., July 17, 1995.
22National Institute of Standards and Technology, Federal Information Processing StandardsPublication 140-1: Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, NIST, Gaithersburg, Md.,January 11, 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYparty.  Under the program, vendors will submit their products for testing
by an independent, NIST-accredited laboratory.23Such a laboratory evaluates both the product and its associated docu-mentation against the requirements in FIPS 140-1.  NIST has also specified

test procedures for all aspects of the standard.  Examples include attempt-

ing to penetrate tamper-resistant coatings and casings, inspecting soft-
ware source code and documentation, attempting to bypass protection of
stored secret keys, and statistically verifying the performance of random
number generators.24  The vendor sends the results of independent tests
to NIST, which determines whether these results show that the tested
product complies with the standard and then issues validation certificates
for products that do.  Time will tell whether the CMVP will prove more

successful than the NCSC.6.2.8  Nonstatutory Influence
By virtue of its size and role in society, government has considerableability to influence public opinion and to build support for policies.  In

many cases, this ability is not based on specific legislative authority, but
rather on the use of the Òbully pulpit.Ó  For example, the government canact in a convening role to bring focus and to stimulate the private sector to
work on a problem.25  The bully pulpit can be used to convey a sense of
urgency that is tremendously important in how the private sector reacts,
especially large companies that try to be good corporate citizens and
responsive to informal persuasion by senior government officials.  Both

vendors and users can be influenced by such authority.2623As of September 1995, the National Institute of Standards and TechnologyÕs NationalVoluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program had accredited three U.S. companies as com-petent to perform the necessary procedures:  CygnaCom Solutions Laboratory (McLean,
Va.), DOMUS Software Limited (Ottawa, Canada), and InfoGard Laboratories (San Luis
Obispo, Calif.).  A current list of these companies is available on-line at http://
csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/fips/1401labs.txt.24National Institute of Standards and Technology, Derived Test Requirements for FIPS Pub-lication 140-1, NIST, Gaithersburg, Md., March 1995.25One advantage of governmentÕs acting in this way is that it may provide some assur-ance to the private sector that any coordinated action taken in response to government calls
for action will be less likely to be interpreted by government as a violation of antitrustprovisions.26For example, in responding favorably to a request by President Clinton for a particularaction in a labor dispute, the chairman of American Airlines noted, ÒHe [President Clinton]is the elected leader of the country.  For any citizen or any company or any union to say
ÔNo, I wonÕt do thatÕ to the President requires an awfully good reason.
Ó  See Gwen Ifill,
ÒStrike at American Airlines; Airline Strike Ends as Clinton Steps In,Ó New York Times,November 23, 1993, p. 1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY235In the security domain, the Clinton Administration has sponsoredseveral widely publicized public meetings to address security dimensions
of the national information infrastructure (NII).  These meetings were

meetings of the NII Security Issues Forum, held in 1994 and 1995.27  Theywere announced in the Federal Register and were intended to provide a
forum in which members of the interested public could air their concerns
about security.In the cryptography domain, the U.S. government has used its con-vening authority to seek comments on various proposed cryptographic
standards and to hold a number of workshops related to key escrow
(discussed in Chapter 5).  Many in the affected communities believe that

these attempts at outreach were too few and too late to influence anything
more than the details of a policy outline on which the government had

already decided.  A second example demonstrating the government
Õs non-statutory influence was the successful government request to AT&T to base
the 3600 Secure Telephone Unit on the Clipper chip instead of an un-

escrowed DES chip (as described in Appendix E).6.2.9  Interagency Agreements Within the Executive Branch
Given that one government agency may have expertise or personnelthat would assist another agency in doing its job better, government agen-
cies often conclude agreements between them that specify the terms and
nature of their cooperative efforts.  In the domain of cryptography policy,

NSAÕs technical expertise in the field has led to memorandums of under-standing with NIST and with the FBI (Appendix N).The memorandum of understanding (MOU) between NIST and NSAoutlines several areas of cooperation between the two agencies that are
intended to implement the Computer Security Act of 1987; joint NIST-
NSA activities are described in Box 6.2.  This MOU has been the subject of

some controversy, with critics believing that the MOU and its implemen-
tation cede too much authority to NSA and defenders believing that the27Office of Management and Budget press release, ÒNational Information InfrastructureSecurity Issues Forum Releases ÔNII Security:  The Federal Role,
ÕÓ Washington, D.C., June
14, 1995.  The subjects of these meetings were 
ÒCommercial Security on the NII,Ó which
focused on the need for intellectual property rights protection in the entertainment, soft-ware, and computer industries; ÒSecurity of Insurance and Financial InformationÓ; ÒSecu-rity of Health and Education InformationÓ; ÒSecurity of the Electronic Delivery of Govern-ment Services and InformationÓ; ÒSecurity for Intelligent Transportation Systems and TradeInformationÓ; and ÒThe NII:  Will It Be There When You Need It?,
Ó addressing the avail-
ability and reliability of the Internet, the public switched telecommunicatins network, andcable, wireless, and satellite communications services.  Available on-line at gopher://
ntiant1.ntia.doc.gov:70/00/iitf/security/files/fedworld.txt.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 6.2Overview of Joint NIST-NSA ActivitiesThe National Security Agency provides technical advice and assistance to theNational Institute of Standards and Technology in accordance with Public Law 100-235, the Computer Security Act of 1987.  An overview of NIST-NSA activities fol-
lows.National conference.  NIST and NSA jointly sponsor, organize, and chair the
prestigious National Computer Security Conference, held yearly for the past 16 years.The conference is attended by over 2,000 people from government and private in-
dustry.Common criteria.  NSA is providing technical assistance to NIST for the devel-
opment of computer security criteria that would be used by both the civilian and
defense sides of the government.  Representatives from Canada and Europe are join-
ing the United States in the development of the criteria.Product evaluations.  NIST and NSA are working together to perform evalua-
tions of computer security products.  In the Trusted Technology Assessment Program,
evaluations of some computer security products will be performed by NIST and itslaboratories, while others will be performed by NSA.  NIST and NSA engineers rou-

tinely exchange information and experiences to ensure uniformity of evaluations.Standards development.  NSA supports NIST in the development of standards
that promote interoperability among security products.  Sample standards include

security protocol standards, digital signature standards, key management standards,and encryption algorithm standards (e.g., the DES, Skipjack).Research and development.  Under the Joint R&D Technology Exchange Pro-
gram, NIST and NSA hold periodic technical exchanges to share information on newand ongoing programs.  Research and development are performed in areas such as
security architectures, labeling standards, privilege management, and identification
and authentication.  Test-bed activities are conducted in areas related to electronic
mail, certificate exchange and management, protocol conformity, and encryptiontechnologies.SOURCE:  National Security Agency, April 1994 (as reprinted in Office of

Technology Assessment, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environ-ments, OTA-TCT-606, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.,September 1994, Box 4-8, p. 165).MOU is faithful to both the spirit and letter of the Computer Security Actof 1987.28The MOU between the FBI and NSA, declassified for the NationalResearch Council, states that the NSA will provide assistance to the FBI
upon request, when the assistance is consistent with NSA policy (includ-28For more discussion of these critical perspectives, see Office of Technology Assessment,Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, 1994, Box 4-8, pp. 164-171.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY237ing protection of sources and methods), and in accordance with certainadministrative requirements.  Furthermore, if the assistance requested is

for the support of an activity that may be conducted only pursuant to a
court order or with the authorization of the Attorney General, the FBI
request to the NSA must include a copy of that order or authorization.In 1995, the National Security Agency, the Advanced Research ProjectsAgency, and the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) signed a

memorandum of agreement (MOA) to coordinate research and develop-
ment efforts in system security.  This MOA provides for the establishment

of the Information Systems Security Research-Joint Technology Office

(ISSR-JTO).  The role of the ISSR-JTO is 
Òto optimize use of the limitedresearch funds available, and strengthen the responsiveness of the pro-
grams to DISA, expediting delivery of technologies that meet DISAÕs re-quirements to safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, and

availability of data in DOD information systems, provide a robust first line

of defense for defensive information warfare, and permit electronic com-
merce between the DOD  and its contractors.
Ó296.3  ORGANIZATION OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
WITH RESPECT TO INFORMATION SECURITY6.3.1  Role of National Security vis-‹-vis
Civilian Information InfrastructuresThe extent to which the traditional national security model is appro-priate for an information infrastructure supporting both civilian and mili-
tary applications is a major point of contention in the public debate.  There

are two schools of thought on this subject:¥The traditional national security model should be applied to thenational information infrastructure, because protecting those networks
also protects services that are essential to the military, and the role of the
defense establishment is indeed to protect important components of the
national infrastructure that private citizens and businesses depend upon.3029See ÒMemorandum of Agreement Between the Advanced Research Projects Agency,the Defense Information Systems Agency, and the National Security Agency Concerning
the Information Systems Security Research-Joint Technology OfficeÓ; MOA effective April2, 1995.  The full text of the MOA is available in Appendix N and on-line at http://
www.ito.darpa.mil/ResearchAreas/Information_Survivability/MOA.html.30For example, the Joint Security Commission recommended that Òpolicy formulation forinformation systems security be consolidated under a joint DoD/DCI security executivecommittee, and that the committee oversee development of a coherent network-oriented
information systems security policy for the DoD and the Intelligence Community that couldalso serve the entire government.Ó  See Joint Security Commission, 
Redefining Security,Washington, D.C., February 28, 1994, p. 107.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY¥The traditional national security model should not be applied tothe national information infrastructure, because the needs of civilian ac-
tivities are so different from those of the military, and the imposition of a
national security model would impose an unacceptable burden on the
civilian sector.  Proponents of this view argue that the traditional national

security model of information securityÑa top-down approach to infor-mation security managementÑwould be very difficult to scale up to ahighly heterogeneous private sector involving hundreds of millions of
people and tens of millions of computers in the United States alone.There is essential unanimity that the world of classified information(both military and nonmilitary) is properly a domain in which the DOD
and NSA can and should exercise considerable influence.  But moving

outside this domain raises many questions that have a high profile in the
public debateÑspecifically, what the DOD and NSA role should be indealing with the following categories of information:1.  Unclassified government information that is military in nature,
2.  Unclassified government information that is nonmilitary in nature,
and3.  Nongovernment information.
To date, policy decisions have been made that give the DOD jurisdic-tion in information security policy for category 1.  For categories 2 and 3,

the debate continues.  It is clear that the security needs for business and

for national security purposes are both similar (Box 6.3) and different
(Box 6.4).  In category 2, the argument is made that DOD and NSA have a

great deal of expertise in protecting information, and that the government
should draw on an enormous historical investment in NSA expertise to
protect all government information.  At the same time, NIST has the

responsibility for protecting such information under the Computer Secu-
rity Act of 1987, with NSAÕs role being one of providing technical assis-tance.  Some commentators believe that NIST has not received resources

adequate to support its role in this area.3131For example, the Office of Technology Assessment stated that Òthe current state ofgovernment security practice for unclassified information has been depressed by the chronicshortage of resources for NISTÕs computer security activities in fulfillment of its govern-ment-wide responsibilities under the Computer Security Act of 1987.  Since enactment of
the Computer Security Act, there has been no serious (i.e., adequately funded and properlystaffed), sustained effort to establish a center of information-security expertise and leader-
ship outside the defense/intelligence communities.Ó  See Office of Technology Assessment,
Issue Update on Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, OTA-BP-ITC-147,U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., June 1995, p. 42.  A similar conclusion
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY239BOX 6.3Similarities in Commercial Security Needs andNational Security Needs¥  Strong aversion to public discussion of security breaches.  Information about
threats is regarded as highly sensitive.  Such a classification makes it very difficult to
conduct effective user education, because security awareness depends on an under-standing of the true scope and nature of a threat.¥  Need to make cost-benefit trade-offs in using security technology.  Neither
party can afford the resources to protect against an arbitrary threat model.¥  Strong preference for self-reliance (government relying on government, in-
dustry relying on industry) to meet security needs.¥  Strong need for high security.  Both government and industry need strong
cryptography with no limitations for certain applications.  However, the best tech-
nology and tools are often reserved for government and military use because com-
mercial deployment cannot be adequately controlled, resulting in opportunities foradversaries to obtain and examine the systems so that they can plan how to exploitthem.¥  Increasing reliance on commercial products in many domains (business,
Third World nations).¥  Increasing scale and sophistication of the security threat for businesses, which
is now approaching that posed by foreign intelligence services and foreign govern-ments.¥  Possibility that exceptional access to encrypted information and data may
become important to commercial entities.In category 3, the same argument is made with respect to non-government information on the grounds that the proper role of govern-
ment is to serve the needs of the entire nation.  A second argument is made

that the military depends critically on nongovernment information infra-
structures (e.g., the public switched telecommunications network) and that
it is essential to protect those networks not just for civilian use but also for
military purposes.  (Note that NSA does not have broad authority to assist

private industry with information security, although it does conduct for
industry, upon request, unclassified briefings related to foreign informa-
tion security threats; NSD 42 (text provided in Appendix N) also gives NSA
was reached by the Board on Assessment of NIST Programs of the National Research Coun-cil, which wrote that Òthe Computer Security Division is severely understaffed andunderfunded given its statutory security responsibilities, the growing national recognitionof the need to protect unclassified but sensitive information, and the unique role the divi-sion can play in fostering security in commercial architectures, hardware, and software.ÓSee Board on Assessment of NIST Programs, National Research Council, An Assessment ofthe National Institute of Standards and Technology, Fiscal Year 1993, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C., 1994, p. 228.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 6.4Differences in Commercial Security Needs andNational Security Needs¥  Business wants market-driven cryptographic technology; government is ap-
prehensive about such technology.  For example, standards are a critical element of
market-driven cryptography.  Market forces and the need to respond to rapidly evolv-
ing dynamic new markets demand an approach to establishing cryptographic stan-dards; businesses want standards for interoperability, and they want to create market
critical mass in order to lower the cost of cryptography.¥  By its nature, the environment of business must include potential adversaries
within its security perimeter.  Commercial enterprises now realize that electronic

delivery of their products and services to their customers will increase.  They must
design systems and processes explicitly so that customers can enter into transactionswith considerable ease.  Business strategies of today empower the customer through

software and technology.  Enterprise networks have value in allowing the maximum
number of people to be attached to the network.  Customers will choose which
enterprise to enter in order to engage in electronic commerce, and making it difficult
for the customer will result in loss of business.  But adversaries masquerading as
customers (or who indeed may be customers themselves) can enter as well.  By
contrast, the traditional national security model keeps potential adversaries outside
the security perimeter, allowing access only to those with a real need.  However, to
the extent that U.S. military forces work in collaboration with forces of other nations,the security perimeter for the military may also become similarly blurred.¥  Business paradigms value teamwork, openness, trust, empowerment, and
speed.  Such values are often difficult to sustain in the national security establish-
ment.  The cultures of the two worlds are different and are reflected in, for example,the unwillingness of business to use multilevel security systems designed for militaryuse.  Such systems failed the market test, although they met Defense Department

criteria for security.¥  National security resources (personnel with cryptographic expertise, funding)
are much larger than the resources in nondefense government sectors and in private
industry and universities.  As a result, a great deal of cryptographic knowledge re-
sides within the world of national security.  Industry wants access to this knowledgeto ensure appropriate use of protocols and strong algorithms, as well as development
of innovative new products and services.¥  National security places considerable emphasis on confidentiality as well as
on authentication and integrity.  Today
Õs commercial enterprises stress authentica-tion of users and data integrity much more than they stress confidentiality (althoughthis balance may shift in the future).  For example, improperly denying a junior
military officer access to a computer facility may not be particularly important in a
military context, whereas improperly denying a customer access to his bank accountbecause of a faulty authentication can pose enormous problems for the bank.¥  While both businesses and national security authorities have an interest in
safeguarding secrets, the tools available to businesses to discourage individuals fromdisclosing secrets (generally civil suits) are less stringent than those available to na-tional security authorities (criminal prosecution).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY241the authority to work with private industry when such work involves na-tional security information systems used by private industry.)6.3.2  Other Government Entities with Influence on
Information SecurityAs noted above, NSA has primary responsibility for information se-curity in the classified domain, while NIST has primary responsibility for
information security in the unclassified domain, but for government in-
formation only.  No organization or entity within the federal government

has the responsibility for promoting information security in the private
sector.32The Security Policy Board (SPB) does have a coordination function.Specifically, the charge of the SPB is to consider, coordinate, and recom-
mend for implementation to the President policy directives for U.S. secu-
rity policies, procedures, and practices, including those related to security
for both classified and unclassified government information.  The SPB is

intended to be the principal mechanism for reviewing and proposing
legislation and executive orders pertaining to security policy, procedures,
and practices.  The Security Policy Advisory Board provides a nongov-

ernmental perspective on security policy initiatives to the SPB and inde-
pendent input on such matters to the President.  The SPB does not have

operational responsibilities.Other entities supported by the federal government have some influ-ence over information security, though little actual policy-making author-
ity.  These include:
¥The Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT).  CERT was formed by
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in November
1988 in response to the needs exhibited during the Internet worm incident.
CERTÕs charge is to work with the Internet community to facilitate its re-sponse to computer security events involving Internet hosts, to take proactive
steps to raise the communityÕs awareness of computer security issues, and toconduct research targeted at improving the security of existing systems.33CERT offers around-the-clock technical assistance for responding to com-
puter security incidents, educates users regarding product vulnerability32This observation was also made in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,National Research Council, Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Information Age
, Na-tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991, a report that proposed an Information Secu-
rity Foundation as the most plausible type of organization to promote information securityin the private sector.33Available on-line at http://www.sei.cmu.edu/technology/cert.faqintro.html.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthrough technical documents and seminars, and provides tools for users to
undertake their own vulnerability analyses.¥The Information Infrastructure Task ForceÕs (IITF) National InformationInfrastructure Security Issues Forum.  The forum is charged with addressing
institutional, legal, and technical issues surrounding security in the NII.
A draft report issued by the forum proposes federal actions to address
these issues.34  The intent of the report, and of the Security Issues Forum
more generally, is to stimulate a dialogue on how the federal government
should cooperate with other levels of government and the private sector
to ensure that participants can trust the NII.  The draft report proposes a

number of security guidelines (proposed NII security tenets), the adop-
tion of Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development security
principles for use on the NII, and a number of federal actions to promote
security.¥The Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board (CSSPAB).CSSPAB was created by the Computer Security Act of 1987 as a statutory
federal public advisory committee.  The law provides that the board shall

identify emerging managerial, technical, administrative, and physical
safeguard issues relative to computer systems security and privacy; ad-
vise the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the secretary
of commerce on security and privacy issues pertaining to federal com-
puter systems; and report its findings to the secretary of commerce, the
directors of the Office of Management and Budget and the National Secu-
rity Agency, and the appropriate committees of the Congress.  The board
Õsscope is limited to federal computer systems or those operated by a con-
tractor on behalf of the federal government and which process sensitive
but unclassified information.  The board
Õs authority does not extend toprivate sector systems, systems that process classified information, or
DOD unclassified systems related to military or intelligence missions as
covered by the Warner Amendment (10 U.S.C. 2315).  The activities of the

board bring it into contact with a broad cross section of the nondefense
agencies and departments; consequently, it often deals with latent policy
considerations and societal consequences of information technology.¥The National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC).
  Established in 1994
by Presidential Decision Directive NSC-24, NACIC is primarily respon-
sible for coordinating national-level counterintelligence activities, and it
reports to the National Security Council.  Operationally, the NACIC works
34Office of Management and Budget press release, ÒNational Information InfrastructureSecurity Issues Forum Releases ÔNII Security:  The Federal Role,
ÕÓ Washington, D.C., June
14, 1995.  Available on-line at gopher://ntiant1.ntia.doc.gov:70/00/iitf/security/files/
fedworld.txt.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY243with private industry through an industry council (consisting of seniorsecurity officials or other senior officials of major U.S. corporations) and
sponsors counterintelligence training and awareness programs, seminars,
and conferences for private industry.  NACIC also produces coordinated

national-level, all-source, foreign intelligence threat assessments to sup-
port private sector entities having responsibility for the protection of clas-
sified, sensitive, or proprietary information, as well as such assessments
for government use.35In addition, a number of private organizations (e.g., trade or profes-sional groups) are active in information security.6.4  INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS OF
CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICYThe cryptography policy of the United States must take into account anumber of international dimensions.  Most importantly, the United States

does not have the unquestioned dominance in the economic, financial,
technological, and political affairs of the world as it might have had at the
end of World War II.  Indeed, the U.S. economy is increasingly inter-

twined with that of other nations.  To the extent that these economically

significant links are based on communications that must be secure, cryp-
tography is one aspect of ensuring such security.  Differing national poli-
cies on cryptography that lead to difficulties in communicating interna-
tionally work against overall national policies that are aimed at opening
markets and reducing commercial and trade barriers.Other nations have the option to maintain some form of export con-trols on cryptography, as well as controls on imports and use of cryptog-
raphy; such controls form part of the context in which U.S. cryptography
policy must be formulated.  Specifically, foreign export control regimes

more liberal than that of the United States have the potential to undercut
U.S. export control efforts to limit the spread of cryptography.  On the

other hand, foreign controls on imports and use of cryptography could
vitiate relaxation of U.S. export control laws; indeed, relaxation of U.S.
export controls laws might well prompt a larger number of nations to
impose additional barriers on the import and use of cryptography within
their borders.  Finally, a number of other nations have no explicit laws

regarding the use of cryptography, but nevertheless have tools at their35National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC), Counterintelligence News and Develop-ments, Issue No. 1, NACIC, Washington, D.C.  This newsletter is available on-line at http://
www. oss.net/oss.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYdisposal to discourage its use; such tools include laws related to the postal,telephone, and telegraph (PTT) system, laws related to content carried by
electronic media, laws related to the protection of domestic industries that
discourage the entry of foreign products, laws related to classification of
patents, and informal arrangements related to licensing of businesses.As a first step in harmonizing cryptography policies across nationalboundaries, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD) held a December 1995 meeting in France among member
nations to discuss how these nations were planning to cope with the
public policy problems posed by cryptography.  What the Paris meeting

made clear is that many OECD member nations are starting to come to
grips with the public policy problems posed by encryption, but that the
dialogue on harmonizing policies across national borders has not yet ma-
tured.  Moreover, national policies are quite fluid at this time, with vari-

ous nations considering different types of regulation regarding the use,
export, and import of cryptography.Appendix G contains more discussion of international issues relevantto national cryptography policy.6.5  RECAP
While export controls and escrowed encryption are fundamental pil-lars of current national cryptography policy, many other aspects of gov-
ernment action also have some bearing on it.  The Communications Assis-

tance for Law Enforcement (Digital Telephony) Act calls attention to the
relationship between access to a communications stream and government
access to the plaintext associated with that digital stream.  The former

problem must be solved (and was solved, by the CALEA, for telephone
communications) before the latter problem is relevant.The government can influence the deployment and use of cryptogra-phy in many ways.  Federal Information Processing Standards often set a

Òbest practiceÓ standard for the private sector, even though they have no
official standing outside government use.  By assuring large-volume sales

when a product is new, government procurement practices can reduce
the cost of preferred cryptography products to the private sector, giving
these products a price advantage over possible competitors.  Policy itself

can be implemented in ways that instill action-inhibiting uncertainty in
the private sector.  Government R&D funding and patents on crypto-

graphic algorithms can narrow technical options to some degree.  Formal

and informal arrangements with various other governments and organi-
zations can promote various policies or types of cooperation.  Product

certification can be used to provide the information necessary for a flour-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER DIMENSIONS OF NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY245ishing free market in products with encryption capabilities.  Convening
authority can help to establish the importance of a topic or approach to
policy.In some ways, the debate over national cryptography policy reflects atension in the role of the national security establishment with respect to
information infrastructures that are increasingly important to civilian use.
In particular, the use of cryptography has been the domain of national
security and foreign policy for most of its history, a history that has led to
a national cryptography policy that today has the effect of discouraging
the use of cryptography in the private sector.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART
 III
Policy Options, Findings,and RecommendationsPART III 
CONSISTS OF TWO CHAPTERS. Chapter 7 considers diverse policy op-tions ranging in scope and scale from large to small. Not every item described in
Chapter 7 has been deemed worthy of adoption by the committee, but the commit-
tee hopes to broaden the publicÕs understanding of crytography policy by discuss-
ing ideas that at least have the support of respectable and responsible elements of
the various stakeholding communities.Chapter 8 is a synthesizing chapter that brings together threads of the previ-ous seven chapters and presents the committeeÕs findings and recommendations.247Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2497Policy Options for the Future
Current national cryptography policy defines only one point in thespace of possible policy options.  A major difficulty in the public debate

over cryptography policy has been incomplete explanation of why the
government has rejected certain policy options.  Chapter 7 explores a

number of possible alternatives to current national cryptography policy,
selected by the committee either because they address an important di-
mension of national cryptography policy or because they have been raised
by a particular set of stakeholders.  Although in the committeeÕs judg-

ment these alternatives deserve analysis, it does not follow that they nec-
essarily deserve consideration for adoption.  The committeeÕs judgments

about appropriate policy options are discussed in Chapter 8.7.1  EXPORT CONTROL OPTIONS FOR CRYPTOGRAPHY
7.1.1  Dimensions of Choice for Controlling the
Export of CryptographyAn export control regimeÑa set of laws and regulations governingwhat may or may not be exported under any specified set of circum-
stancesÑhas many dimensions that can be considered independently.
These dimensions include:¥The type of export license granted.  Three types of export licenses are
available:ÑA general license, under which export of an item does not in gen-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYeral require prior government approval but nonetheless is tracked underan export declaration;ÑA special license, under which prior government approval is re-quired but which allows multiple and continuing transactions under one
license validation; andÑAn individual license, under which prior government approval isrequired for each and every transaction.As a general rule, only individual licenses are granted for the exportof items on the U.S. Munitions List, which includes ÒstrongÓ cryptogra-
phy.1¥The strength of a productÕs cryptographic capabilities.  Current policy
recognizes the difference between RC2/RC4 algorithms using 40-bit keys
and other types of cryptography, and places fewer and less severe restric-
tions on the former.¥The default encryption settings on the delivered product.  Encryption
can be tacitly discouraged, but not forbidden, by the use of appropriate
settings.2¥The type of product.  Many different types of products can incorpo-
rate encryption capabilities.  Products can be distinguished by medium

(e.g., hardware vs. software) and/or intended function (e.g., computer vs.
communications).¥The extent and nature of features that allow exceptional access.  The
Administration has suggested that it would permit the export of encryp-
tion software with key lengths of 64 bits or less if the keys were Òproperlyescrowed.Ó3  Thus, inclusion in a product of a feature for exceptional
access could be made one condition for allowing the export of that prod-
uct.  In addition, the existence of specific institutional arrangements (e.g.,
which specific parties would hold the information needed to implement
exceptional access) might be made a condition for the export of these
products.¥The ultimate destination or intended use of the delivered product.  U.S.
1However, as noted in Chapter 4, the current export control regime for cryptographyinvolves a number of categorical exemptions as well as some uncodified Òin-practiceÓ ex-
emptions.2Software, and even software-driven devices, commonly have operational parametersthat can be selected or set by a user.  An example is the fax machine that allows many user
choices to be selected by keyboard actions.  The parameters chosen by a manufacturer

before it ships a product are referred to as the ÒdefaultsÓ or 
Òdefault condition.Ó  Users are
generally able to alter such parameters at will.3At the time of this writing, the precise definition of Òproperly escrowedÓ is under debate
and review in the Administration.  The most recent language on this definition as of De-
cember 1995 is provided in Chapter 5.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE251export controls have long distinguished between exports to ÒfriendlyÓand ÒhostileÓ nations.  In addition, licenses have been granted for the sale
of certain controlled products only when a particular benign use (e.g.,
financial transactions) could be certified.  A related consideration is the

extent to which nations cooperate with respect to re-export of a controlled
product and/or export of their own products.  For example, CoCom mem-

ber nations4 in principle agreed to joint controls on the export of certain
products to the Eastern bloc; as a result, certain products could be ex-
ported to CoCom member nations much more easily than to other na-
tions.At present, there are few clear guidelines that enable vendors to designa product that will have a high degree of assurance of being exportable
(Chapters 4 and 6).  Table 7.1 describes various mechanisms that might be

used to manage the export of products with encryption capabilities.This remainder of Section 7.1 describes a number of options for con-trolling the export of cryptography, ranging from the sweeping to the
detailed.7.1.2  Complete Elimination of Export Controls on Cryptography
The complete elimination of export controls (both the USML and theCommerce Control List controls) on cryptography is a proposal that goes
beyond most made to date, although certainly such a position has advo-
cates.  If export controls on cryptography were completely eliminated, it

is possible that within a short time most information technology products
exported from the United States would have encryption capabilities.  It

would be difficult for the U.S. government to influence the capabilities of
these products, or even to monitor their deployment and use worldwide,
because numerous vendors would most probably be involved.Note, however, that the simple elimination of U.S. export controls oncryptography does not address the fact that other nations may have im-
port controls and/or restrictions on the use of cryptography internally.
Furthermore, it takes time to incorporate products into existing infra-
structures, and slow market growth may encourage some vendors to take
their time in developing new products.  Thus, simply eliminating U.S.

export controls on cryptography would not ensure markets abroad for
U.S. products with encryption capabilities; indeed, the elimination of U.S.4CoCom refers to the Coordinating Committee, a group of Western nations (and Japan)that agreed to a common set of export control practices during the Cold War to control theexport of militarily useful technologies to Eastern bloc nations.  CoCom was disbanded in
March 1994, and a successor regime known as the New Forum is being negotiated as this
report is being written.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYTotal embargoSelective exportprohibitionsSelective activityprohibitionsTransactionallicensingAll or most exports of cryptography to target country prohibited (this wouldbe more restrictive than todayÕs regime).  Hypothetical example: no
products with encryption capabilities can be exported to Vietnam, Libya,Iraq, Iran.Certain products with encryption capabilities barred for export to targetcountry.  Hypothetical example:  nothing cryptographically stronger than
40-bit RC4 can be exported to South Africa.Exports of cryptography for use in particular activities in target countryprohibited.  Hypothetical example:  PGP allowed for export to pro-

democracy groups in PeopleÕs Republic of China but not for government use.Products with encryption capabilities require government agency licensingfor export to a particular country or country group.  Hypothetical example:
State Department individual validated license for a DES encryption
product.  Licensing actions may be conditioned on end-use verification or
postexport verification.Appropriate during wartime orother acute national emergencyor when imposed pursuant to
United Nations or other broadinternational effort.Appropriate when suppliercountries agree on items fordenial and cooperate on
restrictions.Appropriate when suppliercountries identify proscribedoperations and agree tocooperate on restrictions.Appropriate when product isinherently sensitive for export
to any destination, or whenitems have both acceptable andundesired potential
applications.  Also requires an
effective multilateral controlregime.TABLE 7.1Mechanisms of Export Management
TypeDescription
When AppropriateCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE253Bulk licensingPreexportnotificationConditions ongeneral authority
or right to exportPostexportrecordkeepingExporter obtains government authority to export categories of products withencryption capabilities to particular consignees for a specified time period.Hypothetical examples:  Commerce Department distribution license, ITAR
foreign manufacturing license.  Note that categories can be determined

with considerable freedom.  Enforcement may rely on after-the-fact audits.
Exporter must prenotify shipment; government agency may prohibit, imposeconditions, or exercise persuasion.  Hypothetical example:  requirement
imposed on vendors of products with encryption capabilities to notify theU.S. government prior to shipping product overseas.Exporter not required to obtain government agency license but must meetregulatory conditions that preclude high-risk exports.  (In general, 40-bit
RC2/RC4 encryption falls into this category once the CommodityJurisdiction procedure has determined that a particular product with
encryption capabilities may be governed by the CCL.  Hypothetical
example:  Commerce Department general licenses.
While no license may be necessary, exporter must keep records of particularsof exports for specified period and submit or make available to governmentagency.  Hypothetical example:  vendor is required to keep records of

foreign sales of 40-bit RC2/RC4 encryption products under a ShippersExport Declaration.Same as precedingcircumstances, but whenspecific transaction facts are
not critical to effective exportcontrol.Generally regarded as aninappropriate export controlmeasure because exporter
cannot accept last-minuteuncertainty.Appropriate when risk ofdiversion or undesired use islow.Appropriate when it is possibleto monitor exports of weak
cryptography for possiblediversion.SOURCE:  Adapted from National Research Council, 
Finding Common Ground:  U.S. Export Controls in a Changed Global Environment,
 National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1990, p. 109.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYexport controls could in itself stimulate foreign nations to impose importcontrols more stringently.  Appendix G contains more discussion of these

issues.The worldwide removal of all controls on the export, import, and useof products with encryption capabilities would likely result in greater
standardization of encryption techniques.  Standardization brought about

in this manner would result in:¥Higher degrees of international interoperability of these products;¥Broader use, or at least more rapid spread, of encryption capabili-ties as the result of the strong distribution capabilities of U.S. firms;¥Higher levels of confidentiality, as a result of greater ease in adopt-ing more powerful algorithms and longer keys as standards; and¥Greater use of cryptography by hostile, criminal, and unfriendlyparties as they, too, begin to use commercial products with strong encryp-
tion capabilities.On the other hand, rapid, large-scale standardization would be un-likely unless a few integrated software products with encryption capabili-
ties were able to achieve worldwide usage very quickly.  Consider, for

example, that although there are no restrictions on domestic use of cryp-
tography in the United States, interoperability is still difficult, in many
cases owing to variability in the systems in which the cryptography is
embedded.  Likewise, many algorithms stronger than DES are well

known, and there are no restrictions in place on the domestic use of such
algorithms, and yet only DES even remotely approaches common usage
(and not all DES-based applications are interoperable).For reasons well articulated by the national security and law enforce-ment communities (see Chapter 3) and accepted by the committee, the
complete elimination of export controls on products with encryption ca-
pabilities does not seem reasonable in the short term.  Whether export

controls will remain feasible and efficacious in the long term has yet to be
seen, although clearly, maintaining even their current level of effective-
ness will become increasingly difficult.7.1.3  Transfer of All Cryptography Products to the
Commerce Control ListAs discussed in Chapter 4, the Commerce Control List (CCL) comple-ments the U.S. Munitions List (USML) in controlling the export of cryp-
tography.  (Box 4.2 in Chapter 4 describes the primary difference between

the USML and the CCL.)  In 1994, Representative Maria Cantwell (D-

Washington) introduced legislation to transfer all mass-market software
products involving cryptographic functions to the CCL.  Although this
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE255legislation never passed, it resulted in the promise and subsequent deliv-ery of an executive branch report on the international market for com-
puter software with encryption.5The Cantwell bill was strongly supported by the software industrybecause of the liberal consideration afforded products controlled for ex-
port by the CCL.  Many of the bill
Õs advocates believed that a transfer ofjurisdiction to the Commerce Department would reflect an explicit recog-
nition of cryptography as a commercial technology that should be admin-
istered under a dual-use export control regime.  Compared to the USML,
they argued that the CCL is a more balanced regime that still has consid-
erable effectiveness in limiting exports to target destinations and end
users.On the other hand, national security officials regard the broad au-thorities of the Arms Export Control Act (AECA) as essential to the effec-
tive control of encryption exports.  The AECA provides authority for

case-by-case regulation of exports of cryptography to all destinations,
based on national security considerations.  In particular, licensing deci-

sions are not governed by factors such as the country of destination, end
users, end uses, or the existence of bilateral or multilateral agreements
that often limit the range of discretionary action possible in controlling
exports pursuant to the Export Administration Act.  Further, the national

security provisions of the AECA provide a basis for classifying the spe-
cific rationale for any particular export licensing decision made under its
authority, thus protecting what may be very sensitive information about
the particular circumstances surrounding that decision.Although sympathetic to the Cantwell billÕs underlying rationale, thecommittee believes that the bill does not address the basic dilemma of
cryptography policy.  As acknowledged by some of the bill
Õs supporters,transfer of a productÕs jurisdiction to the CCL does not mean automaticdecontrol of the product, and national security authorities could still have
considerable input into how exports are actually licensed.  In general, the

committee believes that the idea of split jurisdiction, in which some types
of cryptography are controlled under the CCL and others under the
USML, makes considerable sense given the various national security im-
plications of widespread use of encryption.  However, where the split

should be made is a matter of discussion; the committee expresses its own
judgments on this point in Chapter 8.5Department of Commerce and National Security Agency, A Study of the InternationalMarket for Computer Software with Encryption, prepared for the Interagency Working Groupon Encryption and Telecommunications Policy, Office of the Secretary of Commerce, re-leased January 11, 1996.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY7.1.4  End-use Certification
Explicitly exempted under the current International Traffic in ArmsRegulations (ITAR) is the export of cryptography for ensuring the confi-
dentiality of financial transactions, specifically for cryptographic equip-
ment and software that are Òspecially designed, developed or modifiedfor use in machines for banking or money transactions, and restricted to
use only in such transactions.Ó6  In addition, according to senior National
Security Agency (NSA) officials, cryptographic systems, equipment, and
software are in general freely exportable for use by U.S.-controlled for-
eign companies and to banking and financial institutions for purposes
other than financial transactions, although NSA regards these approvals
as part of the case-by-case review associated with equipment and prod-
ucts that do not enjoy an explicit exemption in the ITAR.In principle, the ITAR could explicitly exempt products with encryp-tion capabilities for use by foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies, foreign
companies that are U.S.-controlled, and banking and financial institu-
tions.  Explicit 
ÒverticalÓ exemptions for these categories could do much
to alleviate confusion among users, many of whom are currently uncer-
tain about what cryptographic protection they may be able to use in their
international communications, and could enable vendors to make better
informed judgments about the size of a given market.Specific vertical exemptions could also be made for different indus-tries (e.g., health care or manufacturing) and perhaps for large foreign-
owned companies that would be both the largest potential customers and
the parties most likely to be responsible corporate citizens.  Inhibiting the

diversion to other uses of products with encryption capabilities sold to
these companies could be the focus of explicit contractual language bind-
ing the recipient to abide by certain terms that would be required of any
vendor as a condition of sale to a foreign company, as it is today under
USML procedures under the ITAR.  Enforcement of end-use restrictions is

discussed in Chapter 4.7.1.5  Nation-by-Nation Relaxation of Controls and
Harmonization of U.S. Export Control Policy on Cryptographywith Export/Import Policies of Other NationsThe United States could give liberal export consideration to productswith encryption capabilities intended for sale to recipients in a select set
of nations;7 exports to nations outside this set would be restricted.  Na-
6International Traffic in Arms Regulations, Section 121.1, Category XIII (b)(1)(ii).7For example, products with encryption capabilities can be exported freely to Canadawithout the need of a USML export license if intended for domestic Canadian use.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE257tions in the select set would be expected to have a more or less uniform setof regulations to control the export of cryptography, resulting in a more
level playing field for U.S. vendors.  In addition, agreements would be

needed to control the re-export of products with encryption capabilities
outside this set of nations.Nation-by-nation relaxation of controls is consistent with the fact thatdifferent countries generally receive different treatment under the U.S.
export control regime for military hardware.  For example, exports of U.S.

military hardware have been forbidden to some countries because they
were terrorist nations, and to others because they failed to sign the nuclear
nonproliferation treaty.  A harmonization of export control regimes for

cryptography would more closely resemble the former CoCom approach
to control dual-use items than the approach reflected in the unilateral
controls on exports imposed by the USML.From the standpoint of U.S. national security and foreign policy, aserious problem with harmonization is the fact that the relationship be-
tween the United States and almost all other nations has elements of both
competition and cooperation that may change over time.  The widespread

use of U.S. products with strong encryption capabilities under some cir-
cumstances could compromise U.S. positions with respect to these com-
petitive elements, although many of these nations are unlikely to use U.S.
products with encryption capabilities for their most sensitive communi-
cations.Finally, as is true for other proposals to liberalize U.S. export controlson cryptography, greater liberalization may well cause some other na-
tions to impose import controls where they do not otherwise exist.  Such

an outcome would shift the onus for impeding vendor interests away
from the U.S. government; however, depending on the nature of the re-
sulting import controls, U.S. vendors of information technology products
with encryption capabilities might be faced with the need to conform to a
multiplicity of import control regimes established by different nations.7.1.6  Liberal Export for Strong Cryptography with Weak Defaults
An export control regime could grant liberal export consideration toproducts with encryption capabilities designed in such a way that the
defaults for usage result in weak or nonexistent encryption (Box 7.1), but
also so that users could invoke options for stronger encryption through
an affirmative action.For example, such a product might be a telephone designed for end-to-end security.  The default mode of operation could be set in two differ-

ent ways.  One way would be for the telephone to establish a secure

connection if the called party has a comparable unit.  The second way
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 7.1Possible Examples of Weak Encryption Defaults¥  The product does not specify a minimum password length.  Many users will
generate short, and thus poor or weak, passwords.¥  The product does not perform link encryption automatically.  The user on
either side of the communication link must select an option explicitly to encrypt thecommunications before encryption happens.¥  The product requires user key generation rather than simple passwords and
retains a user key or generates a record of one.  Users might well accidentally com-
promise it and make it available, even if they had the option to delete it.¥  The product generates a key and instructs the user to register it.
¥  E-mail encryption is not automatic.  The sender must explicitly select an en-
cryption option to encrypt messages.would be for the telephone always to establish an insecure connection;establishing a secure connection would require an explicit action by the
user.  All experience suggests that the second way would result in far

fewer secure calls than the first way.8An export policy favoring the export of encryption products withweak defaults benefits the information-gathering needs of law enforce-
ment and signals intelligence efforts because of user psychology.  Many

people, criminals and foreign government workers included, often make
mistakes by using products Òout of the boxÓ without any particular at-
tempt to configure them properly.  Such a policy could also take advan-

tage of the distribution mechanisms of the U.S. software industry to

spread weaker defaults.Experience to date suggests that good implementations of cryptogra-phy for confidentiality are transparent and automatic and thus do not
require positive user action.  Such implementations are likely to be chosen

by organizations that are most concerned about confidentiality and that
have a staff dedicated to ensuring confidentiality (e.g., by resetting weak
vendor-supplied defaults).  End users that obtain their products with

encryption capabilities on the retail store market are the most likely to be
affected by this proposal, but such users constitute a relatively small part
of the overall market.8Of course, other techniques can be used to further discourage the use of secure modes.For example, the telephone could be designed to force the user to wait several seconds forestablishment of the secure mode.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE2597.1.7  Liberal Export for Cryptographic Applications
Programming InterfacesA cryptographic applications programming interface (CAPI; see Ap-pendix K) is a well-defined boundary between a baseline product (such as
an operating system, a database management program, or a word pro-
cessing program) and a cryptography module that provides a secure set
of cryptographic services such as authentication, digital signature genera-
tion, random number generation, and stream or block mode encryption.
The use of a CAPI allows vendors to support cryptographic functions in
their products without actually providing them at distribution.Even though such products have no cryptographic functionality per seand are therefore not specifically included in Category XIII of the ITAR (see
Appendix N), license applications for the export of products incorporating
CAPIs have in general been denied.  The reason is that strong crypto-

graphic capabilities could be deployed on a vast scale if U.S. vendors ex-
ported applications supporting a common CAPI and a foreign vendor then
marketed an add-in module with strong encryption capabilities.9To meet the goals of less restrictive export controls, liberal exportconsideration could be given to products that incorporate a CAPI de-
signed so that only ÒcertifiedÓ cryptographic modules could be incorpo-
rated into and used by the application.  That is, the application with the

CAPI would have to ensure that the CAPI would work only with certified
cryptographic modules.  This could be accomplished by incorporating

into the application a check for a digital signature whose presence would
indicate that the add-on cryptographic module was indeed certified; if
and only if such a signature were detected by the CAPI would the prod-
uct allow use of the module.One instantiation of a CAPI is the CAPI built into applications thatuse the Fortezza card (discussed in Chapter 5).  CAPI software for Fortezza

is available for a variety of operating systems and PC-card reader types;
such software incorporates a check to ensure that the device being used is
itself a Fortezza card.  The Fortezza card contains a private Digital Signa-
ture Standard (DSS) key that can be used to sign a challenge from the
workstation.  The corresponding DSS public key is made available in the
9This discussion refers only to ÒdocumentedÓ or 
ÒopenÓ CAPIs, i.e., CAPIs that are acces-
sible to the end user.  Another kind of CAPI is 
ÒundocumentedÓ and 
ÒclosedÓ; that is, it isinaccessible to the end user, though it is used by system developers for their own conve-nience.  While a history of export licensing decisions and practices supports the conclusion

that most products implementing ÒopenÓ CAPIs will not receive export licenses, history
provides no consistent guidance with respect to products implementing CAPIs that areinaccessible to the end user.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 7.2The Microsoft CryptoAPIIn June 1995, Microsoft received commodity jurisdiction (CJ) to the CommerceControl List (CCL) for Windows NT with CryptoAPI (a Microsoft trademark) plus aÒbaseÓ crypto-module that qualifies for CCL jurisdiction under present regulations
(i.e., it uses a 40-bit RC4 algorithm for confidentiality); a similar CJ application forWindows Õ95 is pending.  The 
ÒbaseÓ crypto-module can be supplemented by a
crypto-module provided by some other vendor of cryptography, but the cryptograph-
ic applications programming interface within the operating system will function onlywith crypto-modules that have been digitally signed by Microsoft, which will pro-vide a digital signature for a crypto-module only if the crypto-module vendor certi-
fies that it (the module vendor) will comply with all relevant U.S. export controlregulations.  (In the case of a crypto-module for sale in the United States only, Mi-
crosoft will provide a digital signature upon the module vendorÕs statement to thateffect.)Responsibility for complying with export control regulations on cryptography isas follows:¥  Windows NT (and Windows 
Õ95, should the pending application be success-ful) qualify for CCL jurisdiction on the basis of a State Department export licensingdecision.¥  Individual crypto-modules are subject to a case-by-case licensing analysis, and
the cryptography vendor is responsible for compliance.¥  Applications that use Windows NT or Windows 
Õ95 for cryptographic servicesshould not be subject to export control regulations on cryptography. At the time of thiswriting, Microsoft is seeking an advisory opinion to this effect so that applicationsvendors do not need to submit a request for a CJ cryptography licensing decision.CAPI, and thus the CAPI is able to verify the authenticity of the Fortezzacard.A second approach to the use of a CAPI has been proposed byMicrosoft and is now eligible for liberal export consideration by the State
Department (Box 7.2).  The Microsoft approach involves three compo-

nents: an operating system with a CAPI embedded within it, modules
providing cryptographic services through the CAPI, and applications that
can call on the modules through the CAPI provided by the operating
system.  In principle, each of these components is the responsibility of

different parties: Microsoft is responsible for the operating system, cryp-
tography vendors are responsible for the modules, and independent ap-
plications vendors are responsible for the applications that run on the
operating system.From the standpoint of national security authorities, the effectivenessof an approach based on the use of a certified CAPI/module combination
depends on a number of factors.  For example, the product incorporatingCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE261the CAPI should be known to be implemented in a manner that enforcesthe appropriate constraints on crypto-modules that it calls; furthermore,
the code that provides such enforcement should not be trivially bypassed.
The party certifying the crypto-module should protect the private signa-
ture key used to sign it.  Vendors would still be required to support

domestic and exportable versions of an application if the domestic ver-
sion was allowed to use any module while the export version was re-
stricted in the set of modules that would be accepted, although the amount
of effort required to develop these two different versions would be quite
small.The use of CAPIs that check for appropriate digital signatures wouldshift the burden for export control from the applications or systems ven-
dors to the vendors of the cryptographic modules.  This shift could ben-

efit both the government and vendors because of the potential to reduce
the number of players engaged in the process.  For example, all of the

hundreds of e-mail applications on the market could quickly support
encrypted e-mail by supporting a CAPI developed by a handful of soft-
ware and/or hardware cryptography vendors.  The cryptography ven-

dors would be responsible for dealing with the export and import con-
trols of various countries, leaving e-mail application vendors to export
freely anywhere in the world.  Capabilities such as escrowed encryption

could be supported within the cryptography module itself, freeing the
applications or system vendor from most technical, operational, and po-
litical issues related to export control.A trustworthy CAPI would also help to support cryptography poli-cies that might differ among nations.  In particular, a given nation might

specify certain performance requirements for all cryptography modules
used or purchased within its borders.10  International interoperability
10An approach to this effect is the thrust of a proposal from Hewlett-Packard.  The
Hewlett-Packard International Cryptography Framework (ICF) proposal includes a stamp
size Òpolicy cardÓ (smart card) that would be inserted into a cryptographic unit that is a
part of a host system.  Cryptographic functions provided within the cryptographic unit
could be executed only with the presence of a valid policy card.  The policy card could be

configured to enable only those cryptographic functions that are consistent with govern-ment export and local policies. The Òpolicy cardÓ allows for managing the use of the inte-
grated cryptography down to the application-specific level.  By obtaining a new policy

card, customers could be upgraded to take advantage of varying cryptographic capabilitiesas government policies or organizational needs change.  As part of an ICF solution, a net-
work security server could be implemented to provide a range of different security ser-
vices, including verification of the other three service elements (the card, the host system,the cryptographic unit).  Sources:  Carl Snyder, Hewlett-Packard, testimony to the NRC
committee in February 1995; Hewlett-Packard, International Cryptography Framework WhitePaper, February 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYproblems resulting from conflicting national cryptography policies wouldstill remain.7.1.8  Liberal Export for Escrowable Products with
Encryption CapabilitiesAs discussed in Chapter 5, the AdministrationÕs proposal of August17, 1995, would allow liberal export consideration for software products
with encryption capabilities whose keys are Òproperly escrowed.Ó  In
other words, strong cryptography would be enabled for these products
only when the keys were escrowed with appropriate escrow agents.An escrowed encryption product differs from what might be calledan ÒescrowableÓ product.  Specifically, an escrowed encryption product
is one whose key must be escrowed with a registered, approved agentbefore the use of (strong) cryptography can be enabled, whereas an
escrowable product is one that provides full cryptographic functionality
that includes optional escrow features for the user.  The user of an

escrowable product can choose whether or not to escrow the relevant
keys, but regardless of the choice, the product still provides its full suite of
encryption capabilities.11Liberal export consideration for escrowable products could be grantedand incentives promulgated to encourage the use of escrow features.
While the short-term disadvantage of this approach from the standpoint
of U.S. national security is that it allows encryption stronger than the
current 40-bit RC2/RC4 encryption allowed under present regulations to
diffuse into foreign hands, it has the long-term advantage of providing
foreign governments with a tool for influencing or regulating the use of
cryptography as they see fit.  Currently, most products with encryption

capabilities do not have built-in features to support escrow built into
them.  However, if products were designed and exported with such fea-

tures, governments would have a hook for exercising some influence.
Some governments might choose to require the escrowing of keys, while
others might simply provide incentives to encourage escrowing.  In any

event, the diffusion of escrowable products abroad would raise the aware-
ness of foreign governments, businesses, and individuals about encryp-
tion and thus lay a foundation for international cooperation on the formu-
lation of national cryptography policies.11For example, an escrowable product would not enable the user to encrypt files withpasswords.  Rather, the installation of the product would require the user to create a key orset of named keys, and these keys would be used when encrypting files.  The installation

would also generate a protected Òsafe copyÓ of the keys with instructions to users that they
should register the key Òsomewhere.Ó  It would be up to the users to decide where or
whether to register the keys.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE2637.1.9  Alternatives to Government Certification
of Escrow Agents AbroadAs discussed in Chapter 5, the AdministrationÕs August 1995 proposalfocuses on an implementation of escrowed encryption that involves the use
of Òescrow agents certified by the U.S. government or by foreign govern-ments with which the U.S. government has formal agreements consistent
with U.S. law enforcement and national security requirements.Ó12  This
approach requires foreign customers of U.S. escrowed encryption products
to use U.S. escrow agents until formal agreements can be negotiated that
specify the responsibilities of foreign escrow agents to the United States for
law enforcement and national security purposes.Skeptics ask what incentives the U.S. government would have to con-clude the formal agreements described in the August 1995 proposal if
U.S. escrow agents would, by default, be the escrow agents for foreign
consumers.  They believe that the most likely result of adopting the

AdministrationÕs proposal would be U.S. foot-dragging and inordinatedelays in the consummation of formal agreements for certifying foreign
escrow agents.  Appendix G describes some of the U.S. government ef-

forts to date to promote a dialogue on such agreements.The approaches described below address problems raised by certify-ing foreign escrow agents:¥Informal arrangements for cooperation.  One alternative is based on
the fact that the United States enjoys strong cooperative law enforcement
relationships with many nations with which it does not have formal agree-

ments regarding cooperation.  Negotiation of a formal agreement be-

tween the United States and another nation could be replaced by presi-
dential certification that strong cooperative law enforcement relationships
exist between the United States and that nation.  Subsequent cooperation
would be undertaken on the same basis that cooperation is offered today.¥Contractual key escrow.  A second alternative is based on the idea
that formal agreements between nations governing exchange of escrowed
key information might be replaced by private contractual arrangements.13A user that escrows key information with an escrow agent, wherever that
agent is located, would agree contractually that the U.S. government
would have access to that information under a certain set of carefully
specified circumstances.  A suitably designed exportable product would

provide strong encryption only upon receipt of affirmative confirmation
that the relevant key information had been deposited with escrow agents
requiring such contracts with users.  Alternatively, as a condition of sale,
12See Box 5.3, Chapter 5.13Henry Perritt, ÒTransnational Key Escrow,Ó paper presented at the International Cryp-
tography Institute 1995 conference, Washington, D.C., September 22, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYend users could be required to deposit keys with escrow agents subject tosuch a contractual requirement.7.1.10  Use of Differential Work Factors in Cryptography
Differential work factor cryptography is an approach to cryptogra-phy that presents different work factors to different parties attempting to
cryptanalyze a given piece of encrypted information.14  Iris Associates,
the creator of Notes, proposed such an approach for Lotus Notes Version
4 to facilitate its export, and the U.S. government has accepted it.  Specifi-

cally, the international edition of Lotus Notes Version 4 is designed to
present a 40-bit work factor to the U.S. government and a 64-bit work
factor to all other parties.  It implements this differential work factor by

encrypting 24 bits of the 64-bit key with the public-key portion of an RSA
key pair held by the U.S. government.  Because the U.S. government can

easily decrypt these 24 bits, it faces only a 40-bit work factor when it needs
access to a communications stream overseas encrypted by the interna-
tional edition. All other parties attempting to cryptanalyze a message face
a 64-bit work factor.Differential work factor cryptography is similar to partial key escrow(described in Chapter 5) in that both provide very strong protection
against most attackers but are vulnerable to attack by some specifically
chosen authority.  However, they are different in that differential work

factor cryptography does not require user interaction with an escrow
agent, and so it can offer strong cryptography Òout of the box.Ó  Partial
key escrow offers all of the strengths and weaknesses of escrowed encryp-
tion, including the requirement that the enabling of strong cryptography
does require interaction with an escrow agent.7.1.11  Separation of Cryptography from
Other Items on the U.S. Munitions ListAs noted in Chapter 4, the inclusion of products with encryptioncapabilities on the USML puts them on a par with products intended for
strictly military purposes (e.g., tanks, missiles).  An export control regime

that authorized the U.S. government to separate cryptographyÑa truedual-use technologyÑfrom strictly military items would provide muchneeded flexibility in dealing with nations on which the United States
wishes to place sanctions.14Recall from Chapter 2 that a work factor is a measure of the amount of work that ittakes to undertake a brute-force exhaustive cryptanalytic search.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE2657.2  ALTERNATIVES FOR PROVIDING GOVERNMENT
EXCEPTIONAL ACCESS TO ENCRYPTED DATAProviding government exceptional access to encrypted data is an is-sue with a number of dimensions, only some of which relate directly to
encryption.7.2.1  A Prohibition on the Use and Sale of Cryptography
Lacking Features for Exceptional AccessOne obvious approach to ensuring government exceptional access toencrypted information is to pass legislation that forbids the use of cryptog-
raphy lacking features for such access, presumably with criminal penalties
attached for violation.  (Given that escrowed cryptography appears to be

the most plausible approach to providing government exceptional access,
the term Òunescrowed cryptographyÓ is used here as a synonym for cryp-
tography without features for exceptional access.)  Indeed, opponents of

the Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES) and the Clipper chip have argued
repeatedly that the EES approach would succeed only if alternatives were
banned.15  Many concerns have been raised about the prospect of a manda-
tory prohibition on the use of unescrowed cryptography.From a law enforcement standpoint, a legislative prohibition on theuse of unescrowed encryption would have clear advantages.  Its primary
impact would be to eliminate the commercial supply of unescrowed prod-
ucts with encryption capabilitiesÑvendors without a market would mostlikely not produce or distribute such products, thus limiting access of
criminals to unescrowed encryption and increasing the inconvenience of
evading a prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryption.  At the same
time, such a prohibition would leave law-abiding users with strong con-
cerns about the confidentiality of their information being subject to proce-
dures beyond their control.A legislative prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryption alsoraises specific technical, economic, and legal issues.Concerns About Personal FreedomThe Clinton Administration has stated that it has no intention of out-lawing unescrowed cryptography, and it has repeatedly and explicitly
disavowed any intent to regulate the domestic use of cryptography.  How-
15For example, see Electronic Privacy Information Center, press release, August 16, 1995,available on-line at http://www.epic.org.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYever, no administration can bind future administrations (a fact freely ac-knowledged by administration officials).  Thus, some critics of the Ad-

ministration position believe that the dynamics of the encryption problem
may well drive the governmentÑsooner or laterÑto prohibit the use ofencryption without government access.16  The result is that the Adminis-
tration is simply not believed when it forswears any intent to regulate
cryptography used in the United States.  Two related concerns are raised:
¥The Òslippery slope.Ó  Many skeptics fear that current cryptography
policy is the first step down a slippery slope toward a more restrictive
policy regime under which government may not continue to respect lim-
its in place at the outset.  An oft-cited example is current use of the Social
Security Number, which was not originally intended to serve as a univer-
sal identifier when the Social Security Act was passed in 1935 but has,
over the last 50 years, come to serve exactly that role by default, simply
because it was there to be exploited for purposes not originally intended
by the enabling legislation.¥Misuse of deployed infrastructure for cryptography.  Many skeptics are
concerned that a widely deployed infrastructure for cryptography could
be used by a future administration or Congress to promulgate and/or
enforce restrictive policies regarding the use of cryptography.  With such
an infrastructure in place, critics argue that a simple policy change might
be able to transform a comparatively benign deployment of technology
into an oppressive one.  For example, critics of the Clipper proposal were

concerned about the possibility that a secure telephone system with gov-
ernment exceptional access capabilities could, under a strictly voluntary
program to encourage its purchase and use, achieve moderate market
penetration.  Such market penetration could then facilitate legislation out-

lawing all other cryptographically secure telephones.1716For example, Senator Charles Grassley (R-Iowa) introduced legislation (The Anti-Elec-tronic Racketeering Act of 1995) on June 27, 1995, to Òprohibit certain acts involving the useof computers in the furtherance of crimes.Ó  The proposed legislation makes it unlawful Òtodistribute computer software that encodes or encrypts electronic or digital communicationsto computer networks that the person distributing the software knows or reasonably should
know, is accessible to foreign nationals and foreign governments, regardless of whethersuch software has been designated as nonexportable,Ó except for software that uses 
Òauniversal decoding device or program that was provided to the Department of Justice prior
to the distribution.Ó17By contrast, a deployed infrastructure could have characteristics that would make itquite difficult to implement policy changes on a short time scale.  For example, it would be

very difficult to implement a policy change that would change the nature of the way inwhich people use todayÕs telephone system.  Not surprisingly, policy makers would prefer
to work with infrastructures that are quickly responsive to their policy preferences.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE267BOX 7.3Bobby Inman on the Classification of Cryptologic ResearchIn 1982, then-Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency Bobby R. In-man wrote that[a] . . . source of tension arises when scientists, completely separate from thefederal government, conduct research in areas where the federal governmenthas an obvious and preeminent role for society as a whole.  One example is

the design of advanced weapons, especially nuclear ones.  Another is cryp-
tography.  While nuclear weapons and cryptography are heavily dependent
on theoretical mathematics, there is no public business market for nuclear
weapons.  Such a market, however, does exist for cryptographic concepts and
gear to protect certain types of business communications.[However], . . .  cryptologic research in the business and academic arenas, no
matter how useful, remains redundant to the necessary efforts of the federal
government to protect its own communications.  I still am concerned that
indiscriminate publication of the results of that research will come to theattention of foreign governments and entities and, thereby, could cause irre-
versible and unnecessary harm to U.S. national security interests. . . . [While]key features of scienceÑunfettered research, and the publication of the re-sults for validation by others and for use by all mankindÑare essential to thegrowth and development of science, . . . nowhere in the scientific ethos isthere any requirement that restrictions cannot or should not, when necessary,be placed on science.  Scientists do not immunize themselves from social
responsibility simply because they are engaged in a scientific pursuit.  Society
has recognized over time that certain kinds of scientific inquiry can endanger
society as a whole and has applied either directly, or through scientific/ethicalconstraints, restrictions on the kind and amount of research that can be donein those areas.For the original text of InmanÕs article, see ÒClassifying Science:  A Government
Proposal . . . ,Ó Aviation Week and Space Technology, February 8, 1982.Adding to these concerns are suggestions such as those made by aresponsible and senior government official that even research in cryptog-
raphy conducted in the civilian sector should be controlled in a legal
regime similar to that which governs research with relevance to nuclear
weapons design (Box 7.3).  Ironically, former NSA Director Bobby Inman
Õscomments on scientific research appeared in an article that called for
greater cooperation between academic scientists and national security
authorities and used as a model of cooperation an arrangement, recom-
mended by the Public Cryptography Study Group, that has worked gen-
erally well in balancing the needs of academic science and those of na-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtional security.18  Nevertheless, Inman
Õs words are often cited as reflect-ing a national security mind-set that could lead to a serious loss of intel-
lectual freedom and discourse.  More recently, FBI Director Louis Freeh

stated to the committee that Òother approaches may be necessaryÓ if tech-
nology vendors do not adopt escrowed encryption on their own.  More-

over, the current Administration has explicitly rejected the premise that
Òevery American, as a matter of right, is entitled to an unbreakable en-cryption product.Ó19Given concerns about possible compromises of personal and civilliberties, many skeptics of government in this area believe that the safest
approach is for government to stay out of cryptography policy entirely.
They argue that any steps in this area, no matter how well intentioned or
plausible or reasonable, must be resisted strongly, because such steps will
inevitably be the first poking of the camelÕs nose under the tent.Technical IssuesEven if a legislative prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryptionwere enacted, it would be technically easy for parties with special needs
for security to circumvent such a ban.  In some cases, circumvention

would be explicitly illegal, while in others it might well be entirely legal.
For example:¥Software for unescrowed encryption can be downloaded from theInternet; such software is available even today.  Even if posting such

software in the United States were to be illegal under a prohibition, it
would nonetheless be impossible to prevent U.S. Internet users from
downloading software that had been posted on sites abroad.18The arrangement recommended by the Public Cryptography Study Group called forvoluntary prepublication review of all cryptography research undertaken in the privatesector.  For more discussion of this arrangement, see Public Cryptography Study Group,
Report of the Public Cryptography Study Group, American Council on Education, Washington,D.C., February, 1981.  A history leading to the formation of the Public Cryptography Study
Group can be found in National Research Council, ÒVoluntary Restraints on Research withNational Security Implications: The Case of Cryptography, 1972-1982,Ó in Scientific Commu-nication and National Security, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1982, AppendixE, pp. 120-125.  The ACM study on cryptography policy concluded that this prepublication
arrangement has not resulted in any chilling effects in the long term (see Susan Landau et
al., Codes, Keys and Conflicts: Issues in U.S. Crypto Policy, Association for Computing Machin-ery Inc., New York, 1994, p. 39.)19ÒQuestions and Answers About the Clinton AdministrationÕs Telecommunications Ini-tiative,Ó undated document released on April 16, 1993, with 
ÒStatement by the Press Secre-tary on the Clipper Chip.Ó  See 
The Third CPSR Cryptography and Privacy Conference SourceBook, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, Washington, D.C., June 7, 1993, PartIII.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE269¥Superencryption can be used.  Superencryption (sometimes also
known as double encryption) is encryption of traffic before it is given to
an escrowed encryption device or system. For technical reasons, super-
encryption is impossible to detect without monitoring and attempting to
decrypt all escrow-encrypted traffic, and such large-scale monitoring
would be seriously at odds with the selected and limited nature of wire-
taps today.An additional difficulty with superencryption is that it is not techni-cally possible to obtain escrow information for all layers simultaneously,
because the fact of double and triple encryption cannot be known in
advance.  Even if the second (or third or fourth) layers of encryption were

escrowed, law enforcement authorities would have to approach sepa-
rately and sequentially the escrow agents holding key information for
those layers.¥Talent for hire is easy to obtain.  A criminal party could easily hirea knowledgable person to develop needed software.  For example, an out-

of-work or underemployed scientist or mathematician from the former
Soviet Union would find a retainer fee of $500 per month to be a kingÕsransom.20¥Information can be stored remotely.  An obvious noncryptographic
circumvention is to store data on a remote computer whose Internet ad-
dress is known only to the user.  Such a computer could be physically

located anywhere in the world (and might even automatically encrypt
files that were stored there).  But even if it were not encrypted, data stored

on a remote computer would be impossible for law enforcement officials
to access without the cooperation of the dataÕs owner.  Such remote stor-
age could occur quite legally even with a ban on the use of unescrowed
encryption.¥Demonstrating that a given communication or data file is Òen-cryptedÓ is fraught with ambiguities arising from the many different pos-
sibilities for sending information:ÑAn individual might use an obscure data format.  For example,
while ASCII is the most common representation of alphanumeric charac-
ters today, Unicode (a proposed 16-bit representation) and EBCDIC (a
more-or-less obsolete 8-bit representation) are equally good for sending
plain English text.20Alan Cooperman and Kyrill Belianinov, ÒMoonlighting by Modem in Russia,Ó U.S.News & World Report, April 17, 1995, pp. 45-48.  In addition, many high-technology jobs are
moving overseas in general, not just to the former Soviet Union.  See, for example, Keith

Bradsher, ÒSkilled Workers Watch Their Jobs Migrate Overseas,Ó New York Times, August28, 1995, p. 1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYÑAn individual talking to another individual might speak in a lan-guage such as Navajo.ÑAn individual talking to another individual might speak in codephrases.ÑAn individual might send compressed digital data that could easilybe confused with encrypted data despite having no purpose related to
encryption.  If, for example, an individual develops his own good com-

pression algorithm and does not share it with anyone, that compressed
bit stream may prove as difficult to decipher as an encrypted bit stream.21ÑAn individual might deposit fragments of a text or image that hewished to conceal or protect in a number of different Internet-accessible
computers.  The plaintext (i.e., the reassembled version) would be reas-

sembled into a coherent whole only when downloaded into the computer
of the user.22ÑAn individual might use steganography.23None of these alternative coding schemes provides confidentiality asstrong as would be provided by good cryptography, but their extensive
use could well complicate attempts by government to obtain plaintext
information.Given so many different ways to subvert a ban on the use ofunescrowed cryptography, emergence of a dedicated subculture is likely
in which the nonconformists would use coding schemes or unescrowed
cryptography impenetrable to all outsiders.21A discussion of using text compression for confidentiality purposes can be found in IanWhitten and John Cleary, ÒOn the Privacy Afforded by Adaptive Text Compression,Ó Com-puters and Security, July 1988, Volume 7(4), pp. 397-408.  One problem in using compressionschemes as a technique for ensuring confidentiality is that almost any practical compres-sion scheme has the characteristic that closely similar plaintexts would generate similar
ciphertexts, thereby providing a cryptanalyst with a valuable advantage not available if astrong encryption algorithm is used.22Jaron Lanier, ÒUnmuzzling the Internet:  How to Evade the Censors and Make a State-
ment, Too,Ó Op-Ed, 
New York Times, January 2, 1996, p. A15.23Steganography is the name given to techniques for hiding a message within anothermessage.  For example, the first letter of each word in a sentence or a paragraph can be used

to spell out a message, or a photograph can be constructed so as to conceal information.Specifically, most black-and-white pictures rendered in digital form use at most 216 (65,536)
shades of gray, because the human eye is incapable of distinguishing any more shades.
Each element of a digitized black-and-white photo would then be associated with 16 bits ofinformation about what shade of gray should be used.  If a picture were digitized with 24
bits of gray scale, the last 8 bits could be used to convey a concealed message that would
never appear except for someone who knew to look for it.  The digital size of the picture
would be 50% larger than it would ordinarily be, but no one but the creator of the imagewould know.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE271Economic ConcernsAn important economic issue that would arise with a legislative pro-hibition on the use of unescrowed cryptography would involve the politi-
cal difficulty of mandating abandonment of existing user investments in
products with encryption capabilities.  These investments, considerable

even today, are growing rapidly, and the expense to users of immediately
having to replace unescrowed encryption products with escrowed ones
could be enormous;24 a further expense would be the labor cost involved
in decrypting existing encrypted archives and reencrypting them using
escrowed encryption products.  One potential mitigating factor for cost is

the short product cycle of information technology products.  Whether

users would abandon nonconforming products in favor of new products
with escrowing featuresÑknowing that they were specifically designedto facilitate exceptional accessÑis open to question.Legal and Constitutional IssuesEven apart from the issues described above, which in the committeeÕsview are quite significant, a legislative ban on the domestic use of
unescrowed encryption would raise constitutional issues.  Insofar as a

prohibition on unescrowed encryption were treated for constitutional
purposes as a limitation on the content of communications, the govern-
ment would have to come forward with a compelling state interest to
justify the ban.  To some, a prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryp-
tion would be the equivalent of a law proscribing use of a language (e.g.,
Spanish), which would almost certainly be unconstitutional.  On the other

hand, if such a ban were regarded as tantamount to eliminating a method
of communication (i.e., were regarded as content-neutral), then the courts
would employ a simple balancing test to determine its constitutionality.
The government would have to show that the public interests were jeop-
ardized by a world of unrestrained availability of encryption, and these
interests would have to be weighed against the free speech interests sacri-
ficed by the ban.  It would also be significant to know what alternative
24Existing unescrowed encryption products could be kept in place if end users could bemade to comply with a prohibition on the use of such products.  In some cases, a small

technical fix might suffice to disable the cryptography features of a system; such fixeswould be most relevant in a computing environment in which the software used by endusers is centrally administered (as in the case of many corporations) and provides system
administrators with the capability for turning off encryption.  In other cases, users
Ñtypi-cally individual users who had purchased their products from retail store outletsÑwouldhave to be trusted to refrain from using encryption.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYforms of methods of anonymous communication would remain availablewith a ban and how freedom of speech would be affected by the specific
system of escrow chosen by the government.  These various consider-

ations are difficult, and in some cases impossible, to estimate in advance
of particular legislation and a particular case, but the First Amendment
issues likely to arise with a total prohibition on the use of unescrowed
encryption are not trivial.25A step likely to raise fewer constitutional problems, but not eliminatethem, is one that would impose restrictions on the commercial sale of
unescrowed products with encryption capabilities.26  Under such a re-
gime, products with encryption capabilities eligible for sale would have
to conform to certain restrictions intended to ensure public safety, in much
the same way that other products such as drugs, automobiles, and meat
must satisfy particular government regulations.  ÒFreewareÓ or home-
grown products with encryption capabilities would be exempt from such
regulations as long as they were used privately.  The problem of already-
deployed products would remain, but in a different form: new products
would either interoperate or not interoperate with existing already-de-
ployed products.  If noninteroperability were required, users attempting

to maintain and use two noninteroperating systems would be faced with
enormous expenses.  If interoperability were allowed, the intent of the

ban would be thwarted.Finally, any national policy whose stated purpose is to prevent theuse of unescrowed encryption preempts decision making that the com-
mittee believes properly belongs to users.  As noted in Chapter 5, es-

crowed encryption reduces the level of assured confidentiality in ex-
change for allowing controlled exceptional access to parties that may need
to retrieve encrypted data.  Only in a policy regime of voluntary compli-

ance can users decide how to make that trade-off.  A legislative prohibi-

tion on the use or sale of unescrowed encryption would be a clear state-
ment that law enforcement needs for exceptional access to information
clearly outweigh user interests in having maximum possible protection25For a view arguing that relevant Fourth and Fifth Amendment issues would be re-solved against a constitutionality of such a prohibition, see Michael Froomkin, ÒThe Meta-phor Is the Key:  Cryptography, The Clipper Chip and the Constitution,
Ó University ofPennsylvania Law Review, Volume 143(3), January 1995, pp. 709-897.  The committee takes no
position on these Fourth and Fifth Amendment issues.26Such a scheme has been suggested by Dorothy Denning in ÒThe Future of Cryptogra-phy,Ó Internet Security Monthly, October 1995, p. 10.  (Also available on-line at http://
www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto.)  Denning
Õs paper does not suggest thatÒfreewareÓ be exempt, although her proposal would provide an exemption for personally
developed software used to encrypt personal files.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE273for their information, a position that has yet to be defended or even pub-licly argued by any player in the debate.7.2.2  Criminalization of the Use of Cryptography in the
Commission of a CrimeProposals to criminalize the use of cryptography in the commission ofa crime have the advantage that they focus the weight of the criminal
justice system on the Òbad guyÓ without placing restrictions on the use of
cryptography by Ògood guys.Ó  Further, deliberate use of cryptography in
the commission of a crime could result in considerable damage, either to
society as a whole or to particular individuals, in circumstances suggest-
ing premeditated wrongdoing, an act that society tends to view as worthy
of greater punishment than a crime committed in the heat of the moment.Two approaches could be taken to criminalize the use of cryptogra-phy in the commission of a crime:¥Construct a specific list of crimes in which the use of cryptographywould subject the criminal to additional penalties.  For example, using a

deadly weapon in committing a robbery or causing the death of someone
during the commission of a crime are themselves crimes that lead to
additional penalties.¥Develop a blanket provision stating that the use of cryptographyfor illegal purposes (or for purposes contrary to law) is itself a felony.In either event, additional penalties for the use of cryptography couldbe triggered by a conviction for a primary crime, or they could be im-
posed independently of such a conviction.  Precedents include the laws

criminalizing mail fraud (fraud is a crime, generally a state crime, but
mail fraudÑuse of the mails to commit fraudÑis an additional federalcrime) and the use of a gun during the commission of a felony.Intentional use of cryptography in the concealment of a crime couldalso be criminalized.  Since the use of cryptography is a prima facie act of

concealment, such an expansion would reduce the burden of proof on law
enforcement officials, who would have to prove only that cryptography
was used intentionally to conceal a crime.  Providers of cryptography
would be criminally liable only if they had knowingly provided cryptog-
raphy for use in criminal activity.  On the other hand, a law of more

expansive scope might well impose additional burdens on businesses and
raise civil liberties concerns.In considering legal penalties for misuse of cryptography, the ques-tion of what it means to ÒuseÓ cryptography must be addressed.  For
example, if and when encryption capabilities are integrated seamlessly
into applications and are invoked automatically without effort on the partCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYof a user, should the use of these applications for criminal purposes leadto additional penalties or to a charge for an additional offense?  Answer-

ing yes to this question provides another avenue for prosecuting a crimi-
nal (recall that Al Capone was convicted for income tax evasion rather
than bank robbery).  Answering no leaves open the possibility of

prosecutorial abuse.  A second question is what counts as 
Òcryptogra-phy.Ó  As noted above in the discussion of prohibiting unescrowed en-
cryption, a number of mathematical coding schemes can serve to obscure
the meaning of plaintext even if they are not encryption schemes in the
technical sense of the word.  These and related questions must be ad-

dressed in any serious consideration of the option for criminalizing the
use of cryptography in the commission of a crime.7.2.3  Technical Nonescrow Approaches
for Obtaining Access to InformationEscrowed encryption is not the only means by which law enforce-ment can gain access to encrypted data.  For example, as advised by

Department of Justice guidelines for searching and seizing computers,
law enforcement officials can approach the software vendor or the Justice
Department computer crime laboratory for assistance in cryptanalyzing
encrypted files.  These guidelines also advise that Òclues to the password[may be found] in the other evidence seizedÑstray notes on hardware ordesks; scribble in the margins of manuals or on the jackets of disks.  Agents

should consider whether the suspect or someone else will provide the
password if requested.Ó27  Moreover, product designs intended to facili-
tate exceptional access can include alternatives with different strengths
and weaknesses such as link encryption, weak encryption, hidden back
doors, and translucent cryptography.Link EncryptionWith link encryption, which applies only to communications andstands in contrast to end-to-end encryption (Box 7.4), a plaintext message
enters a communications link, is encrypted for transmission through the
link, and is decrypted upon exiting the link.  In a communication that may

involve many links, sensitive information can be found in plaintext form
at the ends of each link (but not during transit).  Thus, for purposes of

protecting sensitive information on an open network accessible to anyone
(the Internet is a good example), link encryption is more vulnerable than27Criminal Division, U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Guidelines for Searching and Seiz-ing Computers, Washington, D.C., July 1994, p. 55.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE275BOX 7.4Link vs. End-to-End Encryption of CommunicationsEnd-to-end encryption involves a stream of data traffic (in one or both directions)that is encrypted by the end users involved before it is fed into the communicationslink; traffic in between the end users is never seen in plaintext, and the traffic is
decrypted only upon receipt by an end user.  Link encryption is encryption per-
formed on data traffic after it leaves one of the end users; the traffic enters one end ofthe link, is encrypted and transmitted, and then is decrypted upon exit from that link.TABLE 7.2  Comparison of End-to-End and Link Encryption
End-to-End EncryptionLink Encryption
Controlling partyUserLink provider
Suitable trafficMost suitable for encryptionFacilitates bulk encryp-
of individual messagestion of data
Potential leaks ofOnly at transmitting andAt either end of the link,
plaintextreceiving stationswhich may not be
within the userÕs secur-ity perimeterPoint of responsibilityUser must take responsibilityLink provider takes re-
sponsibilityend-to-end encryption, which protects sensitive information from themoment it leaves party A to the moment it arrives at party B.  However,

from the standpoint of law enforcement, link encryption facilitates legally
authorized intercepts, because the traffic of interest can always be ob-
tained from one of the nodes in which the traffic is unencrypted.On a relatively closed network or one that is used to transmit datasecurely and without direct user action, link encryption may be cost-
effective and desirable.  A good example would be encryption of the

wireless radio link between a cellular telephone and its ground station;
the cellular handset encrypts the voice signal and transmits it to the
ground station, at which point it is decrypted and fed into the land-based
network.  Thus, the land-based network carries only unencrypted voice

traffic, even though it was transmitted by an encrypted cellular telephone.
A second example is the ÒbulkÓ encryption of multiple channels
Ñeachindividually unencryptedÑover a multiplexed fiber-optic link.  In both of
these instances of link encryption, only those with access to carrier facili-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtiesÑpresumably law enforcement officials acting under proper legal au-thorizationÑwould have the opportunity to tap such traffic.Weak EncryptionWeak encryption allowing exceptional access would have to be strongenough to resist brute-force attack by unauthorized parties (e.g., business
competitors) but weak enough to be cracked by authorized parties (e.g.,
law enforcement agencies).  However, 
ÒweakÓ encryption is a moving
target.  The difference between cracking strong and weak encryption by

brute-force attack is the level of computational resources that can be
brought to such an attack, and those resources are ever increasing.  In fact,

the cost of brute-force attacks on cryptography drops exponentially over
time, in accordance with MooreÕs law.28Widely available technologies now enable multiple distributed work-stations to work collectively on a computational problem at the behest of
only a few people; Box 4.6 in Chapter 4 discusses the brute-force crypt-
analysis of messages encrypted with the 40-bit RC4 algorithm, and it is
not clear that the computational resources of unauthorized parties can be
limited in any meaningful way.  In today
Õs environment, unauthorizedparties will almost always be able to assemble the resources needed to
mount successful brute-force attacks against weak cryptography, to the
detriment of those using such cryptography.  Thus, any technical divid-

ing line between authorized and unauthorized decryption would change
rather quickly.Hidden Back DoorsA Òback doorÓ is an entry point to an application that permits access
or use by other than the normal or usual means.  Obviously, a back door

known to government can be used to obtain exceptional access.  Back

doors may be open or hidden.  An open back door is one whose existence

is announced publicly; an example is an escrowed encryption system,
which everyone knows is designed to allow exceptional access.29  By its
28MooreÕs law is an empirical observation that the cost of computation drops by a factorof two approximately every 18 months.29Of course, the fact that a particular product is escrowed may not necessarily be knownto any given user.  Many users learn about the features of a product through reading
advertisments and operating manuals for the product; if these printed materials do not
mention the escrowing features, and no one tells the user, he or she may well remainignorant of them, even though the fact of escrow is Òpublic knowledge.ÓCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE277nature, an open back door is explicit; it must be deliberately and inten-tionally created by a designer or implementer.A hidden back door is one whose existence is not widely known, atleast upon initial deployment.  It can be created deliberately (e.g., by a

designer who insists on retaining access to a system that he may have
created) or accidentally (e.g., as the result of a design flaw).  Often, a user

wishing access through a deliberately created hidden back door must
pass through special system-provided authorization services.  Almost by

definition, an accidentally created hidden back door requires no special
authorization for its exploitation, although finding it may require special
knowledge.  In either case, the existence of hidden back doors may or may

not be documented; frequently, it is not.Particularly harmful hidden back doors can appear when ÒsecureÓapplications are implemented using insecure operating systems; more
generally, ÒsecureÓ applications layered on top of insecure systems may
not be secure in practice.  Cryptographic algorithms implemented on

weak operating systems present another large class of back doors that can
be used to undermine the integrity and the confidentiality that crypto-
graphic implementations are intended to provide.  For example, a data-

base application that provides strong access control and requires authori-
zation for access to its data files but is implemented on an operating
system that allows users to view those files without going through the
database application does not provide strong confidentiality.  Such an

application may well have its data files encrypted for confidentiality.The existence of back doors can pose high-level risks.  The shutdownor malfunction of life-critical systems, loss of financial stability in elec-
tronic commerce, and compromise of private information in database
systems can all have serious consequences.  Even if back doors are un-

documented, they can be discovered and misused by insiders or outsid-
ers.  Reliance on 
Òsecurity by obscurityÓ is always dangerous, because
trying to suppress knowledge of a design fault is generally very difficult.
If a back door exists, it will eventually be discovered, and its discoverer
can post that knowledge worldwide.  If systems containing a discovered

back door were on the Internet or were accessible by modem, massive
exploitation could occur almost instantaneously, worldwide.  If back

doors lack a capability for adequate authentication and accountability,
then it can be very difficult to detect exploitation and to identify the
culprit.Translucent CryptographyTranslucent cryptography has been proposed by Ronald Rivest as anCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYalternative to escrowed encryption.30  The proposed technical scheme,
which involves no escrow of unit keys, would ensure that any given
message or file could be decrypted by the government with probability p;the value of p (0 < 
p < 1) would be determined by the U.S. Congress.  In
other words, on average, the government would be able to decrypt a
fraction p of all messages or files to which it was given legal access.  Today
(without encryption), p = 1.  In a world of strong (unescrowed) encryp-
tion, p = 0.  A large value of 
p favors law enforcement, while a small value
of p favors libertarian privacy.  Rivest proposes that some value of 
pbalances the interests on both sides.It is not necessary that the value of p be fixed for all time or be made
uniform for all devices.  p could be set differently for cellular telephones
and for e-mail, or it could be raised or lowered as circumstances dictated.
The value of p would be built into any given encryption device or pro-
gram.Note that in contrast to escrowed encryption, translucent cryptogra-phy requires no permanent escrowing of unit keys, although it renders
access indeterminate and probabilistic.7.2.4  Network-based Encryption
Security for Voice CommunicationsIn principle, secure telephony can be made the responsibility of tele-phone service providers.  Under the current regulatory regime (changing

even as this report is being written), tariffs often distinguish between data
and voice.  Circuits designated as carrying ordinary voice (also to include

fax and modem traffic) could be protected by encryption supplied by the
service provider, perhaps as an extra security option that users could
purchase.  Common carriers (service providers in this context) that pro-

vide encryption services are required by the Communications Assistance
for Law Enforcement Act to decrypt for law enforcement authorities upon
legal request.  (The 
Òtrusted third partyÓ (TTP) concept discussed in Eu-
rope31 is similar in the sense that TTPs are responsible for providing key
management services for secure communications.  In particular, TTPs

provide session keys over secure channels to end users that they can then30Ronald Rivest, ÒTranslucent Cryptography: An Alternative to Key Escrow,Ó paper pre-
sented at the Crypto 1995 Rump Session, August 29, 1995.31See, for example, Nigel Jefferies, Chris Mitchell, and Michael Walker, A Proposed Archi-tecture for Trusted Third Party Services, Royal Holloway, University of London, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE279use to encrypt communications with parties of interest; these keys aremade available to law enforcement officials upon authorized request.)The simplest version of network-based encryption would provide forlink encryption (e.g., encrypting the voice traffic only between switches).
Link encryption would leave the user vulnerable to eavesdropping at a
point between the end-user device and the first switching office.  In prin-
ciple, a secure end-user device could be used to secure this Òlast mileÓlink.32Whether telecommunications service providers will move ahead ontheir own with network-based encryption for voice traffic is uncertain for
a number of reasons.  Because most people today either believe that their
calls are reasonably secure or are not particularly concerned about the
security of their calls, the extent of demand for such a service within the
United States is highly uncertain.  Furthermore, by moving ahead in a

public manner with voice encryption, telephone companies would be ad-
mitting that calls carried on their network are today not as secure as they
could be; such an acknowledgment might undermine their other business
interests.  Finally, making network-based encryption work internation-

ally would remain a problem, although any scheme for ensuring secure
international communications will have drawbacks.More narrowly focused network-based encryption could be used withthat part of the network traffic that is widely acknowledged to be vulner-
able to interceptionÑnamely, wireless voice communications.  Wireless
communications can be tapped Òin the etherÓ on an entirely passive basis,
without the knowledge of either the sending or receiving party.  Of par-

ticular interest is the cellular telephone network; all of the current stan-
dards make some provisions for encryption.  Encryption of the wireless

link is also provided by the Global System for Mobile Communications
(GSM), a European standard for mobile communications.  In general,

communication is encrypted from the mobile handset to the cell, but not
end to end.  Structured in this manner, encryption would not block the

ability of law enforcement to obtain the contents of a call, because access
could always be obtained by tapping the ground station.At present, transmission of most wireless communications is analog.Unless special measures are taken to prevent surveillance, analog trans-
missions are relatively easy to intercept.  However, it is widely expected
32The Òlast mileÓ is a term describing that part of a local telephone network between the
premises of an individual subscriber and the central-office switch from which service isreceived.  The vulnerability of the 
Òlast mileÓ is increased because it is easier to obtain
access to the physical connections and because the volume of traffic is small enough topermit the relevant traffic to be isolated easily.  On the other hand, the vulnerability of the
switch is increased because it is often accessible remotely through dial-in ports.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthat wireless communications will become increasingly digital in the fu-ture, with two salutary benefits for security.  One is that compared to

analog signals, even unencrypted digital communications are difficult for
the casual eavesdropper to decipher or interpret, simply because they are
transmitted in digital form.  The second is that digital communications

are relatively easy to encrypt.Security for Data CommunicationsThe body responsible for determining technical standards for Internetcommunications, the Internet Engineering Task Force, has developed stan-
dards for the Internet Protocol (version 6, also known as IPv6) that re-
quire conforming implementations to have the ability to encrypt data
packets, with the default method of encryption being DES.33  However,
IPv6 standards are silent with respect to key management, and so leave
open the possibility that escrow features might or might not be included
at the vendorÕs option.If the proposed standards are finalized, vendors may well face aHobsonÕs choice: to export Internet routing products that do not conformto the IPv6 standard (to obtain favorable treatment under the current
ITAR, which do not allow exceptions for encryption stronger than 40-bit
with RC2 or RC4), or to develop products that are fully compliant with
IPv6 (a strong selling point), but only for the domestic market.  Still,
33The Network Working Group has described protocols that define standards for encryp-tion, authentication, and integrity in the Internet Protocol.  These protocols are described in
the following documents, issued by the Network Working Group as Requests for Com-ments (RFCs) in August 1995:RFCTitle

1825Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol (IP); describes the security mecha-
nisms for IP version 4 (IPv4) and IP version 6 (IPv6).1826IP Authentication Header (AH); describes a mechanism for providing crypto-
graphic authentication for IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams.1827IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP); describes a mechanism that works in
both IPv4 and IPv6 for providing integrity and confidentiality to IP datagrams.1828IP Authentication using Keyed MD5; describes the use of a particular authentica-
tion technique with IP-AH.1829The ESP DES-CBC Transform; describes the use of a particular encryption tech-
nique with the IP Encapsulating Security Payload.These documents are available from ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfcNNNN.txt, whereNNNN is the RFC number.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE281escrowed implementations of IPv6 would be consistent with the pro-posed standard and might be granted commodities jurisdiction to the
Commerce Control List under regulations proposed by the Administra-
tion for escrowed encryption products.7.2.5  Distinguishing Between Encrypted Voice and Data
Communications Services for Exceptional AccessFor purposes of allowing exceptional access, it may be possible todistinguish between encrypted voice and data communications, at least
in the short run.  Specifically, a proposal by the JASON study group

suggests that efforts to install features for exceptional access should focus
on secure voice communications, while leaving to market forces the evo-
lution of secure data communications and storage.34  This proposal rests
on the following propositions:¥Telephony, as it is experienced by the end user, is a relativelymature and stable technology, compared to data communications ser-
vices that evolve much more rapidly.  Many people
Ñperhaps the major-ity of the populationÑwill continue to use devices that closely resemblethe telephones of today, and many more people are familiar with tele-
phones than are familiar with computers or the Internet.An important corollary is that regulation of rapidly changing tech-nologies is fraught with more danger than is the regulation of mature
technologies, simply because regulatory regimes are inherently slow to
react and may well pose significant barriers to the development of new
technologies.  This is especially true in a field moving as rapidly as infor-
mation technology.¥Telephony has a long-standing regulatory and technical infrastruc-ture associated with it, backed by considerable historical precedent, such
as that for law enforcement officials obtaining wiretaps on telephonic
communications under court order.  By contrast, data communications

services are comparatively unregulated (Box 7.5).¥In remarks to the committee, FBI Director Louis Freeh pointed outthat it was voice communications that drove the FBIÕs desire for passageof the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA); he
acknowledged that other mechanisms for communication might be rel-
evant to law enforcement investigations but has undertaken nonlegislative
approaches to deal with those mechanisms.34JASON Program Office, JASON Encryption/Privacy Study, Report JSR-93-520 (unpub-lished), MITRE Corporation, McLean, Va., 1993.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYBOX 7.5Two Primary Rate and Service Models forTelecommunications TodayRegulated Common Carrier Telephony ServicesRegulated common carrier telephony services are usually associated with voicetelephony, including fax and low-speed modem data communications.  If a 
Òcom-mon carrierÓ provision applies to a given service provider, the provider must provide
service to anyone who asks at a rate that is determined by a public utilities commis-sion.  Common carriers often own their own transport facilities (e.g., fiber-optic ca-
bles, telephone wires, and so on), and thus the service provider exerts considerable
control over the routing of a particular communication.  Pricing of service for the end
user is often determined on the basis of actual usage.  The carrier also provides
value-added services (e.g., call waiting) to enhance the value of the basic service to
the customer.  Administratively, the carrier is usually highly centralized.
Bulk Data TransportBulk services are usually associated with data transport (e.g., data sent from onecomputer to another) or with ÒprivateÓ telephony (e.g., a privately owned or operat-ed branch exchange for telephone service within a company).  Pricing for bulk ser-

vices is usually a matter of negotiation between provider and customer and may bebased on statistical usage, actual usage, reliability of transport, regional coverage, orother considerations.  Policy for use is set by the party that pays for the bulk service,and thus, taken over the multitude of organizations that use bulk services, is admin-istratively decentralized.  In general, the customer provides value-added services.

Routing paths are often not known in advance, but instead may be determined dy-namically.¥Demand for secure telephone communications, at least domesti-cally, is relatively small, if only because most users consider todayÕs tele-phone system to be relatively secure.  A similar perception of Internet

security does not obtain today, and thus the demand for highly secure
data communications is likely to be relatively greater and should not be
the subject of government interference.Under the JASON proposal, attempts to influence the inclusion ofescrow features could affect only the hardware devices that characterize
telephony today (e.g., a dedicated fax device, an ordinary telephone).  In

general, these devices do now allow user programming or additions and,
in particular, lack the capability enabling the user to provide encryption
easily.The JASON study also recognized that technical trends in telecom-munications are such that telephony will be increasingly indistinguish-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE283able from data communications.  One reason is that communications are
becoming increasingly digital.  A bit is a bit, whether it was originally part

of a voice communication or part of a data communication, and the pur-
pose of a communications infrastructure is to transport bits from Point A
to Point B, regardless of the underlying information content; reconstitut-
ing the transported bits into their original form will be a task left to the
parties at Point A and Point B.  Increasingly, digitized signals for voice,

data, images, and video will be transported in similar ways over the same
network facilities, and often they will be combined into single multi-
plexed streams of bits as they are carried along.35For example, a voice-generated analog sound wave that enters a tele-phone may be transmitted to a central switching office, at which point it
generally is converted into a digital bit stream and merged with other
digital traffic that may originally have been voices, television signals, and
high-speed streams of data from a computer.  The network transports all

of this traffic across the country by a fiber-optic cable and converts the bits
representing voice back into an analog signal only when it reaches the
switching office that serves the telephone of the called party.  To a con-

temporary user of the telephone, the conversation proceeds just as it might
have done 30 years ago (although probably with greater fidelity), but the
technology used to handle the call is entirely different.Alternatively, a computer connected to a data network can be con-verted into the functional equivalent of a telephone.36  Some on-line ser-
vice providers will be offering voice communications capability in the
near future, and the Internet itself can be used today to transport real-
time voice and even video communications, albeit with relatively low
fidelity and reliability but also at very low cost.37  Before these modalities
35Note, however, that the difficulty of searching for a given piece of information does
depend on whether it is voice or text.  It is quite straightforward to search a given digital
stream for a sequence of bits that represents a particular word as text, but quite difficult tosearch a digital stream for a sequence of bits that represents that particular word as voice.36For example, an IBM catalogue offers for general purchase a ÒDSP Modem and AudioCardÓ with 
ÒTelephony EnhancementÓ that provides a full-duplex speaker telephone for
$254.  The card is advertised as being able to make the purchaser
Õs PC into Òa telephonecommunications center with telephone voice mail, caller ID, and full duplex speakerphonecapability (for true simultaneous, two-way communications).Ó  See 
The IBMPC Direct SourceBook, Fall 1994, p. 43.  An article in the 
Hewlett-Packard Journal describes the ease with which
a telephone option card was developed for a workstation; see S. Paul Tucker, ÒHP TeleShare:Integrating Telephone Capabilities on a Computer Workstation,Ó Hewlett-Packard Journal,April 1995, pp. 69-74.37In January 1996, it was estimated that approximately 20,000 people worldwide are us-ers of Internet telephone service.  See Mike Mills, 
ÒItÕs the NetÕs Best Thing to Being There,ÓWashington Post, January 23, 1996, p. C1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYbecome acceptable for mainstream purposes, the Internet (or its succes-sor) will have to implement on a wide scale new protocols and switching
services to eliminate current constraints that involve time delays and
bandwidth limitations.A second influence that will blur the distinction between voice anddata is that the owners of the devices and lines that transport bits today
are typically the common carriersÑfirms originally formed to carry long-distance telephone calls and today subject to all of the legal requirements
imposed on common carriers (see Box 7.5).  But these firms sell transport

capacity to parties connecting data networks, and much of todayÕs bulkdata traffic is carried over communications links that are owned by the
common carriers.  The Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996 will fur-

ther blur the lines among service providers.The lack of a technical boundary between telephony and data com-munications results from the way todayÕs networks are constructed.  Net-
works are built on a protocol ÒstackÓ that embodies protocols at different
layers of abstraction.  At the very bottom are the protocols for the physical

layer that define the voltages and other physical parameters that repre-
sent ones and zeros. On top of the physical layer are other protocols that
provide higher-level services by making use of the physical layer.  Be-

cause the bulk of network traffic is carried over a physical infrastructure
designed for voice communications (i.e., the public switched telecommu-
nications network), interactions at the physical layer can be quite natu-
rally regarded as being in the domain of Òvoice.Ó  But interactions at
higher layers in the stack are more commonly associated with Òdata.ÓAcknowledging these difficulties, the JASON study concluded thatlimiting efforts to promote escrowed encryption products to those associ-
ated with voice communications had two important virtues.  First, it

would help to preserve law enforcement needs for access to a communi-
cations modeÑnamely telephonyÑthat is widely regarded as importantto law enforcement.  Second, it would avoid premature government regu-

lation in the data services area (an area that is less important historically
to criminal investigation and prosecution than is telephony), thus avoid-
ing the damage that could be done to a strong and rapidly evolving U.S.
information technology industry.   It would take
Ñseveral years to a de-cadeÑfor the technical ÒloopholesÓ described above to become signifi-
cant, thus giving law enforcement time to adapt to a new technical reality.7.2.6  A Centralized Decryption Facility
for Government Exceptional AccessProposed procedures to implement the retrieval of keys escrowedunder the Clipper initiative call for the escrowed key to be released by theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE285escrow agencies to the requesting law enforcement authorities upon pre-sentation of proper legal authorization, such as a court order.  Critics have

objected to this arrangement because it potentially compromises keys for
all timeÑthat is, once the key to a specific telephone has been divulged, itis in principle possible to eavesdrop forever on conversations using that
telephone, despite the fact that court-ordered wiretaps must have a finite
duration.To counter this criticism, Administration officials have designed aplan that calls for keys to be transmitted electronically to EES decryption
devices in such a way that the decryption device will erase the key at the
time specified in the court order.  However, acceptance of this plan relies
on assurances that the decryption device would indeed work in this man-
ner.  In addition, this proposal is relevant only to the final plan
Ñtheinterim procedures specify manual key handling.Another way to counter the objection to potential long-lasting com-promise of keys involves the use of a centralized government-operated
decryption facility.  Such a facility would receive EES-encrypted traffic

forwarded by law enforcement authorities and accompanied by appro-
priate legal authorization.  Keys would be made available by the escrow

agents to the facility rather than to the law enforcement authorities them-
selves, and the plaintext would be returned to the requesting authorities.
Thus, keys could never be kept in the hands of the requesting authorities,
and concern about illicit retention of keys by law enforcement authorities
could be reduced.  Of course, concerns about retention by the decryption

facility would remain, but since the number of decryption facilities would
be small compared to the number of possible requesting law enforcement
authorities, the problem would be more manageable.  Since the decryption

facilities would likely be under centralized control as well, it would be
easier to promulgate and enforce policies intended to prevent abuse.3838The committee suspects that the likelihood of abusive exercise of wiretap authority isgreater for parties that are farther removed from higher levels of government, although the
consequences may well be more severe when parties closer to the top levels of governmentare involved.  A single 
Òbad appleÓ near the top of government can set a corrupt and
abusive tone for an entire government, but at least Òbad applesÓ tend to be politically
accountable.  By contrast, the number of parties tends to increase as those parties are farther
and farther removed from the top, and the likelihood that at least some of these parties willbe abusive seems higher.  (Put differently, the committee believes that state/local authori-

ties are more likely to be abusive in their exercise of wiretapping authority simply becausethey do the majority of the wiretaps.  Note that while Title III calls for a report to be filed on
every federal and state wiretap order, the majority of missing reports are mostly from state
wiretap orders rather than federal orders. (See Administrative Office of the United StatesCourts, Wiretap Report, AOUSC, Washington, D.C., April 1995, Table 2.)
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYOne important aspect of this proposal is that the particular number offacilities constructed and the capacity of each could limit the number of
simultaneous wiretaps possible at any given time.  Such a constraint

would force law enforcement authorities to exercise great care in choos-
ing targets for interception, just as they must when they are faced with
constraints on resources in prosecuting cases.  A result could be greater

public confidence that only wiretaps were being used only in important
cases.  On the other hand, a limit on the number of simultaneous wiretaps

possible is also a potential disadvantage from the standpoint of the law
enforcement official, who may not wish to make resource-driven choices
about how and whom to prosecute or investigate.  Making encryption

keys directly available to law enforcement authorities allows them to
conduct wiretaps unconstrained by financial and personnel limitations.A centralized decryption facility would also present problems of itsown.  For example, many people would regard it as more threatening to

give a centralized entity the capability to acquire and decrypt all traffic
than to have such capabilities distributed among local law enforcement
agencies.  In addition, centralizing all wiretaps and getting the communi-

cations out into the field in real time could require a complex infrastruc-
ture.  The failure of a centralized facility would have more far-reaching

effects than a local failure, crippling a much larger number of wiretaps at
once.7.3  LOOMING ISSUES
Two looming issues have direct significance for national cryptogra-phy policy: determining the level of encryption needed to protect against
high-quality attacks, and organizing the U.S. government for a society
that will need better information security.  Appendix M describes two

other issues that relate but are not central to the current debate over
cryptography policy: digital cash and the use of cryptography to protect
intellectual property.7.3.1  The Adequacy of Various Levels of Encryption
Against High-Quality AttackWhat level of encryption strength is needed to protect informationagainst high-quality attack?  For purposes of analysis, this discussion

considers only perfect implementations of cryptography for confidential-
ity (i.e., implementations without hidden Òtrap doors,Ó installed on se-
cure operating systems, and so on).  Thus, the only issue of significance

for this discussion is the size of the key and the algorithm used to encrypt
the original plaintext.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE287Any cryptanalysis problem can be solved by brute force given enoughcomputers and time; the question is whether it is possible to assemble
enough computational resources to allow a brute-force cryptanalysis on a
time scale and cost reasonable for practical purposes.As noted in Chapter 4, a message encoded with a 40-bit RC4 algo-rithm was recently broken in 8 days by a brute-force search through the
use of a single workstation optimized for speed in graphics processing.Even so, such a key size is adequate for many purposes (e.g., creditcard purchases).  It is also sufficient to deny access to parties with few

technical skills, or to those with access to limited computing resources.
But if the data being protected is valuable (e.g., if it refers to critical pro-
prietary information), 40-bit keys are inadequate from an information
security perspective.  The reason is that for logistical and administrative

reasons, it does not make sense to require a user to decide what informa-
tion is or is not criticalÑthe simplest approach is to protect both criticaland noncritical information alike at the level required for protecting criti-
cal information.  If this approach is adopted, the user does not run the risk

of inadequately protecting sensitive information.  Furthermore, the com-

promise of a single piece of information can be catastrophic, and since it is
generally impossible to know if a particular piece of information has been
compromised, those with a high degree of concern for the confidentiality
of information must be concerned about protecting all information at a
level higher than the thresholds offered by the 8-day cryptanalysis time
described above.From an interceptorÕs point of view, the cryptanalysis times providedby such demonstrations are quite daunting, because they refer to the time
needed to cryptanalyze a single message.  A specific encrypted message

cryptanalyzed in this time may be useful when it is known with high
probability to be useful; however, such times are highly burdensome
when many messages must be collected and processed to yield one useful
message.  An eavesdropper could well have considerable difficulty in

finding the ciphertext corresponding to critical information, but the infor-mation security manager cannot take the chance that a critical piece of
information might be compromised anyway.39A larger key size increases the difficulty of a brute-force search.  For
39In general, information security managers must develop a model of the threat andrespond to that threat, rather than simply assuming the worst (for which the only possibleresponse would be to do ÒeverythingÓ).  However, in the case of encryption and in the
absence of governmental controls on technology, strong encryption costs about the same as
weak encryption.  Under such circumstances, it makes no sense at all for the information
security manager to choose weak encryption.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYsymmetric algorithms, a 56-bit key entails a work factor that is 216 (65,536)
times larger than that of a 40-bit key, and implies a search time of about
1,430 years to accomplish (assuming that the algorithm using that key
would take about the same time to execute as the RC4 algorithm).  Using

more computers could decrease the time proportionally.  (A discussion of

key lengths for asymmetric algorithms is contained in Chapter 2.)Large speed-up factors for search time would be possible through theuse of special-purpose hardware, which can be optimized to perform
specific tasks.  Estimates have been made regarding the amount of money

and time needed to conduct an exhaustive key search against a message
encrypted using the DES algorithm.  Recent work by Wiener in 1993,
40Dally in 1994,41 and Diffie et al. in 1996
42 suggest the feasibility of using
special-purpose processors costing a few million dollars working in par-
allel or in a distributed fashion to enable a brute-force solution of a single
56-bit DES cipher on a time scale of hours.  When the costs of design,

operation, and maintenance are included (and these costs are generally
much larger than the cost of the hardware itself), the economic burden of
building and using such a machine would be significant for most indi-
viduals and organizations.  Criminal organizations would have to sup-

port an infrastructure for cracking DES through brute-force search clan-
destinely, to avoid being targeted and infiltrated by law enforcement

officials.  As a result, developing and sustaining such an infrastructure

would be even more difficult for criminals attempting to take that ap-
proach.Such estimates suggest that brute-force attack against 56-bit algo-
rithms such as DES would require the significant effort of a well-funded
adversary with access to considerable resources.  Such attacks would be

far more likely from foreign intelligence services or organized criminal
cartels with access to considerable resources and expertise, for whom the
plaintext information sought would have considerable value, than from
the casual snoop or hacker who is merely curious or nosy.Thus, for routine information of relatively low or moderate sensitiv-ity or value, 56-bit protection probably suffices at this time.  But for infor-

mation of high value, especially information that would be valuable to40M.J. Wiener, ÒEfficient DES Key Search,Ó TR-244, May 1994, School of Computer Sci-
ence, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada; presented at the Rump Session of Crypto Õ93.41William P. Dally, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-nology, private communication to the committee, September 1995.42Matt Blaze, Whitfield Diffie, Ronald L. Rivest, Bruce Schneier, Tsutomu Shimomura,Eric Thompson, and Michael Wiener, ÒMinimal Key Lengths for Symmetric Ciphers toProvide Adequate Commercial Security: A Report by an Ad Hoc Group of Cryptographersand Computer Scientists,Ó January 1996.  Available on-line at http://www.bsa.org.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE289foreign intelligence services or major competitors, the adequacy in a de-cade of 56-bit encryption against a determined and rich attacker is open to
question.7.3.2  Organizing the U.S. Government
for Better Information Security on a National BasisAs noted in Chapter 6, no organization or entity within the federalgovernment has the responsibility for promoting information security in
the private sector or for coordinating information security efforts between
government and nongovernment parties.  NIST is responsible for setting

Federal Information Processing Standards, and from time to time the pri-
vate sector adopts these standards, but NIST has authority for information
security only in unclassified government information systems.  Given the

growing importance of the private nongovernment sector technologically
and the dependence of government on the private information infrastruc-
ture, security practices of the private information infrastructure may have a
profound effect on government activities, both civilian and military.How can coordination be pursued?  Coherent policy regarding infor-
mation assurance, information security, and the operation of the informa-
tion infrastructure itself is needed.  Business interests and the private

sector need to be represented at the policy-making table, and a forum for
resolving policy issues is needed.  And, since the details of implementa-

tion are often critical to the success of any given policy, policy implemen-
tation and policy formulation must go hand in hand.Information security functions that may call for coordinated nationalaction vary in scale from large to small:¥Assisting individual companies in key commercial sectors at theirown request to secure their corporate information infrastructures by pro-
viding advice, techniques, and analysis that can be adopted at the judg-
ment and discretion of the company involved.  In some key sectors (e.g.,

banking and telecommunications), conduits and connections for such as-
sistance already exist as the result of government regulation of firms in
those sectors.  At present, the U.S. government will provide advice re-

garding information security threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions only
to government contractors (and federal agencies).43¥Educating users both inside and outside government about vari-43This responsibility belongs to the NSA, as specified in the NSA-NIST Memorandum ofUnderstanding of March 24, 1989 (reprinted in Office of Technology Assessment, Informa-tion Security and Privacy in Network Environments, OTA-TCT-606, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C., September 1994, and in Appendix N).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYous aspects of better information security.  For example, many product
vendors and potential users are unaware of the fact that there are no legal
barriers to the use of cryptography domestically.  Outreach efforts could

also help in publicizing the information security threat.¥Certifying appropriate entities that perform some cryptographicservice.  For example, a public-key infrastructure for authentication re-

quires trusted certification authorities (Appendix H).  Validating the bona

fides of these authorities (e.g., through a licensing procedure) will be an
essential aspect of such an infrastructure.  In the event that private escrow

agents become part of an infrastructure for the wide use of cryptography,
such agents will need to be approved or certified to give the public confi-
dence in using them.¥Setting de jure standards for information security.  As noted above,
the NIST charter prevents it from giving much weight to commercial or
private sector needs in the formulation of Federal Information Processing
Standards if those needs conflict with those of the federal government,
even when such standards affect practice in the private sector.  Standards

of technology and of practice that guide the private sector should be
based on private sector needs, both to promote Òbest practicesÓ for infor-
mation security and to provide a legitimate defense in liability cases in-
volving breaches of information security.How such functions should be implemented is another major ques-tion.  The committee does not wish to suggest that the creation of a new

organization is the only possible mechanism for performing these func-
tions; some existing organization or entity could well be retooled to ser-
vice these purposes.  But it is clear that whatever entity assumes these

functions must be highly insulated from political pressure (arguing for a
high degree of independence from the executive branch), broadly repre-
sentative (arguing for the involvement of individuals who have genuine
policy-making authority drawn from a broad range of constituencies, not
just government), and fully capable of hearing and evaluating classified
arguments if necessary (arguing the need for security clearances).44One proposal that has been discussed for assuming these responsi-bilities is based on the Federal Reserve Board.  The Federal Reserve Board

oversees the Federal Reserve System (FRS), the nationÕs central bank.  The
44As noted in the preface to this report, the committee concluded that the broad outlinesof national cryptography policy can be argued on an unclassified basis.  Nevertheless, it is a
reality of decision making in the U.S. government on these matters that classified informa-
tion may nevertheless be invoked in such discussions and uncleared participants asked toleave the room.  To preclude this possibility, participating members should have the clear-
ances necessary to engage as full participants in order to promote an effective interchange
of views and perspectives.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE291FRS is responsible for setting monetary policy (e.g., setting the discountrate), the supervision of banking organizations and open market opera-
tions, and providing services to financial institutions.  The Board of Gov-
ernors is the FRSÕs central coordinating body.  Its seven members are
appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the
Senate for 14-year terms.  These terms are staggered to insulate the gover-

nors from day-to-day political pressure.  Its primary function is the

formulation of monetary policy, but the Board of Governors also has
supervisory and regulatory responsibilities over the activities of banking
organizations and the Federal Reserve Banks.A second proposal has been made by the Cross-Industry WorkingTeam (XIWT) of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives for the
U.S. government to establish a new Joint Security Technology Policy
Board as an independent agency of the government.45  Under this pro-
posal, the board would be an authoritative agency and coordination body
officially chartered by statute or executive order Òresponsible and an-swerableÓ for federal performance across all of its agencies, and for pro-
motion of secure information technology environments for the public.  In

addition, the board would solicit input, analysis, and recommendations
about security technology policy concerns from private sector groups and
government agencies, represent these groups and agencies within the
board, disseminate requests and inquiries and information back to these
groups and agencies, review draft legislation in cognizant areas and make
recommendations about the legislation, and represent the U.S. govern-
ment in international forums and other activities in the domain of interna-
tional security technology policy.  The board would be chaired by the

Vice President of the United States and would include an equal number of
members appointed from the private sector and the federal government.A third proposal, perhaps more in keeping with the objective of mini-mal government, could be to utilize existing agencies and organizational
structures.  The key element of the proposal would be to create an explicit

function in the government, that of domestic information security.  Because
information policy intersects with the interests and responsibilities of sev-
eral agencies and cabinet departments, the policy role should arguably
reside in the Executive Office of the President.  Placing the policy function

there would also give it the importance and visibility it requires.  It might

also be desirable to give specific responsibility for the initiation and coor-
dination of policy to a Counselor to the President for Domestic Informa-45Cross-Industry Working Team, A Process for Information Security Technology:  An XIWT
Report on Industry-Government Cooperation for Effective Public Policy, March 1995.  Available
from Corporation for National Research Initiatives, Reston, Va., or on-line at http://www.cnri.reston.va.us.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtion Security (DIS).  This individual could chair an interagency committee
consisting of agencies and departments with a direct interest in and re-
sponsibilities for information security matters, including the operating
agency, economic policy agencies (Departments of Treasury and Com-
merce), law enforcement agencies (FBI; Drug Enforcement Administra-
tion; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobaccco, and Firearms), and international af-
fairs and intelligence agencies (Departments of State and Defense, CIA).Operationally, a single agency could have responsibility for standardssetting, certification of escrow agents, approval of certificate holders for
authentication purposes, public education on information security, defi-
nition of Òbest practices,Ó management of cryptography on the Commerce
Control List, and so on.  The operating agency could be one with an

economic policy orientation, such as the Department of Commerce.  An

alternative point of responsibility might be the Treasury Department, al-
though its law enforcement responsibilities could detract from the objec-
tive of raising the economic policy profile of the information security
function.The public advisory committee, which is an essential element of thisstructure, could be made up of representatives of the computing, telecom-
munications, and banking industries, as well as ÒpublicÓ members from
academia, law, and so on.  This committee could be organized along the

lines of the PresidentÕs Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board and couldreport to the Counselor for DIS.7.4  RECAP
This chapter describes a number of possible policy options but doesnot attempt to pull together how these options might fit together in a
coherent policy framework.  That is the function of Chapter 8.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2938Synthesis, Findings, andRecommendations8.1  SYNTHESIS AND FINDINGS
In an age of explosive worldwide growth of electronic data storageand communications, many vital national interests require the effective
protection of information.  Especially when used in coordination with

other tools for information security, cryptography in all of its applica-
tions, including data confidentiality, data integrity, and user authentica-
tion, is a most powerful tool for protecting information.8.1.1  The Problem of Information Vulnerability
Because digital representations of large volumes of information areincreasingly pervasive, both the benefits and the risks of digital represen-
tation have increased.  The benefits are generally apparent to users of

information technologyÑlarger amounts of information, used more ef-
fectively and acquired more quickly, can increase the efficiency with
which businesses operate, open up entirely new business opportunities,
and play an important role in the quality of life for individuals.The risks are far less obvious.  As discussed in Chapter 1, one of the
most significant risks of a digital information age is the potential vulner-
ability of important information as it is communicated and stored.  When

information is transmitted in computer-readable form, it is highly vulner-
able to unauthorized disclosure or alteration:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY¥  Many communications are carried over channels (e.g., satellites,
cellular telephones, and local area networks) that are easily tapped.  Tap-
ping wireless channels is almost impossible to detect and to stop, and
tapping local area networks may be very hard to detect or stop as well.
Other electronic communications are conducted through data networks
that can be easily penetrated (e.g., the Internet).¥  Approximately 10 billion words of information in computer-read-
able form can be scanned for $1 today (as discussed in Chapter 1), allow-
ing intruders, the malicious, or spies to separate the wheat from the chaff
very inexpensively.  For example, a skilled person with criminal inten-

tions can easily develop a program that recognizes and records all credit
card numbers in a stream of unencrypted data traffic.1  The decreasing
cost of computation will reduce even further the costs involved in such
searches.¥  Many users do not know about their vulnerabilities to the theft or
compromise of information; in some instances, they are ignorant of or
even complacent about them.  Indeed, the insecurity of computer net-

works today is much more the result of poor operational practices on the
part of users and poor implementations of technology on the part of
product developers than of an inadequate technology base or a poor sci-
entific understanding.In the early days of computing, the problems caused by informationvulnerability were primarily the result of relatively innocent trespasses of
amateur computer hackers who were motivated mostly by technical curi-
osity.  But this is no longer true, and has not been true for some time.  The

fact that the nation is moving into an information age on a large scale
means that a much larger number of people are likely to have strong
financial, political, or economic motivations to exploit information vul-
nerabilities that still exist.  For example, electronic interceptions and other

technical operations account for the largest portion of economic and in-
dustrial information lost by U.S. corporations to foreign parties, as noted
in Chapter 1.Today, the consequences of large-scale information vulnerability arepotentially quite serious:¥  U.S. business, governmental, and individual communications are
1The feasibility of designing a program to recognize text strings that represent credit cardnumbers has been demonstrated most recently by the First Virtual Corporation. See pressrelease of February 7, 1996, ÒFirst Virtual Holdings Identifies Major Flaw in Software-BasedEncryption of Credit Cards; Numbers Easily Captured by Automated Program,Ó First Vir-
tual Corporation, San Diego, Calif.  Available on-line at http://www.fv.com/gabletxt/
release2_7_96.html.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS295targets or potential targets for intelligence organizations of foreign govern-ments, competitors, vandals, suppliers, customers, and organized crime.
Businesses send through electronic channels considerable amounts of con-
fidential information, including items such as project and merger propos-
als, trade secrets, bidding information, corporate strategies for expansion

in critical markets, research and development information relevant to cost
reduction or new products, product specifications, and expected delivery
dates.  Most importantly, U.S. businesses must compete on a worldwide

basis.  International exposure increases the vulnerability to compromise

of sensitive information.  Helping to defend U.S. business interests against

such compromises of information is an important function of law enforce-
ment.¥  American values such as personal rights to privacy are at stake.
Private citizens may conduct sensitive financial transactions electroni-
cally or by telephone.  Data on their medical histories, including mental

illnesses, addictions, sexually transmitted diseases, and personal health
habits, are compiled in the course of providing medical care.  Driving

records, spending patterns, credit histories, and other financial informa-
tion are available from multiple sources.  All such information warrants

protection.¥  The ability of private citizens to function in an information economy
is at risk.  Even today, individuals suffer as criminals take over their

identities and run up huge credit card bills in their names.  Toll fraud on

cellular telephones is so large that some cellular providers have simply
terminated international connections in the areas that they serve.  Inaccu-

racies as the result of incorrectly posted information ruin the credit records
of some individuals.  Protecting individuals against such problems war-

rants public concern and is again an area in which law enforcement and
other government authorities have a role to play.¥  The federal government has an important stake in assuring that its
important and sensitive political, economic, law enforcement, and mili-
tary information, both classified and unclassified, is protected from mis-
use by foreign governments or other parties whose interests are hostile to
those of the United States.¥  Elements of the U.S. civilian infrastructure such as the banking
system, the electric power grid, the public switched telecommunications
network, and the air traffic control system are central to so many dimen-
sions of modern life that protecting these elements must have a high
priority.  Defending these assets against information warfare and crimes

of theft, misappropriation, and misuse potentially conducted by hostile
nations, terrorists, criminals, and electronic vandals is a matter of national
security and will require high levels of information protection and strong
security safeguards.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY8.1.2  Cryptographic Solutions to Information Vulnerabilities
Cryptography does not solve all problems of information security; forexample, cryptography cannot prevent a party authorized to view informa-
tion from improperly disclosing that information.  Although it is not a

Òsilver bulletÓ that can stand by itself, cryptography is a powerful tool thatcan be used to protect information stored and communicated in digital
form: cryptography can help to assure confidentiality of data, to detect
unauthorized alterations in data and thereby help to maintain its integrity,
and to authenticate the asserted identity of an individual or a computer
system (Chapter 2).  Used in conjunction with other information security

measures, cryptography has considerable value in helping law-abiding citi-
zens, businesses, and the nation as a whole defend their legitimate interests
against information crimes and threats such as fraud, electronic vandalism,
the improper disclosure of national security information, or information
warfare.Modern cryptographic techniques used for confidentiality make itpossible to develop and implement ciphers that are for all practical pur-
poses impossible for unauthorized parties to penetrate but that still make
good economic sense to use.¥  Strong encryption is economically feasible today.  For example,
many integrated circuit chips that would be used in a computer or com-
munications device can inexpensively accommodate the extra elements
needed to implement the Data Encryption Standard (DES) encryption
algorithm.  If implemented in software, the cost is equally low, or even

lower.¥  Public-key cryptography can help to eliminate the expense of using
couriers, registered mail, or other secure means for exchanging keys.

Compared to a physical infrastructure for key exchange, an electronic
infrastructure based on public-key cryptography to exchange keys will be
faster and more able to facilitate secure communications between parties
that have never interacted directly with each other prior to the first com-
munication.  Public-key cryptography also enables the implementation of

the digital equivalent of a written signature, enabling safer electronic
commerce.¥  Encryption can be integrated by vendors into end-user applications
and hardware for the benefit of the large majority of users who do not
have the technical skill to perform their own integration.  Encryption can
also be made automatic and transparent in ways that require no extra
action on the part of the user, thus ensuring that cryptographic protection
will be present regardless of user complacency or ignorance.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS2978.1.3  The Policy Dilemma Posed by Cryptography
The confidentiality of information that cryptography can provide isuseful not only for the legitimate purposes of preventing information
crimes (e.g., the theft of trade secrets or unauthorized disclosure of sensi-
tive medical records) but also for illegitimate purposes (e.g., shielding
from law enforcement officials a conversation between two terrorists plan-
ning to bomb a building).  Although strong automatic encryption imple-

mented as an integral part of data processing and communications pro-
vides confidentiality for Ògood guysÓ against 
Òbad guysÓ (e.g., U.S.
business protecting information against economic intelligence efforts of
foreign nations), it unfortunately also protects Òbad guysÓ against 
ÒgoodguysÓ (e.g., terrorists evading law enforcement agencies).  Under appro-
priate legal authorization such as a court order, law enforcement authori-
ties may gain access to Òbad guyÓ information for the purpose of investi-
gating and prosecuting criminal activity.  Similarly, intelligence gathering

for national security and foreign policy purposes depends on having ac-
cess to information of foreign governments and other foreign entities.
(See Chapter 3.)  Because such activities benefit our society as a whole

(e.g., by limiting organized crime and terrorist activities), Òbad guyÓ use
of cryptography used for confidentiality poses a problem for society as a
whole, not just for law enforcement and national security personnel.Considered in these terms, it is clear that the development and wide-spread deployment of cryptography that can be used to deny government
access to information represents a challenge to the balance of power be-
tween the government and the individual.  Historically, all governments,

under circumstances that further the common good, have asserted the
right to compromise the privacy of individuals (e.g., through opening
mail, tapping telephone calls, inspecting bank records); unbreakable cryp-
tography for confidentiality provides the individual with the ability to
frustrate assertions of that right.The confidentiality that cryptography can provide thus creates con-flicts.  Nevertheless, all of the stakes described above
Ñprivacy for indi-viduals, protection of sensitive or proprietary information for businesses
and other organizations in the prevention of information crimes, ensuring
the continuing reliability and integrity of nationally critical information
systems and networks, law enforcement access to stored and communi-
cated information for purposes of investigating and prosecuting crime,
and national security access to information stored or communicated by
foreign powers or other entities and organizations whose interests and
intentions are relevant to the national security and the foreign policy
interests of the United StatesÑare legitimate.  Informed public discussion
of the issues must begin by acknowledging the legitimacy of both infor-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYmation security for law-abiding individuals and businesses and informa-tion gathering for law enforcement and national security purposes.A major difficulty clouding the public policy debate regarding cryp-tography has been that certain elements have been removed from public
view due to security classification.  However, for reasons noted in the

preface, the cleared members of the committee (13 of its 16 members)
concluded that the debate over national cryptography policy can becarried out in a reasonable manner on an unclassified basis.  Although
many of the details relevant to policy makers are necessarily classified,
these details are not central to making policy arguments one way or the
other.  Classified material, while important to operational matters in spe-
cific cases, is not essential to the big picture of why policy has the shape
and texture that it does today nor to the general outline of how technol-
ogy will, and policy should, evolve in the future.To manage the policy dilemma created by cryptography, the UnitedStates has used a number of tools to balance the interests described above.
For many years, concern over foreign threats to national security has been
the primary driver of a national cryptography policy that has sought to
maximize the protection of U.S. military and diplomatic communications
while denying the confidentiality benefits of cryptography to foreign ad-
versaries through the use of controls on the export of cryptographic tech-
nologies, products, and related technical information (Chapter 4).  More

recently, the U.S. government has aggressively promoted escrowed en-
cryption as the technical foundation for national cryptography policy,
both to serve domestic interests in providing strong protection for legiti-
mate uses while enabling legally authorized access by law enforcement
officials when warranted and also as the basis for more liberal export
controls on cryptography (Chapter 5).Both escrowed encryption and export controls have generated con-siderable controversy.  Escrowed encryption has been controversial be-

cause its promotion by the U.S. government appears to some important
constituencies to assert the primacy of information access needs of law
enforcement and national security over the information security needs of
businesses and individuals.  Export controls on cryptography have been

controversial because they pit the interests of U.S. vendors and some U.S
multinational corporations against some of the needs of national security.8.1.4  National Cryptography Policy for the Information Age
In a world of ubiquitous computing and communications, a concertedeffort to protect the information assets of the United States is critical.
While cryptography is only one element of a comprehensive approach to
information security, it is nevertheless an essential element.  Given the
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS299committee
Õs basic charge to focus on national cryptography policy ratherthan national policy for information security, the essence of the committeeÕsbasic conclusion about policy is summarized by the following principle:Basic Principle:  U.S. national policy should be changed to support
the broad use of cryptography in ways that take into account competing
U.S. needs and desires for individual privacy, international economic
competitiveness, law enforcement, national security, and world leader-
ship.In practice, this principle suggests three basic objectives for nationalcryptography policy:1.  Broad availability of cryptography to all legitimate elements of
U.S. society.  Cryptography supports the confidentiality and integrity of
digitally represented information (e.g., computer data, software, video)
and the authentication of individuals and computer systems communi-
cating with other computer systems; these capabilities are important in
varying degrees to protecting the information security interests of many
different private and public stakeholders, including law enforcement and
national security.  Furthermore, cryptography can help to support law

enforcement objectives in preventing information crimes such as economic
espionage.2.  Continued economic growth and leadership of key U.S. indus-
tries and businesses in an increasingly global economy, including but
not limited to U.S. computer, software, and communications compa-
nies.  Such leadership is an integral element of national security.  U.S.
companies in information technology today have undeniable strengths in
foreign markets, but current national cryptography policy threatens to
erode these advantages.  The largest economic opportunities for U.S. firms

in all industries lie in using cryptography to support their critical domes-
tic and international business activities, including international intrafirm
and interfirm communications with strategic partners, cooperative efforts
with foreign collaborators and researchers in joint business ventures, and
real-time connections to suppliers and customers, rather than in selling
information technology (Chapter 4).3.  Public safety and protection against foreign and domestic threats.
Insofar as possible, communications and stored information of foreign
parties whose interests are hostile to those of the United States should be
accessible to U.S. intelligence agencies.  Similarly, the communications

and stored information of criminal elements that are a part of U.S. and
global society should be available to law enforcement authorities as au-
thorized by law (Chapter 3).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYObjectives 1 and 2 argue for a policy that actively promotes the use ofstrong cryptography on a broad front and that places few restrictions on
the use of cryptography.  Objective 3 argues that some kind of govern-

ment role in the deployment and use of cryptography may continue to be
necessary for public safety and national security reasons.  The committee
believes that these three objectives can be met within a framework recog-
nizing that on balance, the advantages of more widespread use of cryp-tography outweigh the disadvantages.The committee concluded that cryptography is one important tool forprotecting information and that it is very difficult for governments to
control; it thus believes that the widespread nongovernment use of cryp-
tography in the United States and abroad is inevitable in the long run.
Cryptography is important because when it is combined with other mea-
sures to enhance information security, it gives end users significant con-
trol over their information destinies.  Even though export controls have

had a nontrivial impact on the worldwide spread of cryptography in
previous years, over the long term cryptography is difficult to control
because the relevant technology diffuses readily through national bound-
aries; export controls can inhibit the diffusion of products with encryp-
tion capabilities but cannot contain the diffusion of knowledge (Chapter
4).  The spread of cryptography is inevitable because in the information

age the security of information will be as important in all countries as
other attributes valued today, such as the reliability and ubiquity of infor-
mation.Given the inevitability that cryptography will become widely avail-able, policy that manages how cryptography becomes available can help
to mitigate the deleterious consequences of such availability.  Indeed,

governments often impose regulations on various types of technology
that have an impact on the public safety and welfare, and cryptography
may well fall into this category.  National policy can have an important

effect on the rate and nature of the transition from todayÕs world to that ofthe long-term future.  Still, given the importance of cryptography to a

more secure information future and its consequent importance to various
dimensions of economic prosperity, policy actions that inhibit the use of
cryptography should be scrutinized with special care.The committeeÕs policy recommendations are intended to facilitate ajudicious transition between todayÕs world of high information vulner-ability and a future world of greater information security, while to the
extent possible meeting governmentÕs legitimate needs for informationgathering for law enforcement, national security, and foreign policy pur-
poses.  National cryptography policy should be expected to evolve over

time in response to events driven by an era of rapid political, technologi-
cal, and economic change.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS301The committee recognizes that national cryptography policy is in-tended to address only certain aspects of a much larger information secu-
rity problem faced by citizens, businesses, and government.  Neverthe-

less, the committee found that current national policy is not adequate tosupport the information security requirements of an information soci-
ety.  Cryptography is an important dimension of information security,
but current policy discourages the use of this important tool in both inten-
tional and unintentional ways, as described in Chapters 4 and 6.  For

example, through the use of export controls, national policy has explicitly
sought to limit the use of encryption abroad but has also had the effect of
reducing the domestic availability of products with strong encryption
capabilities to businesses and other users.  Furthermore, government ac-

tion that discourages the use of cryptography contrasts sharply with na-
tional policy and technological and commercial trends in other aspects of
information technology.  Amidst enormous changes in the technological

environment in the past 20 years, today the federal government actively
pursues its vision of a national information infrastructure, and the use of
computer and communications technology by private parties is growing
rapidly.The committee believes that a mismatch between the speed at whichthe policy process moves and the speed with which new products de-
velop has had a profound impact on the development of the consensus
necessary with respect to cryptography policy (Chapters 4 and 6).  This

mismatch has a negative impact on both users and vendors.  For example,

both are affected by an export control regime that sometimes requires
many months or even years to make case-by-case decisions on export
licensing, while high-value sales to these users involving integrated prod-
ucts with encryption capabilities can be negotiated and consummated on
a time scale of days or weeks.  Since the basic knowledge underlying

cryptography is well known, cryptographic functionality can be imple-
mented into new products on the time scale of new releases of products
(several months to a year).  Both users and vendors are affected by the fact

that significant changes in the export control regulations governing cryp-
tography have not occurred for 4 years (since 1992) at a time when needs
for information security are growing, a period that could have accommo-
dated several product cycles.  Promulgation of cryptographic standards

not based on commercial acceptability (e.g., the Escrowed Encryption
Standard (FIPS 185), the Digital Signature Standard (FIPS 180-1)) raised
significant industry opposition (from both vendors and users) and led to
controversy and significant delays in or outright resistance to commercial
adoption of these standards.These examples suggest that the time scales on which cryptographypolicy is made and is operationally implemented are incompatible withCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthe time scales of the marketplace.  A more rapid and market-responsive
decision-making process would leverage the strengths of U.S. businesses
in the international marketplace before significant foreign competition
develops.  As is illustrated by the shift in market position from IBM to

Microsoft in the 1980s, the time scale on which significant competition can
arise is short indeed.Attempts to promote a policy regime that runs against prevailingcommercial needs, practice, and preference may ultimately result in a
degree of harm to law enforcement and national security interests far
greater than what would have occurred if a more moderate regime had
been promoted in the first place.  The reason is that proposed policy

regimes that attempt to impose market-unfriendly solutions will inevita-
bly lead to resistance and delay; whether desirable or not, this is a politi-
cal reality.  Responsible domestic businesses, vendors, and end users are

willing to make some accommodations to U.S. national interests in law
enforcement and national security, but cannot be expected to do so will-
ingly when those accommodations are far out of line with the needs of the
market.  Such vendors and users are likely to try to move ahead on their

ownÑand quickly soÑif they believe that government requirements arenot reasonable.  Moreover, foreign vendors may well attempt to step into

the vacuum.  The bottom line is that the U.S. government may have only

a relatively small window of time in which to influence the deployment of
cryptography worldwide.The committee also notes that the public debate has tended to drawlines that divide the policy issues in an overly simplistic manner, i.e.,
setting the privacy of individuals and businesses against the needs of
national security and law enforcement.  As observed above, such a di-

chotomy does have a kernel of truth.  But viewed in the large, the di-

chotomy as posed is misleading.  If cryptography can protect the trade

secrets and proprietary information of businesses and thereby reduce
economic espionage (which it can), it also supports in a most important
manner the job of law enforcement.  If cryptography can help protect

nationally critical information systems and networks against unautho-
rized penetration (which it can), it also supports the national security of
the United States.  Framing national cryptography policy in this larger

context would help to reduce some of the polarization among the relevant
stakeholders.Finally, the national cryptography policy of the United States is situ-ated in an international context, and the formulation and implementation
of U.S. policy must take into account international dimensions of the
problem if U.S. policy is to be successful.  These international dimensions,

discussed in Chapter 6 and Appendix G, include the international scope
of business today; the possibility of significant foreign competition inCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS303information technology; an array of foreign controls on the export, im-port, and use of cryptography; important similarities in the interests of
the United States and other nations in areas such as law enforcement and
antiterrorist activities; and important differences in other areas such as
the relationship between the government and the governed.8.2  RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations below address several critical policy areas.Each recommendation is cast in broad terms, with specifically actionable
items identified for each when appropriate.  In accordance with the com-
mitteeÕs finding that the broad picture of cryptography policy can beunderstood on an unclassified basis, no findings or recommendations
were held back on the basis of classification, and this report is unclassified
in its entirety.Recommendation 1:  No law should bar the manufacture, sale, or
use of any form of encryption within the United States.This recommendation is consistent with the position of the ClintonAdministration that legal prohibitions on the domestic use of any kind of
cryptography are inappropriate,2 and the committee endorses this aspectof the AdministrationÕs policy position without reservation.For technical reasons described in Chapter 7, the committee believesthat a legislative ban on the use of unescrowed encryption would be
largely unenforceable.  Products using unescrowed encryption are in use
today by millions of users, and such products are available from many
difficult-to-censor Internet sites abroad.  Users could pre-encrypt their

data, using whatever means were available, before their data were ac-
cepted by an escrowed encryption device or system.  Users could store

their data on remote computers, accessible through the click of a mouse
but otherwise unknown to anyone but the data owner; such practices
could occur quite legally even with a ban on the use of unescrowed en-
cryption.  Knowledge of strong encryption techniques is available from

official U.S. government publications and other sources worldwide, and
experts understanding how to use such knowledge might well be in high
demand from criminal elements.  Even demonstrating that a given com-

munication or data file is ÒencryptedÓ may be difficult to prove, as algo-
2For example, see ÒQuestions and Answers About the Clinton AdministrationÕs Encryp-tion Policy,Ó February 4, 1994.  Reprinted in David Banisar (ed.), 
1994 Cryptography andPrivacy Sourcebook, Electronic Privacy Information Center, Washington, D.C., 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYrithms for data compression illustrate.  Such potential technical circum-
ventions suggest that even with a legislative ban on the use of unescrowed
cryptography, determined users could easily evade the enforcement of
such a law.In addition, a number of constitutional issues, especially those relatedto free speech, would be almost certain to arise.  Insofar as a ban on the

use of unescrowed encryption would be treated (for constitutional pur-
poses) as a limitation on the ÒcontentÓ of communications, the govern-
ment would have to come forward with a compelling state interest to
justify the ban.  These various considerations are difficult, and in some

cases impossible, to estimate in advance of particular legislation as ap-
plied to a specific case, but the First Amendment issues likely to arise
with a ban on the use of unescrowed encryption are not trivial.  In addi-

tion, many people believe with considerable passion that government
restrictions on the domestic use of cryptography would threaten basic
American values such as the right to privacy and free speech.  Even if the

constitutional issues could be resolved in favor of some type of ban on the
use of unescrowed encryption, these passions would surely result in a
political controversy that could divide the nation and at the very least
impede progress on the way to the full use of the nationÕs informationinfrastructure.Finally, a ban on the use of any form of encryption would directlychallenge the principle that users should be responsible for assessing and
determining their own approaches to meeting their security needs.  This

principle is explored in greater detail in Recommendation 3.Recommendation 2:  National cryptography policy should be de-
veloped by the executive and legislative branches on the basis of open
public discussion and governed by the rule of law.In policy areas that have a direct impact on large segments of thepopulation, history demonstrates that the invocation of official govern-
ment secrecy often leads to public distrust and resistance.  Such a result is

even more likely where many members of society are deeply skeptical
about government.Cryptography policy set in the current social climate is a case in point.When cryptography was relevant mostly to government interests in di-
plomacy and national security, government secrecy was both necessary
and appropriate.  But in an era in which cryptography plays an important

role in protecting information in all walks of life, public consensus and
government secrecy related to information security in the private sector
are largely incompatible.  If a broadly acceptable social consensus that

satisfies the interests of all legitimate stakeholders is to be found regard-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS305ing the nationÕs cryptographic future, a national discussion of the issuemust occur.The nationÕs best forum for considering multiple views across theentire spectrum is the U.S. Congress, and only comprehensive congres-
sional deliberation and discussion conducted in the open can generate the
public acceptance that is necessary for policy in this area to succeed.  In

turn, a consensus derived from such deliberations, backed by explicit
legislation when necessary, will lead to greater degrees of public accep-
tance and trust, a more certain planning environment, and better connec-
tions between policy makers and the private sector on which the nationÕseconomy and social fabric rest.  For these reasons, congressional involve-
ment in the debate over cryptography policy is an asset rather than a
liability.  Moreover, some aspects of cryptography policy will require

legislation if they are to be properly implemented (as discussed under
Recommendation 5.3).This argument does not suggest that there are no legitimate secrets inthis area.  However, in accordance with the committee
Õs conclusion thatthe broad outlines of national cryptography policy can be analyzed on an
unclassified basis, the committee believes that the U.S. Congress can also
debate the fundamental issues in the open.  Nor is the committee arguing

that all aspects of policy should be handled in Congress.  The executive
branch is necessarily an important player in the formulation of national
cryptography policy, and of course it must implement policy.  Moreover,
while working with the Congress, the executive branch must develop a
coherent voice on the matter of cryptography policyÑone that it does notcurrently haveÑand establish a process that is efficient, comprehensive,and decisive in bringing together and rationalizing many disparate agency
views and interests.Instances in which legislation may be needed are found in Recom-mendations 4, 5, and 6.Recommendation 3:  National cryptography policy affecting the de-
velopment and use of commercial cryptography should be more closely
aligned with market forces.As cryptography has assumed greater importance to nongovernmentinterests, national cryptography policy has become increasingly discon-
nected from market reality and the needs of parties in the private sector.
As in many other areas, national policy on cryptography that runs counter
to user needs and against market forces is unlikely to be successful over
the long term.  User needs will determine the large-scale demand for

information security, and policy should seek to exploit the advantages of
market forces whenever and wherever possible.  Indeed, many decades of
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYexperience with technology deployment suggest that reliance on userchoices and market forces is generally the most rapid and effective way to
promote the widespread utilization of any new and useful technology.
Since the committee believes that the widespread deployment and use of
cryptography will be in the national interest, it believes that national
cryptography policy should align itself with user needs and market forces
to the maximum feasible extent.The committee recognizes that considerations of public safety andnational security make it undesirable to maintain an entirely laissez-faire
approach to national cryptography policy.  But it believes that govern-

ment intervention in the market should be carefully tailored to specific
circumstances.  The committee describes a set of appropriate government

interventions in Recommendations 4, 5, and 6.A national cryptography policy that is aligned with market forceswould emphasize the freedom of domestic users to determine crypto-
graphic functionality, protection, and implementations according to their
security needs as they see fit.  Innovation in technologies such as es-

crowed encryption would be examined by customers for their business
fitness of purpose.  Diverse user needs would be accommodated; some

users will find it useful to adopt some form of escrowed encryption to
ensure their access to encrypted data, while others will find that the risks
of escrowed encryption (e.g., the dangers of compromising sensitive in-
formation through a failure of the escrowing system) are not worth the
benefits (e.g., the ability to access encrypted data the keys to which have
been lost or corrupted).  Since no single cryptographic solution or ap-

proach will fit the business needs of all users, users will be free to make
their own assessments and judgments about the products they wish to
use.  Such a policy would permit, indeed encourage, vendors to imple-

ment and customers to use products that have been developed within an
already-existing framework of generally accepted encryption methods
and to choose key sizes and management techniques without restriction.Standards are another dimension of national cryptography policywith a significant impact on commercial cryptography and the market
(Chapter 6).  Cryptographic standards that are inconsistent with prevail-

ing or emerging industry practice are likely to encounter significant mar-
ket resistance.  Thus, to the maximum extent possible, national cryptogra-

phy policy that is more closely aligned with market forces should
encourage adoption by the federal government and private parties of
cryptographic standards that are consistent with prevailing industry prac-
tice.Finally, users in the private sector need confidence that products withcryptographic functionality will indeed perform as advertised.  To the

maximum degree possible, national cryptography policy should supportCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS307the use of algorithms, product designs, and product implementations thatare open to public scrutiny.  Information security mechanisms for wide-

spread use that depend on a secret algorithm or a secret implementation
invite a loss of public confidence, because they do not allow open testing
of the security, they increase the cost of hardware implementations, and
they may prevent the use of software implementations as described be-
low.  Technical work in cryptography conducted in the open can expose

flaws through peer review and assure the private sector user community
about the quality and integrity of the work underlying its cryptographic
protection (Chapter 5).Government classification of algorithms and product implementa-tions clearly inhibits public scrutiny, and for the nongovernment sector,
government classification in cryptography is incompatible with most com-
mercial and business interests in information security.  Moreover, the use

of classified algorithms largely precludes the use of software solutions,
since it is impossible to prevent a determined and technically sophisti-
cated opponent from reverse-engineering an algorithm implemented in
software.  A similar argument applies to unclassified company-propri-

etary algorithms and product designs, although the concerns that arise
with classified algorithms and implementations are mitigated somewhat
by the fact that it is often easier for individuals to enter into the nondisclo-
sure agreements necessary to inspect proprietary algorithms and product
designs than to obtain U.S. government security clearances.  Legally man-

dated security requirements to protect classified information also add to
costs in a way that protection of company-proprietary information does
not.Recommendation 4:  Export controls on cryptography should be
progressively relaxed but not eliminated.For many years, the United States has controlled the export of crypto-graphic technologies, products, and related technical information as mu-
nitions (on the U.S. Munitions List (USML) administered by the State
Department).  These controls have been used to deny potential adversar-

ies access to U.S. encryption technology that might reveal important char-
acteristics of U.S. information security products and/or be used to thwart
U.S. attempts at collecting signals intelligence information.  To date, these

controls have been reasonably effective in containing the export of U.S.
hardware-based products with encryption capabilities (Chapter 4).  How-

ever, software-based products with encryption capabilities and crypto-
graphic algorithms present a more difficult challenge because they can
more easily bypass controls and be transmitted across national borders.
In the long term, as the use of encryption grows worldwide, it is probableCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthat national capability to conduct traditional signals intelligence againstforeign parties will be diminished (as discussed in Chapter 3).The current export control regime on strong cryptography is an in-creasing impediment to the information security efforts of U.S. firms com-
peting and operating in world markets, developing strategic alliances
internationally, and forming closer ties with foreign customers and sup-
pliers.  Some businesses rely on global networks to tie together branch

offices and service centers across international boundaries.  Other busi-

nesses are moving from a concept of operations that relies on high de-
grees of vertical integration to one that relies on the ÒoutsourcingÓ of
many business functions and activities.  Consistent with rising emphasis

on the international dimensions of business (for both business operations
and markets), many U.S. companies must exchange important and sensi-
tive information with an often-changing array of foreign partners, cus-
tomers, and suppliers.  Under such circumstances, the stronger level of

cryptographic protection available in the United States is not meaningful
when an adversary can simply attack the protected information through
foreign channels.Export controls also have had the effect of reducing the domesticavailability of products with strong encryption capabilities.  As noted in

Chapter 4, the need for U.S. vendors (especially software vendors) to
market their products to an international audience leads many of them to
weaken the encryption capabilities of products available to the domestic
market, even though no statutory restrictions are imposed on that market.
Thus, domestic users face a more limited range of options for strong
encryption than they would in the absence of export controls.Looking to the future, both U.S. and foreign companies have the tech-nical capability to integrate high-quality cryptographic features into their
products and services.  As demand for products with encryption capabili-

ties grows worldwide, foreign competition could emerge at a level signifi-
cant enough to damage the present U.S. world leadership in this critical
industry.  Today, U.S. information technology products are widely used

in foreign markets because foreign customers find the package of features
offered by those products to be superior to packages available from other,
non-U.S. vendors, even though the encryption capabilities of U.S. prod-
ucts sold abroad are known to be relatively weak.  However, for growing

numbers of foreign customers with high security needs, the incremental
advantage of superior nonencryption features offered by U.S. products
may not be adequate to offset perceived deficiencies in encryption capa-
bility.  Under such circumstances, foreign customers may well turn to

non-U.S. sources that offer significantly better encryption capabilities in
their products.Overly restrictive export controls thus increase the likelihood thatCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS309significant foreign competition will step into a vacuum left by the inabil-ity of U.S. vendors to fill a demand for stronger encryption capabilities
integrated into general-purpose products.  The emergence of significant

foreign competition for the U.S. information technology industry has a
number of possible long-term negative effects on U.S. national and eco-
nomic security that policy makers would have to weigh against the con-
tribution these controls have made to date in facilitating the collection of
signals intelligence in support of U.S. national security interests (a contri-
bution that will probably decline over time).  Stimulating the growth of

important foreign competitors would undermine a number of important
national interests:¥  The national economic interest, which is supported by continuing and
even expanding U.S. world leadership in information technology sup-
ports.  Today, U.S. information technology vendors have a window of

opportunity to set important standards and deploy an installed base of
technology worldwide, an opportunity that should be exploited to the
maximum degree possible.  Conversely, strong foreign competition would

not be in the U.S. economic self-interest.¥  Traditional national security interests, which are supported by leader-
ship by U.S. vendors in supplying products with encryption capabilities
to the world market.  For example, it is desirable for the U.S. government
to keep abreast of the current state of commercially deployed encryption
technology, a task that is much more difficult to accomplish when the
primary suppliers of such technology are foreign vendors rather than U.S.
vendors.¥  U.S. business needs for trustworthy information protection, which are
supported by U.S. encryption products.  Foreign vendors could be influ-

enced by their governments to offer for sale to U.S. firms products with
weak or poorly implemented cryptography.  If these vendors were to gain

significant market share, the information security of U.S. firms could be
adversely affected.¥  Influence over the deployment of cryptography abroad, which is sup-
ported by the significant impact of U.S. export controls on cryptography
as the result of the strength of the U.S. information technology industry
abroad.  To the extent that the products of foreign competitors are avail-

able on the world market, the United States loses influence over cryptog-
raphy deployments worldwide.The committee believes that the importance of the U.S. informationtechnology industry to U.S. economic interests and national security is
large enough that some prudent risks can be taken to hedge against the
potential damage to that industry, and some relaxation of export controls
on cryptography is warranted.  In the long term, U.S. signals intelligence
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.310CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYcapability is likely to decrease in any case.  Consequently, the committee
believes that the benefits of relaxationÑnamely helping to promote betterinformation security for U.S. companies operating internationally and to
extend U.S. leadership in this critical industryÑare worth the short-termrisk that the greater availability of U.S. products with stronger encryption
capabilities will further impede U.S. signals intelligence capability.Relaxation of export controls on cryptography is consistent with thebasic principle of encouraging the use of cryptography in an information
society for several reasons.  First, relaxation would encourage the use of

cryptography by creating an environment in which U.S. and multinational
firms and users are able to use the same security products in the United
States and abroad and thus to help promote better information security for
U.S. firms operating internationally.  Second, it would increase the avail-

ability of good cryptography products in the United States.  Third, it would

expand U.S. business opportunities overseas for information technology
sales incorporating stronger cryptography for confidentiality by allowing
U.S. vendors to compete with foreign vendors on a more equal footing,
thereby helping to maintain U.S. leadership in fields critical to national
security and economic competitiveness (as described in Chapter 4).Some of these thoughts are not new.  For example, in referring to a
decision to relax export controls on computer exports, then-Deputy Secre-
tary of Defense William Perry said that Òhowever much we want to con-trol [computers] that are likely to be available on retail mass markets, it
will be impractical to control them,Ó and that 
Òwe have to recognize wedonÕt have any ability to control computers which are available on themass retail market from non-CoCom countries.Ó3  He further noted that
the U.S. government can no longer Òset the standards and specificationsof computers.  They
Õre going to be set in the commercial industry, and ourjob is to adapt to those if we want to stay current in the latest computer
technology.Ó  The committee believes that exports of information technol-
ogy products with encryption capabilities are not qualitatively different.At the same time, cryptography is inherently dual-use in character(more so than most other items on the USML), with important applications
to both civilian and military purposes.  While this fact suggests to some that

the export of all cryptography should be regulated under the Commerce
Control List (CCL), the fact remains that cryptography is a particularly
critical military application for which few technical alternatives are avail-
able.  The USML is designed to regulate technologies with such applica-

tions for reasons of national security (as described in Chapters 3 and 4), and
thus the committee concluded that the current export control regime on3William J. Perry, Deputy Secretary of Defense, ÒBreakfast with Reporters, Friday, Octo-ber 15, 1993, on Computer Exports,Ó transcript of an on-the-record briefing.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS311cryptography should be relaxed but not eliminated.  The committee be-
lieves that this action would have two major consequences:¥  Relaxation will achieve a better balance between U.S. economic
needs and the needs of law enforcement and national security.¥  Retention of some controls will mitigate the loss to U.S. national
security interests in the short term, allow the United States to evaluate the
impact of relaxation on national security interests before making further
changes, and Òbuy timeÓ for U.S. national security authorities to adjust to
a new technical reality.Consistent with Recommendation 3, the committee believes that theexport control regime for cryptography should be better aligned with
technological and market trends worldwide.  Recommendations 4.1 and

4.2 below reflect the committeeÕs judgments about how the present exportcontrol regime should be relaxed expeditiously.  However, it should be

noted that some explicit relaxations in the export control regime have
occurred over the last 15 years (see Chapter 4), although not to an extent
that has fully satisfied vendor interests in liberalization.  For example,

under current export rules, the USML governs the export of software
applications without cryptographic capabilities per se if they are designed
with ÒhooksÓ that would, among other things, make it easy to interface a
foreign-supplied, stand-alone cryptography module to the application
(turning it into an integrated product with encryption capability so far as
the user is concerned).  However, the U.S. government set a precedent in

1995 by placing on the CCL the software product of a major vendor that
incorporates a cryptographic applications programming interface (CAPI;
as described in Chapter 7 and Appendix K).Recommendation 4.3 is intended to provide for other importantchanges in the export control regime that would help to close the profound
gap described in Chapter 4 regarding the perceptions of national security
authorities vis-‹-vis those of the private sector, including both technologyvendors and users of cryptography; such changes would reduce uncer-
tainty about the export control licensing process and eliminate unnecessary
friction between the export control regime and those affected by it.Recommendations 4.1 and 4.2 describe changes to the current exportcontrol regime, and unless stated explicitly, leave current regulations and
proposals in place.  However, the committee believes that certain features

of the current regime are sufficiently desirable to warrant special atten-
tion here.  Specifically,
¥  Certain products with encryption capabilities are subject to a more
liberal export control regime by virtue of being placed on the CCL rather
than the USML; these products include those providing cryptographic
confidentiality that are specially designed, developed, or modified for useCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYin machines for banking or money transactions and are restricted to useonly in such transactions; and products that are limited in cryptographic
functionality to providing capabilities for user authentication, access con-
trol, and data integrity without capabilities for confidentiality.  Any

change to the export control regime for cryptography should maintain at
least this current treatment for these types of products.¥  Since items on the CCL by definition have potential military uses,
they are subject to trade embargoes against rogue nations.  Thus, even

products with encryption capabilities that are on the CCL require indi-
vidual licenses and specific U.S. government approval if they are intended
for use by a rogue destination.  Furthermore, U.S. vendors are prohibited
from exporting such products even to friendly nations if they know that
those products will be re-exported to rogue nations.  Maintaining the

embargo of products with encryption capabilities against rogue nations
supports the U.S. national interest and should not be relaxed now or in
the future.Finally, the committee notes that relaxation of export controls is onlythe first step on the road to greater use of cryptography around the world.
As described in Chapter 6 and Appendix G, foreign nations are sovereign
entities with the power and authority to apply import controls on prod-
ucts with encryption capabilities.  It is thus reasonable to consider that a

relaxation of U.S. export controls on cryptography may well prompt other
nations to consider import controls; in such a case, U.S. vendors may be
faced with the need to develop products with encryption capabilities on a
nation-by-nation basis.  Anticipating such eventualities as well as poten-

tial markets for escrowed encryption in both the United States and abroad,

vendors may wish to develop families of ÒescrowableÓ products (as dis-
cussed in Chapter 7) that could easily be adapted to the requirements of
various nations regarding key escrow; however, none of the three recom-
mendations below, 4.1 through 4.3, is conditioned on such development.Recommendation 4.1ÑProducts providing confidentiality at a levelthat meets most general commercial requirements should be easily ex-
portable.4  Today, products with encryption capabilities that incorpo-
rate the 56-bit DES algorithm provide this level of confidentiality and
should be easily exportable.4For purposes of Recommendation 4.1, a product that is Òeasily exportableÓ will auto-
matically qualify for treatment and consideration (i.e., commodity jurisdiction, or CJ) under
the CCL. Automatic qualification refers to the same procedure under which software prod-ucts using RC2 or RC4 algorithms for confidentiality with 40-bit key sizes currently qualifyfor the CCL.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS313A collateral requirement for products covered under Recommenda-tion 4.1 is that a product would have to be designed so as to preclude its
repeated use to increase confidentiality beyond the acceptable level (i.e.,
today, it would be designed to prevent the use of triple-DES).  However,

Recommendation 4.1 is intended to allow product implementations of
layered encryption (i.e., further encryption of already-encrypted data, as
might occur when a product encrypted a message for transmission on an
always-encrypted communications link).For secret keys used in products covered by Recommendation 4.1,public-key protection should be allowed that is at least as strong as the
cryptographic protection of message or file text provided by those prod-
ucts, with appropriate safety margins that protect against possible attacks
on these public-key algorithms.5  In addition, to accommodate vendors
and users who may wish to use proprietary algorithms to provide en-
cryption capabilities, the committee believes that products incorporating
any combination of algorithm and key size whose cryptographic charac-
teristics for confidentiality are substantially equivalent to the level al-
lowed under Recommendation 4.1 (today, 56-bit DES) should be granted
commodity jurisdiction (CJ) to the CCL on a case-by-case basis.An important collateral condition for products covered under Rec-ommendation 4.1 (and 4.2 below) is that steps should be taken to mitigate
the potential harm to U.S. intelligence-collection efforts that may result
from the wider use of such products.  Thus, the U.S. government should

require that vendors of products with cryptographically provided confi-
dentiality features exported under the relaxed export control regime of
Recommendation 4.1 (and 4.2 below) must provide to the U.S. govern-
ment under strict nondisclosure agreements (a) full technical specifica-
tions of their product, including source code and wiring schematics if
necessary, and (b) reasonable technical assistance upon request in order
to assist the U.S. government in understanding the productÕs internaloperations.  These requirements are consistent with those that govern

export licenses granted under the case-by-case review procedure for CJ
decisions today, and the nondisclosure agreements would protect propri-
etary vendor interests.These requirements have two purposes.  First, they would enable theU.S. government to validate that the product complies with all of the
conditions required for export jurisdiction under the CCL.  Second, they
5For example, the committee believes that a Rivest-Shamir-Adelman (RSA) or Diffie-Hellman key on the order of 1,024 bits would be appropriate for the protection of a 56-bit
DES key. The RSA and Diffie-Hellman algorithms are asymmetric. Chapter 2 discusses whykey sizes differ for asymmetric and symmetric algorithms.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYwould allow more cost-effective use of intelligence budgets for under-standing the design of exported cryptographic systems.Note that these requirements do not reduce the security provided bywell-designed cryptographic systems.  The reason is that a well-designed

cryptographic system is designed on the principle that all security af-
forded by the system must reside in the secrecy of an easily changed,
user-provided key, rather than in the secrecy of the system design or
implementation.  Because the disclosure of internal design and imple-

mentation information does not entail the disclosure of cryptographic
keys, the security afforded by a well-designed cryptographic system is
not reduced by these requirements.Finally, the level of cryptographic strength that determines the thresh-old of easy exportability should be set at a level that promotes the broad
use of cryptography and should be adjusted upward periodically as tech-
nology evolves.The committee believes that today, products that incorporate 56-bitDES for confidentiality meet most general commercial requirements and
thus should be easily exportable.  The ability to use 56-bit DES abroad will

significantly enhance the confidentiality available to U.S. multinational
corporations conducting business overseas with foreign partners, suppli-
ers, and customers and will improve the choice of products with encryp-
tion capabilities available to domestic users, as argued in Chapter 4.Relaxation of export controls in the manner described in Recommen-dation 4.1 will help the United States to maintain its worldwide market
leadership in products with encryption capabilities.  The committee be-

lieves that many foreign customers unwilling to overlook the perceived
weaknesses of 40-bit RC2/RC4 encryption, despite superior noncryp-
tography features in U.S. information technology products, are likely to
accept DES-based encryption as being adequate.  Global market accep-

tance of U.S. products incorporating DES-based encryption is more con-
ducive to U.S. national security interests in intelligence collection than is
market acceptance of foreign products incorporating even stronger algo-
rithm and key size combinations that may emerge to fill the vacuum if
U.S. export controls are not relaxed.Why DES? The Data Encryption Standard was promulgated by theNational Bureau of Standards in 1975 as the result of an open solicitation
by the U.S. government to develop an open encryption standard suitable
for nonclassified purposes.  Over the last 20 years, DES has gained wide-

spread acceptance as a standard for secret-key cryptography and is cur-
rently being used by a wide range of users, both within the United States
and throughout the world.  This acceptance has come from a number of

very important aspects that make DES a unique cryptographic solution.
Specifically, DES provides the following major benefits:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS315¥  DES provides a significantly higher level of confidentiality protec-
tion than does 40-bit RC2 or RC4, the key-size and algorithm combination
currently granted automatic commodity jurisdiction to the CCL.  In the

committeeÕs judgment, DES provides a level of confidentiality adequateto promote broader uses of cryptography, whereas the public perception
that 40-bit RC2/RC4 is ÒweakÓ does not provide such a level (even though
the wide use of 40-bit RC2/RC4 would have significant benefits for infor-
mation security in practice).6¥  Since its inception, DES has been certified by the U.S. government
as a high-quality solution for nonclassified security problems.  Although

future certification cannot be assured, its historical status has made it a
popular choice for private sector purposes.  Indeed, a large part of the

global financial infrastructure is safeguarded by products and capabilities
based on DES.  Moreover, the U.S. government has developed a process

by which specific DES implementations can be certified to function prop-
erly, increasing consumer confidence in implementations so certified.¥  The analysis of DES has been conducted in open forums over a
relatively long period of time (20 years).  DES is one of a handful of

encryption algorithms that has had such public scrutiny, and no flaws
have been discovered that significantly reduce the work factor needed to
break it; no practical shortcuts to exhaustive search for cryptanalytic at-
tacks on DES have been found.¥  DES can be incorporated into any product without a licensing
agreement or fees.  This means that any product vendor can include DES

in its products with no legal or economic impact on its product lines.¥  DES has nearly universal name recognition among both product
vendors and users.  Users are more likely to purchase DES-based prod-

ucts because they recognize the name.¥  Since many foreign products are marketed as incorporating DES,
U.S. products incorporating DES will not suffer a competitive market
disadvantage with respect to encryption features.These major benefits of DES are the result of the open approach takenin its development and its long-standing presence in the industry.  The

brute-force decryption of a single message encrypted with a 40-bit RC4
algorithm has demonstrated to information security managers around6In other words, the market reality is that a side-by-side comparison of two productsidentical except for their domestic vs. exportable encryption capabilities always results in a
market assessment of the stronger product as providing a ÒbaselineÓ level of security and
the weaker one as being inferior, rather than the weaker product providing the baseline andthe stronger one being seen as superior.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthe world that such a level of protection may be inadequate for sensitiveinformation, as described in Chapter 4.  A message encrypted with a 56-

bit key would require about 216 (65,536) times as long to break, and since
a 40-bit decryption has been demonstrated using a single workstation for
about a week, it is reasonable to expect that a major concerted effort,
including the cost of design, operation, and maintenance (generally sig-
nificantly larger than the cost of the hardware itself), would be required
for effective and efficient exhaustive-search decryption with the larger 56-
bit key (as described in Chapter 7).As described in Chapter 7, the economics of DES make it an attractivechoice for providing protection within mass-market products and appli-
cations intended to meet general commercial needs.  When integrated

into an application, the cost of using DES in practice is relatively small,
whereas the cost of cracking DES is significantly higher.  Since most infor-

mation security threats come from individuals within an enterprise or
individuals or small organizations outside the enterprise, the use of DES
to protect information will be sufficient to prevent most problems.  That

is, DES is Ògood enoughÓ for most information security applications and
is likely to be good enough for the next decade because only the most
highly motivated and well-funded organizations will be capable of sus-
taining brute-force attacks on DES during that time.Some would argue that DES is already obsolete and that what isneeded is a completely new standard that is practically impossible to
break for the foreseeable future.  Since computer processing speeds double

every 1.5 years (for the same component costs),  an exhaustive search for

cryptographic keys becomes roughly 1,000 times easier every 15 years or
so.  Over time, any algorithm based on a fixed key length (DES uses a 56-
bit key) becomes easier to attack.  While the committee agrees that a

successor to DES will be needed in the not-so-distant future, only DES has
today the record of public scrutiny and practical experience that is neces-
sary to engender public confidence.  Developing a replacement for DES,

complete with such a record, will take years by itself, and waiting for such
a replacement will leave many of todayÕs information vulnerabilities with-out a viable remedy.  Adopting DES as today
Õs standard will do much torelieve pressures on the export control regime stemming from commer-
cial users needing to improve security, and will give the United States
and other nations time to formulate a long-term global solution, which
may or may not include provisions to facilitate authorized government
access to encrypted data, based on the knowledge gained from emerging
escrow techniques, digital commerce applications, and certificate authen-
tication systems, which are all in their infancy today.Given that a replacement for DES will eventually be necessary, prod-uct designers and users would be well advised to anticipate the need toCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS317upgrade their products in the future.  For example, designers may need to
design into the products of today the ability to negotiate cryptographic
protocols with the products of tomorrow.  Without this ability, a transi-

tion to a new cryptographic standard in the future might well be very
expensive and difficult to achieve.The committee recognizes that the adoption of Recommendation 4.1may have a negative impact on the collection of signals intelligence.  Much

of the general intelligence produced today depends heavily on the ability
to monitor and select items of interest from the large volumes of commu-
nications sent in the clear.  If most of this traffic were encrypted, even at

the levels allowed for liberal export today, the selection process would
become vastly more difficult.  Increasing the threshold of liberal

exportability from 40-bit RC2/RC4 to 56-bit DES will not, in itself, add
substantially to the difficulties of message selection.  Foreign users of

selected channels of high-interest communications would, in many cases,
not be expected to purchase and use U.S. encryption products under any
circumstances and thus in these cases would not be affected by a change
in the U.S. export control regime.  However, it is likely that the general

use of 56-bit DES abroad will make it less likely that potentially signifi-
cant messages can be successfully decrypted.The overwhelming acceptance of DES makes it the most natural can-didate for widespread use, thereby significantly increasing the security of
most systems and applications.  The committee believes that such an

increase in the ÒfloorÓ of information security outweighs the additional
problems caused to national security agencies when collecting informa-
tion.  Since DES has been in use for 20 years, those agencies will at least be

facing a problem that has well-known and well-understood characteris-
tics.  Recommendation 5 addresses measures that should help national

security authorities to develop the capabilities necessary to deal with these
problems.Recommendation 4.2ÑProducts providing stronger confidentialityshould be exportable on an expedited basis to a list of approved compa-
nies if the proposed product user is willing to provide access to de-
crypted information upon legally authorized request.Recommendation 4.1 addresses the needs of most general commer-cial users.  However, some users for some purposes will require encryp-

tion capabilities at a level higher than that provided by 56-bit DES.  The

AdministrationÕs proposal to give liberal export consideration to softwareproducts with 64-bit encryption provided that those products are es-
crowed with a qualified escrow agent is a recognition that some usersCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYmay need encryption capabilities stronger than those available to the gen-eral commercial market.The philosophy behind the AdministrationÕs proposal is that the wideforeign availability of strong encryption will not significantly damage
U.S. intelligence-gathering and law enforcement efforts if the United
States can be assured of access to plaintext when necessary.  Recommen-

dation 4.2 builds on this philosophy to permit liberal export consideration
of products with encryption capabilities stronger than that provided by
56-bit DES to users that are likely to be Òtrustworthy,Ó i.e., willing to
cooperate in providing access to plaintext for U.S. law enforcement au-
thorities when a legally authorized request is made to those companies.
(How firms are designated as approved companies is described below.)
These approved firms will determine for themselves how to ensure access
to plaintext, and many of them may well choose to use escrowed encryp-
tion products.  A firm that chooses to use escrowed encryption would be

free to escrow the relevant keys with any agent or agents of its own
choosing, including those situated within the firm itself.Note that while Recommendation 4.2 builds on the philosophy un-derlying the AdministrationÕs current software encryption proposal, itstands apart from it.  In other words, Recommendation 4.2 should not be

regarded as a criticism of, as a substitute for, or in contrast to the
AdministrationÕs proposal.From the standpoint of U.S. law enforcement interests, continued in-clusion on the list of approved firms is a powerful incentive for a com-
pany to abide by its agreement to provide access to plaintext under the
proper circumstances.  While Recommendation 4.2 does not stipulate that

companies must periodically requalify for the list, a refusal or inability to
cooperate when required might well result in a company being dropped
from the list and publicly identified as a noncooperating company, and
subject the parties involved to the full range of sanctions that are available
today to enforce compliance of product recipients with end-use restric-
tions (as described in Chapter 4).Recommendation 4.2 also provides a tool with which the United Statescan promote escrowed encryption in foreign nations.  Specifically, the

presence of escrowed encryption products that are in fact user-escrowed
would help to deploy a base of products on which the governments of the
relevant nations could build policy regimes supporting escrowed encryp-
tion.  It has the further advantage that it would speed the deployment of

escrowed encryption in other countries because shipment of escrowed
encryption products would not have to wait for the completion of formal
agreements to share escrowed keys across international boundaries, a
delay that would occur under the current U.S. proposal on escrowed
encryption software products.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS319U.S. vendors benefit from Recommendation 4.2 because the foreigncustomers on the list of approved companies need not wait for the suc-
cessful negotiation of formal agreements.  Moreover, since Recommenda-

tion 4.2 allows approved companies to establish and control their own
escrow agents, it eliminates the presence or absence of escrowing features
as a competitive disadvantage.  A final benefit for the U.S. vendor com-

munity is that Recommendation 4.2 reduces many bureaucratic impedi-
ments to sales to approved companies on the list, a benefit particularly
valuable to smaller vendors that lack the legal expertise to negotiate the
export control regime.Customers choosing products covered under Recommendation 4.2benefit because they retain the choice about how they will provide access
to decrypted information.  Potential customers objecting to Administra-

tion proposals on the export of escrowed encryption because their crypto-
graphic keys might be compromised can be reassured that keys to prod-
ucts covered by Recommendation 4.2 could remain within their full
control.  If these customers choose to use escrowed encryption products

to meet the need for access, they may use escrow agents of their own
choosing, which may be the U.S. government, a commercial escrow agent
as envisioned by the AdministrationÕs proposal, or an organization inter-nal to the customer company.Recommendation 4.2 is silent on how much stronger the encryptioncapabilities of covered products would be as compared to the capabilities
of the products covered by Recommendation 4.1.  The Administration has

argued that the 64-bit limit on its current proposal is necessary because
foreign parties with access to covered products might find a way to by-
pass the escrowing features.  However, Recommendation 4.2 covers prod-

ucts that would be used by approved firms that, by assumption, would
not be expected to tamper with products in a way that would prevent
access to plaintext when necessary or would bypass the escrowing fea-
tures of an escrowed encryption product.  (The risks inherent in this

assumption are addressed below in Requirements 1 through 3 for ap-
proved companies.)  In addition, the committee observes that providing

much stronger cryptographic confidentiality (e.g., 80 or 128 bits of key size
rather than 56 or 64) would provide greater incentives for prospective
users to adopt these products.What firms constitute the list of approved companies? Under currentpractice, it is generally the case that a U.S.-controlled firm (i.e., a U.S. firm
operating abroad, a U.S.-controlled foreign firm, or a foreign subsidiary
of a U.S. firm) will be granted a USML license to acquire and export for its
own use products with encryption capabilities stronger than that pro-
vided by 40-bit RC2/RC4 encryption.  Banks and financial institutions

(including stock brokerages and insurance companies), whether U.S.-con-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtrolled/owned or foreign-owned, are also generally granted USML li-censes for stronger cryptography for use in internal communications and
communications with other banks even if these communications are not
limited strictly to banking or money transactions.  Such licenses are

granted on the basis of an individual review rather than through a cat-
egorical exemption from the USML.Building on this practice, the committee believes that this categoryshould be expanded so that a U.S.-controlled firm is able to acquire and
export products covered under Recommendation 4.2 to its foreign suppli-
ers and customers for the purpose of regular communications with the
U.S.-controlled firm.  A number of USML licenses for cryptography have

implemented just such an arrangement, but the purpose of Recommenda-
tion 4.2 is to make these arrangements far more systematic and routine.In addition, foreign firms specifically determined by U.S. authoritiesto be major and trustworthy firms should qualify for the list of approved
companies.  To minimize delay for U.S. information technology vendors

and to help assure their competitiveness with foreign vendors, a list of the
firms eligible to purchase U.S. products with encryption capabilities and/
or the criteria for inclusion on the list should be made available upon
request.  Over time, it would be expected that the criteria would grow to

be more inclusive so that more companies would qualify.All firms on this list of approved companies would agree to certainrequirements:¥  Requirement 1ÑThe firm will provide an end-user certification thatthe exported products will be used only for intrafirm business or by for-
eign parties in regular communications with the U.S. or approved foreign
firm involved.¥  Requirement 2ÑThe firm will take specific measures to prevent thetransfer of the exported products to other parties.¥  Requirement 3ÑThe firm agrees to provide the U.S. governmentwith plaintext of encrypted information when presented with a properly
authorized law enforcement request and to prove, if necessary, that the
provided plaintext does indeed correspond to the encrypted information
of interest.  The use of escrowed encryption products would not be re-

quired, although many companies may find such products an appropri-
ate technical way to meet this requirement.The firms on the list of approved companies are likely to have needsfor information security products of the highest strength possible for the
environment in which they operate, because they are more likely to be the
targets of the major concerted cryptanalytic effort described in Recom-
mendation 4.1.  On the other hand, some risks of diversion to unintended
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS321purposes do remain, and a firmÕs obligation to abide by Requirements 1through 3 is a reasonable precaution that protects against such risks.  Note

also that the approved companies are defined in such a way as to increase
the likelihood that they will be responsible corporate citizens, and as such
responsive to relevant legal processes that may be invoked if access to
plaintext data is sought.  Further, they are likely to have assets in the

United States that could be the target of appropriate U.S. legal action
should they not comply with any of the three requirements above.Recommendation 4.3ÑThe U.S. government should streamline andincrease the transparency of the export licensing process for cryptogra-
phy.As discussed in Chapters 4 and 6, the committee found a great deal ofuncertainty regarding rules, time lines, and the criteria used in making
decisions about the exportability of particular products.  To reduce such

uncertainty, as well as to promote the use of cryptography by legitimate
users, the following changes in the export licensing process should occur.a.  For cryptography submitted to the State Department for export
licensing, the presumptive decision should be for approval rather than
disapproval.  Licensing decisions involving cryptography should be pre-sumed to be approvable unless there is a good reason to deny the license.
The committee understands that foreign policy considerations may affect
the granting of export licenses to particular nations, but once national
security concerns have been satisfied with respect to a particular export,
cryptography should not be regarded for export control purposes as dif-
fering from any other item on the CCL.  Thus, if telephone switches were
to be embargoed to a particular nation for foreign policy reasons, cryptog-
raphy should be embargoed as well.  But if telephone switches are al-

lowed for export, cryptography should be allowed if national security
concerns have been satisfied, even if other items on the USML are embar-
goed.b.  The State Department
Õs licensing process for cryptography ex-ports should be streamlined to provide more expeditious decision mak-
ing.  A streamlined process would build on procedural reforms already
achieved and might further include the imposition of specific deadlines
(e.g., if a license approved by the National Security Agency (NSA) is not
denied by the State Department within 14 days, the license is automati-
cally approved) or the establishment of a special desk within the State
Department specifically with the expertise for dealing with cryptogra-
phy; such a desk would consult with country or regional desks but wouldCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYnot be bound by their decisions or schedules for action.  Such streamlining
would greatly reduce the friction caused by exports determined to be con-
sistent with U.S. national security interests but denied or delayed for rea-
sons unrelated to national security.c.  The U.S. government should take steps to increase vendor and
user understanding of the export control regime with the intent of bridg-
ing the profound gap in the perceptions of national security authorities
and the private sector, including both technology vendors and users of
cryptography.  These steps would build on the efforts already undertaken

over the last several years in this area.  Possible additional steps that

might be taken to reduce this gap include:¥  Sponsorship of an annual briefing regarding the rules and regu-
lations governing the export of cryptography.  While established infor-

mation technology vendors have learned through experience about
most of the rules and regulations and informal guidelines that channel
decision making regarding export licenses, newer firms lack a compa-
rable base of experience.  The U.S. government should seek a higher

degree of clarity regarding what exporting vendors must do to satisfy
national security concerns.¥  Clarification of the rules regarding export of technical data.  Forexample, foreign students attending U.S. universities can be exposed
to any cryptographic source code without consequence, whereas U.S.
vendors violate the law in developing products with encryption capa-
bilities if they hire non-U.S. citizens to work as designers or
implementors.  For very complex products, it is very difficult if not

impossible to ÒpartitionÓ the projects so that the non-U.S. citizen is
unable to gain access to the cryptographic code.  Such apparent incon-
sistencies should be reconciled, keeping in mind practicality and en-
forceability.Recommendation 5:  The U.S. government should take steps to as-
sist law enforcement and national security to adjust to new technical
realities of the information age.For both law enforcement and national security, cryptography is atwo-edged sword.  In the realm of national security, the use of cryptogra-

phy by adversaries impedes the collection of signals intelligence.  Manag-

ing the damage to the collection of signals intelligence is the focus of
export controls, as discussed in Chapter 4 and in the text accompanying
Recommendation 4.  At the same time, cryptography can help to defend

vital information assets of the United States; the use of cryptography in
this role is discussed in Recommendations 5.1 and 5.2 below.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS323From the standpoint of law enforcement, cryptography provides tools
that help to prevent crime, e.g., by helping law-abiding businesses and
individuals defend themselves against information crimes, such as the
theft of proprietary information and the impersonation of legitimate par-
ties by illegitimate ones.  Crime prevention is an important dimension of

law enforcement, especially when the crimes prevented are difficult to
detect.  Nevertheless, the public debate to date has focused primarily on

the impact of cryptography on criminal prosecutions and investigations.The committee accepts that the onset of an information age is likely tocreate many new challenges for public safety, among them the greater use
of cryptography by criminal elements of society.  If law enforcement au-

thorities are unable to gain access to the encrypted communications and
stored information of criminals, some criminal prosecutions will be sig-
nificantly impaired, as described in Chapter 3.The AdministrationÕs response to this law enforcement problem hasbeen the aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption as a pillar of the
technical foundation for national cryptography policy.  The committee

understands the AdministrationÕs rationale for promoting escrowed en-cryption but believes that escrowed encryption should be only one part of
an overall strategy for dealing with the problems that encryption poses
for law enforcement and national security.In the context of an overall strategy, it is important to examine thespecific problems that escrowed encryption might solve.  For example,

Administration advocates of escrowed encryption have argued that the
private sector needs techniques for recovering the plaintext of stored en-
crypted data for which the relevant keys have been lost.  To the extent that

this is true, the law enforcement need for access to encrypted records
could be substantially met by the exercise of the governmentÕs compul-sory process authority (including search warrants and subpoenas) for
information relevant to the investigation and prosecution of criminal ac-
tivity against both the encrypted records and any relevant cryptographic
keys, whether held by outside escrow agents or by the targets of the
compulsory process.  In this way, law enforcement needs for access to

encrypted files, records, and stored communications such as e-mail are
likely to be met by mechanisms established to serve private sector needs.Communications (i.e., digital information in transit) pose a differentproblem from that of data storage.  Neither private individuals nor busi-

nesses have substantial needs for exceptional access to the plaintext of
encrypted communications.  Thus, it is unlikely that users would volun-

tarily adopt on a large scale measures intended to ensure exceptional
access to such communications.  Law enforcement authorities are under-

standably concerned that they will be denied information vital for the
investigation and prosecution of criminal activity.  At the same time, it is
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.324CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYnot clear that encrypted digital communications will in fact be the mostimportant problem for law enforcement authorities seeking to gain access
to digital information.In the short term, voice communications are almost certainly moreimportant to law enforcement than are data communications, a problem
addressed through Recommendation 5.2.  Over the longer term, the chal-
lenges to law enforcement authorities from data communications are
likely to grow as data communications become more ubiquitous and as
the technical distinction between voice and data blurs.  The committee

believes that advanced information technologies are likely to lead to ex-
plosive increases in the amount of electronic information being transmit-
ted (e.g., e-mail); given the likelihood that the spread of encryption capa-
bilities will be much slower than the rate at which the volume of electronic
communications increases, the opportunities for authorized law enforce-
ment exploitation of larger amounts of unprotected computer-readable
information may well increase in the short run.  Nevertheless, when en-

crypted data communications do become ubiquitous, law enforcement
may well face a serious challenge.  For this reason, Recommendation 5.3,

dealing with an exploration of escrowed encryption, sets into motion a
prudent ÒhedgeÓ strategy against this eventuality; Recommendation 5.4
begins the process of seeking to discourage criminal use of cryptography;
and Recommendation 5.5 addresses the development of new technical
capabilities to meet the challenge of encryption.Against this backdrop, Recommendation 5.3 is only one part of anoverall strategy for dealing with the problems that encryption poses for
law enforcement and national security.Recommendation 5.1ÑThe U.S. government should actively en-courage the use of cryptography in nonconfidentiality applications such
as user authentication and integrity checks.The nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography (e.g., digital sig-natures, authentication and access controls, nonrepudiation, secure time/
date stamps, integrity checks) do not directly threaten law enforcement or
national security interests and do not in general pose the same policy
dilemma as confidentiality does.  Since the deployment of infrastructures

for the nonconfidentiality uses of cryptography is a necessary (though not
sufficient) condition for the use of cryptography for confidentiality, the
nation may take large steps in this area without having to resolve the
policy dilemmas over confidentiality, confident that those steps will be
beneficial to the nation in their own right.  Policy can and should promote

nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography in all relevant areas.One of the most important of these areas concerns protection againstCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS325systemic national vulnerabilities.  Indeed, in areas in which confidence in
and availability of a national information network are most critical, non-

confidentiality uses of cryptography are even more important than are
capabilities for confidentiality.  For example, ensuring the integrity of data

that circulates in the air traffic control system is almost certainly more
important than ensuring its confidentiality; ensuring the integrity (accu-
racy) of data in the banking system is often more important than ensuring
its confidentiality.7Nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography support reliable userauthentication.  Authentication of users is an important crime-fighting

measure, because authentication is the antithesis of anonymity.  Crimi-

nals in general seek to conceal their identities; reliable authentication ca-
pabilities can help to prevent unauthorized access and to audit improper
accesses that do occur.  Nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography

support reliable integrity checks on data; used properly, they can help to
reduce crimes that result from the alteration of data (such as changing the
payable amount on a check).To date, national cryptography policy has not fully supported thesenonconfidentiality uses.  Some actions have been taken in this area, but

these actions have run afoul of government concerns about confidential-
ity.  For example, the government issued a Federal Information Process-

ing Standard (FIPS) for the Digital Signature Standard in 1993, based on
an unclassified algorithm known as the Digital Signature Algorithm.  This

FIPS was strongly criticized by industry and the public, largely because it
did not conform to the de facto standard already in use at the time, namely
one based on the Rivest-Shamir-Adelman (RSA) algorithm.  Government
sources told the committee that one reason the government deemed the
RSA algorithm inappropriate for promulgation as a FIPS was that it is
capable of providing strong confidentiality (and thus is not freely export-
able) as well as digital signature capability.  The two other reasons were

the desire to promulgate an approach to digital signatures that would be
royalty-free (RSA is a patented algorithm) and the desire to reduce overall
system costs for digital signatures.8  Export controls on cryptography for
confidentiality have also had some spillover effect in affecting the foreign7This is not to say that confidentiality plays no role in protecting national informationsystems from unauthorized penetration.  As noted in Chapter 2, cryptographically pro-
vided confidentiality can be one important (though secondary) dimension of protecting
information systems from unauthorized penetration.8For a discussion of the patent issues involved in the decision regarding the Digital Signa-ture Standard and the concern over confidentiality, see Office of Technology Assessment,
Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, OTA-TCT-606, U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office, Washington, D.C., 1994, pp. 167-168 and pp. 217-222.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.326CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYavailability of cryptography for authentication purposes, as described inChapter 4.The government has expressed considerably more concern in the pub-lic debate regarding the deleterious impact of widespread cryptography
used for confidentiality than over the deleterious impact of not deploying
cryptographic capabilities for user authentication and data integrity.  The

government has not fully exercised the regulatory influence it does have
over certain sectors (e.g., telecommunications, air traffic control) to pro-
mote higher degrees of information security that would be met through
the deployment of nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography.  Fi-

nally, the committee believes that since todayÕs trend among vendors andusers is to build and use products that integrate multiple cryptographic
capabilities (for confidentiality and for authentication and integrity) with
general-purpose functionality, government actions that discourage capa-
bilities for confidentiality also tend to discourage the development and
use of products with authentication and integrity capabilities even if there
is no direct prohibition or restriction on products with only capabilities
for the latter (Chapter 4).What specific actions can the government take to promote nonconfi-dentiality applications of cryptography?  For illustrative purposes only,

the committee notes that the government could support and foster techni-
cal standards and/or standards for business practices that encourage
nonconfidentiality uses based on de facto commercial standards.  One

example would be the promulgation of a business requirement that all
data electronically provided to the government be certified with an integ-
rity check and a digital signature.  A second example would be enactment

of legislation and associated regulations setting standards to which all
commercial certification authorities should conform; greater clarity re-
garding the liabilities, obligations, and responsibilities for certificate au-
thorities would undoubtedly help to promote applications based on certi-
fication authorities.  A third example is that the U.S. government has a

great deal of expertise in the use of cryptography and other technologies
for authentication purposes; an aggressive technology transfer effort in
this domain would also help to promote the use of reliable authentication
methods.A final dimension of this issue is that keys used in nonconfidentialityapplications of cryptography, especially ones that support established
and essential business practices or legal constructs (e.g., digital signa-
tures, authentication, integrity checks), must be controlled solely by the
immediate and intended parties to those applications.  Without such as-

surances, outside access to such keys could undermine the legal basis and
threaten the integrity of these practices carried out in the electronic do-
main.  Whatever benefits might accrue to government authorities acting
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS327in the interests of public safety or national security from being able toforge digital signatures or alter digital data clandestinely would pale by
comparison to the loss of trust in such mechanisms that would result from
even a hint that such activities were possible.Recommendation 5.2ÑThe U.S. government should promote thesecurity of the telecommunications networks more actively.  At a mini-
mum, the U.S. government should promote the link encryption of cel-
lular communications9 and the improvement of security at telephone
switches.As described in Chapter 1, the public switched telecommunicationsnetwork (PSTN) is both critical to many sectors of the national economy
and is undergoing rapid evolution.  While the U.S. government has taken

some steps to improve the security of the PSTN, much more could be
done based on the regulatory authority that the U.S. government has in
this area.The encryption of wireless voice communications would prevent eaves-dropping that is all too easy in todayÕs largely analog cellular telephonemarket.  As wireless communications shift from analog to digital modes of
transport, encryption will become easier even as the traffic itself becomes
harder to understand.  A requirement to encrypt wireless communications
may also accelerate the shift to wireless modes of digital transport.  How-

ever, because of the cost of retrofitting existing cellular services, this recom-
mendation is intended to apply only to the deployment of future cellular
services.Security in telephone switches could be improved in many ways.  For
example, a requirement for adequate authentication to access such switches
would prevent unauthorized access from maintenance ports; such ports
often provide remote access to all switch functions, a level of access equal to
what could be obtained by an individual standing in the control center.  Yet

such ports are often protected with nothing more than a single password.
Telecommunications service providers could also provide services for link
encryption of traffic on wired landlines (Chapter 7).By addressing through the telecommunications service providers the
publicÕs demands for greater security in voice communications (especially
9ÒLink encryptionÓ refers to the practice of encrypting information being communicated
in such a way that it is encrypted only in between the node from which it is sent and the
node where it is received; while the information is at the nodes themselves, it isunencrypted.  In the context of link encryption for cellular communications, a cellular call
would be encrypted between the mobile handset and the ground station.  When carried on

the landlines of the telephone network, the call would be unencrypted.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.328CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthose such as cellular telephone traffic) that are widely known to benonsecure, government would maintain law enforcement access for law-
fully authorized wiretaps through the requirements imposed on carriers
today to cooperate with law enforcement in such matters.  For example, a

cellular telephone connects to the PSTN through a ground station; since in
general, the cellular telephone service provider must feed its traffic to the
PSTN in unencrypted form, encrypted cellular telephone traffic from the
mobile handset would be decrypted at the ground station, at which point

law enforcement could gain authorized access.  Thus, legitimate law en-

forcement access would not, in general, be impeded by link encryption of
cellular traffic until communications systems that bypass the PSTN en-
tirely become common.Recommendation 5.2 is an instance of a general philosophy that link(or node) security provided by a service provider offers more opportuni-
ties for providing law enforcement with legally authorized access than
does security provided by the end user.  In the case of voice communica-

tions, improved security over the telecommunications network used for
voice communications and provided by the owners and operators of that
networkÑa good thing in its own right and consistent with the basicprinciple of this reportÑwould also reduce the demand for (and thus theavailability of) devices used to provide end-to-end encryption of voice
communications.  Without a ready supply of such devices, a criminal user

would have to go to considerable trouble to obtain a device that could
thwart a lawfully authorized wiretap.Recommendation 5.2 focuses on voice communications, given thatfor the foreseeable future, voice is likely to be the most common form of
communication used by the general public (and hence by criminals as
well).  The committee recognizes that data communications will pose

certain problems for law enforcement, and this is the focus of Recommen-
dation 5.3.Recommendation 5.3ÑTo better understand how escrowed encryp-tion might operate, the U.S. government should explore escrowed en-
cryption for its own uses.  To address the critical international dimen-

sions of escrowed communications, the U.S. government should work
with other nations on this topic.As described in Chapter 5, escrowed encryption (as a generic concept,not limited to the Clipper/Capstone initiatives of the U.S. government)
has both benefits and risks from a public policy standpoint.  The purpose

of encryption is to provide users with high degrees of assurance that their
sensitive information will remain secure.  The primary benefit of 
escrowedencryption for law enforcement and national security is that when prop-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS329erly implemented and widely deployed, it provides such assurance butnevertheless enables law enforcement and national security authorities to
obtain access to escrow-encrypted data in specific instances when autho-
rized by law.  Escrowed encryption also enables businesses and individu-

als to recover encrypted stored data to which access has been inadvert-
ently lost, and businesses to exercise a greater degree of control over their
encrypted communications.  Finally, by meeting demands for better infor-

mation security emanating from legitimate business and private interests,
escrowed encryption may dampen the market for unescrowed encryption
products that would provide similar security but without features for gov-
ernment exceptional access that law enforcement and national security au-
thorities could use for legitimate and lawfully authorized purposes.The risks of escrowed encryption are also considerable.  Escrowed
encryption provides a potentially lower degree of confidentiality than
does properly implemented unescrowed encryption, because escrowed
encryption is specifically designed to permit external access and then
relies on procedures and technical controls implemented and executed by
human beings to prevent unauthorized use of that access.  While policy

makers have confidence that procedures can be established and imple-
mented without a significant reduction of information security, skeptics
place little faith in such procedural safeguards.  Maintaining system secu-

rity is difficult enough without the deliberate introduction of a potential
security hole, and the introduction of another route of attack on procedures
simply complicates the job of the information defender.  In addition, the

widespread adoption of escrowed encryption, even on a voluntary basis,
would lay into place mechanisms, procedures, and organizations that could
be used to promulgate and/or enforce more restrictive cryptography poli-
cies.  With such elements in place, some critics of escrowed encryption fear

that procedural safeguards against government abuse that are administra-
tive in nature, or that rest on the personal assurances of government offi-
cials, could be eviscerated by a future administration or Congress.The committee believes that many policy benefits can be gained by anoperational exploration of escrowed encryption by the U.S. government,
but also that aggressive promotion of the concept is not appropriate at
this time for four reasons.First, not enough is yet known about how best to implement escrowedencryption on a large scale.  The operational complexities of a large-scale

infrastructure are significant (especially in an international context of
cross-border communications), and approaches proposed today for deal-
ing with those complexities are not based on real experience.  A more

prudent approach to setting policy would be to develop a base of experi-
ence that would guide policy decisions on how escrowed encryption
might work on a large scale in practice.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.330CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYSecond, because of the ease with which escrowed encryption can becircumvented technically, it is not at all clear that escrowed encryption
will be a real solution to the most serious problems that law enforcement
authorities will face.  Administration officials freely acknowledge that

their various initiatives promoting escrowed encryption are not intended
to address all criminal uses of encryption, but in fact those most likely to
have information to conceal will be motivated to circumvent escrowed
encryption products.Third, information services and technologies are undergoing rapidevolution and change today, and nearly all technology transitions are
characterized by vendors creating new devices and services.  Imposing a

particular solution to the encryption dilemma at this time is likely to have
a significant negative impact on the natural market development of appli-
cations made possible by new information services and technologies.

While the nation may choose to bear these costs in the future, it is particu-
larly unwise to bear them in anticipation of a large-scale need that may
not arise and in light of the nationÕs collective ignorance about how es-crowed encryption would work on a large scale.Fourth and most importantly, not enough is yet known about howthe market will respond to the capabilities provided by escrowed encryp-
tion, nor how it will prefer the concept to be implemented, if at all.  Given

the importance of market forces to the long-term success of national cryp-
tography policy, a more prudent approach to policy would be to learn
more about how in fact the market will respond before advocating a
specific solution driven by the needs of government.For these reasons, the committee believes that a policy of deliberateexploration of the concept of escrowed encryption is better suited to the
circumstances of today than is the current policy of aggressive promotion.
The most appropriate vehicle for such an exploration is, quite naturally,
government applications.  Such exploration would enable the U.S. gov-

ernment to develop and document the base of experience on which to
build a more aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption should cir-
cumstances develop in such a way that encrypted communications come
to pose a significant problem for law enforcement.  This base would in-

clude significant operating experience, a secure but responsive infrastruc-
ture for escrowing keys, and devices and products for escrowed encryp-
tion whose unit costs have been lowered as the result of large government
purchases.In the future, when experience has been developed, the U.S. govern-ment, by legislation and associated regulation, will have to clearly specify
the responsibilities, obligations, and liabilities of escrow agents (Chapter
5).  Such issues include financial liability for the unauthorized release or

negligent compromise of keys, criminal penalties for the deliberate andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS331knowing release of keys to an unauthorized party, statutory immuniza-tion of users of escrowed encryption against claims of liability that might
result from the use of such encryption, and the need for explicit legal
authorization for key release.  Such legislation (and regulations issued

pursuant to such legislation) should allow for and, when appropriate,
distinguish among different types of escrow agents, including organiza-
tions internal to a user company, private commercial firms for those firms
unwilling or unable to support internal organizations for key holding,
and government agencies.Such government action is a necessary (but not sufficient) conditionfor the growth and spread of escrowed encryption in the private sector.
Parties whose needs may call for the use of escrowed encryption will
need confidence in the supporting infrastructure before they will entrust
encryption keys to the safekeeping of others.  Moreover, if the govern-

ment is to actively promote the voluntary use of escrowed encryption in
the future, it will need to convince users that it has taken into account
their concerns about compromise and abuse of escrowed information.
The best way to convince users that these agents will be able to live up to
their responsibilities is to point to a body of experience that demonstrates
their ability to do so.  In a market-driven system, this body of experience

will begin to accrue in small stepsÑsome in small companies, some inbigger onesÑrather than springing up fully formed across the country inevery state and every city.  As this body of experience grows, government

will have the ability to make wise decisions about the appropriate stan-
dards that should govern escrow agents.In addition, the U.S. government should pursue discussions withother nations on how escrowed encryption might operate internationally
(Appendix G).  The scope of business and law enforcement today crosses
national borders, and a successful U.S. policy on cryptography will have
to be coordinated with policies of other nations.  Given that the developed

nations of the world have a number of common interests (e.g., in preserv-
ing authorized law enforcement access to communications, in protecting
the information assets of their domestic businesses), the process begun at
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in Decem-
ber 1995 is a promising forum in which these nations can bring together
representatives from business, law enforcement, and national security to
discuss matters related to cryptography policy over national borders.
Fruitful topics of discussion might well include how to expand the net-
work of Mutual Law Enforcement Assistance Treaties that bind the United
States and other nations to cooperate on law enforcement matters.
Broader cooperation should contribute to the sharing of information re-
garding matters that involve the criminal use of encryption; national poli-
cies that encourage the development and export of ÒescrowableÓ encryp-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.332CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYtion products; understanding of how to develop a significant base of ac-tual experience in operating a system of escrowed encryption for commu-
nications across national borders; and the negotiation of sector-specific
arrangements (e.g., a specific set of arrangements for banks) that cross
international boundaries.Recommendation 5.4ÑCongress should seriously consider legisla-tion that would impose criminal penalties on the use of encrypted com-
munications in interstate commerce with the intent to commit a federal
crime.The purpose of such a statute would be to discourage the use ofcryptography for illegitimate purposes.  Criminalizing the use of cryptog-

raphy in this manner would provide sanctions analogous to the existing
mail fraud statutes, which add penalties to perpetrators of fraud who use
the mail to commit their criminal acts.  Such a law would focus the weight

of the criminal justice system on individuals who were in fact guilty of
criminal activity, whereas a mandatory prohibition on the use of cryptog-
raphy would have an impact on law-abiding citizens and criminals alike.A concern raised about the imposition of penalties based on a periph-eral aspect of a criminal act is that it may be used to secure a conviction
even when the underlying criminal act has not been accomplished.  The

statute proposed for consideration in Recommendation 5.4 is not intended
for this purpose, although the committee understands that it is largely the
integrity of the judicial and criminal justice process that will be the ulti-
mate check on preventing its use for such purposes.As suggested in Chapter 7, any statute that criminalizes the use ofencryption in the manner described in Recommendation 5.4 should be
drawn narrowly.  The limitation of Recommendation 5.4 to federal crimes

restricts its applicability to major crimes that are specifically designated
as such; it does not extend to the much broader class of crimes that are
based on common law.  Under Recommendation 5.4, federal jurisdiction

arises from the limitation regarding the use of communications in inter-
state commerce.  The focus of Recommendation 5.4 on encrypted commu-nications recognizes that private sector parties have significant incentives
to escrow keys used for encrypting stored data, as described in Recom-
mendation 5.3.  A statute based on Recommendation 5.4 should also make

clear that speaking in foreign languages unknown to many people would
not fall within its reach.  Finally, the use of 
ÒencryptedÓ communications
should be limited to communications encrypted for confidentiality pur-
poses, not for user authentication or data integrity purposes.  The drafters

of the statute would also have to anticipate other potential sources of
ambiguity such as the use of data compression techniques that also ob-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS333scure the true content of a communication and the lack of a commonunderstanding of what it means to Òuse encrypted communications
Ó when
encryption may be a ubiquitous and automatic feature in a communica-
tions product.Finally, the committee recognizes the existence of debate over theeffectiveness of laws targeted against the use of certain mechanisms (e.g.,
mail, guns) to commit crimes.  Such a debate should be part of a serious

consideration of a law such as that described in Recommendation 5.4.
However, the committee is not qualified to resolve this debate, and the
committee takes no position on this particular issue.A second aspect of a statutory approach to controlling the sociallyharmful uses of encryption could be to expand its scope to include the
criminalization of the intentional use of cryptography in the concealment
of a crime.  With such an expanded scope, the use of cryptography would

constitute a prima facie act of concealment, and thus law enforcement
officials would have to prove only that cryptography was used intention-ally to conceal a crime.  On the other hand, its more expansive scope
might well impose additional burdens on businesses and raise other con-
cerns, and so the committee takes no stand on the desirability of such an
expansion of scope.The committee notes the fundamental difference between Recommen-dation 5.4 and Recommendation 1.  Recommendation 1 says that the use

of any type of encryption within the United States should be legal, but 
notthat any use of encryption should be legal.  Recommendation 5.4 says that
the nation should consider legislation that would make illegal a specificuse of encryption (of whatever type), namely the use of encrypted com-
munications in interstate commerce with the intent of committing a fed-
eral crime.Recommendation 5.5ÑHigh priority should be given to research,development, and deployment of additional technical capabilities for
law enforcement and national security for use in coping with new tech-
nological challenges.Over the past 50 years, both law enforcement and national securityauthorities have had to cope with a variety of changing technological
circumstances.  For the most part, they have coped with these changes

quite well.  This record of adaptability provides considerable confidence

that they can adapt to a future of digital communications and stored data
as well, and they should be strongly supported in their efforts to develop
new technical capabilities.Moreover, while the committeeÕs basic thrust is toward a wider use ofcryptography throughout society, considerable time can be expected toCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.334CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYelapse before cryptography is truly ubiquitous.  For example, Recommen-
dation 4.1 is likely to accelerate the widespread use of DES, but market
forces will still have the dominant effect on its spread.  Even if export

controls were removed tomorrow, vendors would still take time to decide
how best to proceed, and the use of DES across the breadth of society will
take even longer.  Thus, law enforcement and national security authori-

ties have a window in which to develop new capabilities for addressing
future challenges.  Such development should be supported, because effec-

tive new capabilities are almost certain to have a greater impact on their
future information collection efforts than will aggressive attempts to pro-
mote escrowed encryption to a resistant market.An example of such support would be the establishment of a technicalcenter for helping federal, state, and local law enforcement authorities with
technical problems associated with new information technologies.10  Such a
center would of course address the use by individuals of unescrowed en-
cryption in the commission of criminal acts, because capabilities to deal
with this problem will be necessary whether or not escrowed encryption is
widely deployed.  Moreover, for reasons of accessibility and specific tailor-

ing of expertise to domestic criminal matters, it is important for domestic
law enforcement to develop a source of expertise on the matter.  A second

problem of concern to law enforcement authorities is obtaining the digital
stream carrying the targeted communications.  The task of isolating the

proper digital stream amidst multiple applications and multiplexed chan-
nels will grow more complex as the sophistication of applications and tech-
nology increases, and law enforcement authorities will need to have (or
procure) considerable technical skill to extract useful information out of the
digital streams involved.  These skills will need to be at least as good as

those possessed by product vendors.Compared to the use of NSA expertise, a technical center for lawenforcement would have a major advantage in being dedicated to serving
law enforcement needs, and hence its activities and expertise relevant to
prosecution would be informed and guided by the need to discuss ana-
lytical methods in open court without concern for classification.  More-

over, such a center could be quite useful to state and local law enforce-
ment authorities who currently lack the level of access to NSA expertise
accorded the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).10This example is consistent with the FBI proposal for a Technical Support Center (TSC)to serve as a central national law enforcement resource to address problems related toencryption and to technological problems with an impact on access to electronic communi-
cations and stored information. The FBI proposes that a TSC would provide law enforce-ment with capabilities in signals analysis (e.g., protocol recognition), mass media analysis(e.g., analysis of seized computer media), and cryptanalysis on encrypted data communica-
tions or files.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS335National security authorities recognize quite clearly that future capa-bilities to undertake traditional signals intelligence will be severely chal-
lenged by the spread of encryption and the introduction of new commu-
nications media.  In the absence of improved cryptanalytic methods,

cooperative arrangements with foreign governments, and new ways of
approaching the information collection problem, losses in traditional sig-
nals intelligence capability would likely result in a diminished effective-
ness of the U.S. intelligence community.  To help ensure the continuing

availability of strategic and tactical intelligence, efforts to develop alter-
natives to traditional signals intelligence collection techniques should be
given high priority in the allocation of financial and personnel resources
before products covered by Recommendation 4.1 become widely used.Recommendation 6:  The U.S. government should develop a mecha-
nism to promote information security in the private sector.Although the committee was asked to address national cryptographypolicy, any such policy is necessarily only one component of a national
information security policy.  Without a forward-looking and comprehen-

sive national information security policy, changes in national cryptography
policy may have little operational impact on U.S. information security.
Thus, the committee believes it cannot leave unaddressed the question of a
national information security policy, although it recognizes that it was not
specifically chartered with such a broad issue in mind.The committee makes Recommendation 6 based on the observationthat the U.S. government itself is not well organized to meet the chal-
lenges posed by an information society.  Indeed, no government agency

has the responsibility to promote information security in the private sec-
tor.  The information security interests of most of the private sector have

no formal place at the policy-making table: the National Security Agency
represents the classified government community, while the charter of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology directs it to focus on the
unclassified needs of the government (and its budget is inadequate to do
more than that).  Other organizations such as the Information Infrastruc-

ture Task Force and the Office of Management and Budget have broad
influence but few operational responsibilities.  As a result, business and

individual stakeholders do not have adequate representation in the de-
velopment of information security standards and export regimes.For these reasons, the nation requires a mechanism that will provideaccountability and focus for efforts to promote information security in the
private sector.  The need for information security cuts across many di-

mensions of the economy and the national interest, suggesting that absentCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.336CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYa coordinated approach to promoting information security, the needs ofmany stakeholders may well be given inadequate attention and notice.The importance of close cooperation with the private sector cannot beoveremphasized.  While the U.S. government has played an important

role in promoting information security in the past (e.g., in its efforts to
promulgate DES, its stimulation of a market for information security prod-
ucts through the government procurement process, its outreach to in-
crease the level of information security awareness regarding Soviet col-
lection attempts, and the stimulation of national debate on this critical
subject), information security needs in the private sector in the informa-
tion age will be larger than ever before (as argued in Recommendation 3).
Thus, close consultations between government and the private sector are
needed before policy decisions are made that affect how those needs can
be addressed.  Indeed, many stakeholders outside government have criti-

cized what they believe to be an inadequate representation of the private
sector at the decision-making table.  While recognizing that some part of

such criticism simply reflects the fact that these stakeholders did not get
all that they wanted from policy makers, the committee believes that the
policy-making process requires better ways for representing broadly both
government and nongovernment interests in cryptography policy.  Those

who are pursuing enhanced information security and those who have a
need for legal access to stored or communicated information must both be
included in a robust process for managing the often-competing issues and
interests that will inevitably arise over time.How might the policy-making process include better representationof nongovernment interests?  Experiences in trade policy suggest the fea-
sibility of private sector advisors, who are often needed when policy cuts
across many functional and organizational boundaries and interests both
inside and outside government.  National policy on information security

certainly falls into this cross-cutting category, and thus it might make
sense for the government to appoint parties from the private sector to
participate in government policy discussions relevant to export control
decisions and/or decisions that affect the information security interests of
the private sector.  Despite the committee
Õs conclusion that the broadoutlines of national cryptography policy can be argued on an unclassified
basis, classified information may nevertheless be invoked in such discus-
sions and uncleared participants asked to leave the room.  To preclude

this possibility, these individuals should have the clearances necessary to
engage as full participants in order to promote an effective interchange of
views and perspectives.  While these individuals would inevitably reflect

the interests of the organizations from which they were drawn, their es-
sential role would be to present to the government their best technicalCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS337and policy advice, based on their expertise and judgment, on how gov-ernment policy would best serve the national interest.How and in what areas should the U.S. government be involved inpromoting information security?  One obvious category of involvement is

those areas in which the secure operation of information systems is criti-
cal to the nationÕs welfareÑinformation systems that are invested withthe public trust, such as those of the banking and financial system, the
public switched telecommunications network, the air traffic control sys-
tem, and extensively automated utilities such as the electric power grid.
Indeed, the U.S. government is already involved to some extent in pro-
moting the security of these systems, and these efforts should continue
and even grow.In other sectors of the economy, the committee sees no particularreason for government involvement in areas in which businesses are
knowledgeable (e.g., their own operational practices, their own risk-ben-
efit assessments), and the role of the U.S. government is most properly
focused on providing information and expertise that are not easily avail-
able to the private sector.  Specifically, the government should build on

existing private-public partnerships and private sector efforts in dissemi-
nating information (e.g., the Forums of Incident Response and Security
Teams (FIRST), the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT), the I-4
group, the National Counterintelligence Center) to take a vigorous and
proactive role in collecting and disseminating information to promote
awareness of the information security threat.  For illustrative purposes

only, some examples follow.  The government might:
¥  Establish mechanisms in which the sharing of sanitized security-
related information (especially information related to security breaches)
could be undertaken without disadvantaging the companies that reveal
such information.  Such efforts might well build on efforts in the private

sector to do the same thing.¥  Undertake a program to brief senior management in industry on
the information security threat in greater detail than is usually possible in
open forums but without formal security clearances being required for
those individuals.  Such briefings would mean that specific threat infor-

mation might have to be declassified or treated on a Òfor official use onlyÓbasis.¥  Expand the NIST program that accredits firms to test products
involving cryptography for conformance to various Federal Information
Processing Standards.  As of this writing, three private companies today

have been accredited to evaluate and certify compliance of products claim-
ing to conform to FIPS 140-1, the FIPS for cryptographic modules; bothCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.338CRYPTOGRAPHYÕS ROLE IN SECURING THE INFORMATION SOCIETYthe range of FIPSs subject to such evaluation and the number of certifyingcompanies could be increased.¥  Help industry to develop common understandings regarding cryp-
tography and information security standards that would constitute fair
defenses against damages.  These common understandings would help to

reduce uncertainty over liability and Òresponsible practice.Ó¥  Undertake technology transfer efforts that would help the private
sector to use powerful and capable authentication technologies devel-
oped by government.  As noted elsewhere in this section, authentication

is an application of cryptography that poses a minimal public policy di-
lemma, and so the use of such government-developed technology should
not be particularly controversial.Finally, in describing the need for a mechanism to promote informa-tion security in the private sector, the committee does not make a recom-
mendation on its specific form because its charter did not call for it to
address the question of government organization.  As discussed in Chap-

ter 7, such a mechanism could be a new coordinating office for informa-
tion security in the Executive Office of the President.  It could be one or

more existing agencies or organizations with a new charter or set of re-
sponsibilities.  It could be a new government agency or organization,

although in the current political climate such an agency would demand
the most compelling justification.  It could be a quasi-governmental body

or a governmentally chartered private organization, examples of which
are described in Chapter 6.  Because of NSA
Õs role within the defense andintelligence communities and its consequent concern about defense and
intelligence threats and systems, the committee believes the NSA is not
the proper agency to assume primary responsibility for a mission that is
primarily oriented toward the needs of the private sector.  At the same

time, experts from all parts of the U.S. government should be encouraged
to assist in analyzing vulnerabilities; if such assistance requires new legis-
lative authority, such authority should be sought from Congress.8.3  ADDITIONAL WORK NEEDED
The committee recognizes that a number of important areas wereoutside the scope of this study.  Two of these areas are described below:
¥  As noted in Chapter 2, the creation of an infrastructure (or infra-
structures) to support user authentication is a central aspect of any wide-
spread use of various forms of cryptography.  The nature of these infra-

structures is a matter of public policy; however, since the committee was
concerned primarily with addressing issues related to cryptographic con-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS339fidentiality, it did not address infrastructure issues in the depth that wouldbe necessary to provide detailed advice to federal decision makers.¥  As noted in Chapter 7 and discussed in Appendix L, digital cash
and electronic money pose many issues for public policy.  These issues

considerably transcend what could be examined within the scope of the
current study.Although the committee realized that these areas were important, anin-depth study in each would require a committee with a different mem-
bership, a different charge, and a different time line.  Problems in these

areas will become relevant in the near future, and policy makers may
wish to anticipate them by commissioning additional examination.8.4  CONCLUSION
The committee believes that its recommendations will lead to en-hanced confidentiality and protection of information for individuals and
companies, thereby reducing economic and financial crimes and economic
espionage from both domestic and foreign sources.  While the recommen-

dations will to that extent contribute to the prevention of crime and en-
hance national security, the committee recognizes that the spread of cryp-
tography will increase the burden of those in government charged with
carrying out certain specific law enforcement and intelligence activities.
It believes that widespread commercial and private use of cryptography
in the United States and abroad is inevitable in the long run and that its
advantages, on balance, outweigh its disadvantages.  The committee con-

cluded that the overall interests of the government and the nation would
best be served by a policy that fosters a judicious transition toward the
broad use of cryptography.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXESCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.343AContributors to the NRC Project on
National Cryptography PolicyA.1  COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Kenneth W. Dam, Chair, is the Max Pam Professor of American andForeign Law at the University of Chicago Law School, where he is also
director of the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics.  Mr. Dam

received his bachelorÕs degree from the University of Kansas and com-
pleted his graduate work at the University of Chicago Law School.  Dur-

ing the period from 1985 to 1992, he held the post of corporate vice presi-
dent for law and external relations at IBM.  Mr. Dam served as deputy

secretary of state (1982-1985) and as provost of the University of Chicago
(1980-1982).  Mr. Dam currently serves on the board of Alcoa and on the

boards of a number of nonprofit institutions, including the Brookings
Institution and the Council on Foreign Relations.  He is also co-chairman

(with Senator Sam Nunn) of the Aspen Strategy Group.  He has written

books on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the international
monetary system, U.S. economic policy, and the development of oil re-
sources, as well as many articles on economic policy and antitrust law.W.Y. Smith, Vice Chair, is president emeritus and a trustee of the Institutefor Defense Analyses; he was its president from 1985 to 1991.  Prior to that

he was a fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
at the Smithsonian Institution, 1983 to 1984.  His military posts include

deputy commander in chief of the European Command in Germany, 1981Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.344APPENDIX Ato 1983; chief of staff of SHAPE, Belgium, 1979 to 1981; assistant to thechairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1975 to 1979; and director of Policy
Plans and National Security Affairs at the Office of the Assistant Secretary
for International Security Affairs.  He has a BS from the U.S. Military

Academy, 1948, and an MPA and a PhD from Harvard University, 1961.
He is director and treasurer of the Atlantic Council of the United States
and a member of the executive committee of the National Security Ar-
chives Board of Directors.Lee Bollinger has been provost of Dartmouth College since July 1994.
Previously, he was a professor at the University of Michigan Law School
from 1973 and served as dean of the law school from 1987 to 1994.  In 1983

he was a visiting associate at Clare Hall, Cambridge University.  Mr.

Bollinger received his bachelorÕs degree from the University of Oregonand a law degree from Columbia University School of Law.  In 1972-1973,

he served as a law clerk to Supreme Court Justice Warren E. Burger.  His

books include Images of a Free Press (University of Chicago Press, 1991)
and The Tolerant Society: Freedom of Speech and Extremist Speech in America(Oxford University Press, 1987).  He has published numerous articles on

freedom of the press and free speech, including ÒThe First Amendmentand National SecurityÓ and 
ÒThe First Amendment and New Communi-cations Technologies.Ó  He was co-author of the National Research Coun-
cil publication ÒConstitutional Issues in Regulating Televised Presenta-tions of ViolenceÓ in 1982.  Mr. Bollinger is a fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences.Ann Caracristi was appointed a member of President Clinton
Õs ForeignIntelligence Advisory Board in September 1993.  She was deputy director

of the National Security Agency from January 1980 to August 1982.  Ms.

Caracristi holds a BA from Russell Sage College and is a graduate of the
Federal Executive Institute.  She has received the Department of Defense

Distinguished Civilian Service Award, the National Intelligence Distin-
guished Service Medal, and the United States National Security Award.
Currently she is a consultant to the NSA Scientific Advisory Board and a
member of the Board of Visitors of the Defense Language Institute For-
eign Language Center.  She served as a member of the Chief of Naval

Operations Executive Panel from October 1982 to September 1991.  She

was a two-term president of the Association of Former Intelligence Offi-
cers from 1989 to 1991.  Most recently she was a member of the Commis-

sion on the Roles and Capabilities of the U.S. Intelligence Community.Benjamin R. Civiletti has been in private law practice with Venable,
Baetjer, Howard & Civiletti in Baltimore and Washington, D.C., sinceCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTRIBUTORS TO THE NRC PROJECT ON NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY3451981.  He is chairman of that firm.  Prior to 1981, he was U.S. attorney
general from 1979 to 1981, deputy U.S. attorney general from 1978 to 1979,
and assistant attorney general for the Criminal Division of the Depart-
ment of Justice, 1977 and 1978.  He has an AB from Johns Hopkins Univer-

sity, 1957, and an LLB from the University of Maryland, 1961.  He is

chairman of the board of directors of Maryland Healthcorp; a director of
MBNA Corporation, MBNA International, Wackenhut Corrections Cor-
poration, and the Bethlehem Steel Corporation; a trustee of Johns Hopkins
University; former chairman of Maryland Legal Services Corporation;
and a chairman of the Governors Task Force for Funding of Public Educa-
tion.Colin Crook is the senior technology officer of Citicorp.  He has gover-
nance and oversight responsibility for technology at Citicorp, including
operational management of the global information network.  Mr. Crook is

a graduate of the United KingdomÕs Liverpool Polytechnic, where heearned his degrees (electrical engineering) while working as a computer
designer for the Plessey Company.  Mr. Crook has held various positions
in top management for the Motorola Corporation in the United States and
Europe, as well as positions with Rank Precision Industries, Zynar, Ltd.,
and British Telecom.  He also was senior vice president with Data General

(USA).  Mr. Crook has been a key speaker at international industry con-

ferences, has published in scholarly and professional journals, and has
been the subject of numerous interviews.  He is a member of the Associa-

tion for Computing Machinery, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, and the Institution of Electrical Engineers (United Kingdom).
In 1981, Mr. Crook was elected to the United KingdomÕs Royal Academyof Engineering, the youngest person to be so honored at the time.Samuel H. Fuller is currently a vice president and the chief scientist of
Digital Equipment Corporation.  Prior to joining Digital in 1978, Dr. Fuller

was an associate professor of computer science and electrical engineering
at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU).  While at CMU, he was involved in

the performance evaluation and design of several experimental multipro-
cessor computer systems.  His fields of interest include computer science

and electrical engineering.  Dr. Fuller received his BS from the University

of Michigan (1968) and his MS (1969) and PhD (1972) in electrical engi-
neering and computer science from Stanford University.  He is a member

of the National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers, and Association for Computing Machinery.  Dr. Fuller

was a founding member of the Computer Science and Telecommunica-
tions Board (1986-1992) and served on the steering committee for the
Competitiveness Colloquium Follow-up Workshop on Systems Integra-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.346APPENDIX Ation (1989-1991).  Dr. Fuller is on the board of directors of Analog Device
Inc. and INSO Corporation.Leslie H. Gelb has been president of the Council on Foreign Relations
since 1993.  He is a trustee of the Carnegie Endowment for International

Peace and of Tufts University, a board member of Columbia UniversityÕsSchool of International and Public Affairs, and an advisory board mem-
ber for the Center on Press, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard Univer-
sityÕs John F. Kennedy School of Government.  He is a member of the
International Institute for Strategic Studies and a fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences.  In 1985, Mr. Gelb shared in the winning of

the Pulitzer Prize for explanatory journalism.  He was a senior associate

for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace from 1980 to 1981,
and from 1977 to 1979, he served as director of the Bureau of Politico-
Military Affairs, where he received the Distinguished Honor Award.  He

was a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution from 1969 to 1973 and also
a visiting professor at Georgetown University.  He was director of Policy

Planning and Arms Control for International Security Affairs at the De-
partment of Defense from 1967 to 1969, where he also served as director
of the Pentagon Papers Project.  While at the Defense Department, Mr.

Gelb won the PentagonÕs Distinguished Service Award.  Mr. Gelb was
executive assistant to U.S. Senator Jacob K. Javits from 1966 to 1967 and an
assistant professor at Wesleyan University from 1964 to 1966.  Mr. Gelb

received a BA from Tufts University in 1959, and his MA in 1961 and PhD
in 1964 from Harvard University.  He is an author and a co-author of

several foreign policy studies.Ronald Graham is director of Information Sciences Research at AT&T
Laboratories, which he joined in 1962, and has also been a professor at
Rutgers University since 1987.  Concurrently, he has been a Regents
Õ Pro-
fessor of Mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a
frequent visiting professor of computer science at Stanford University
and Princeton University.  He was a Fairchild Distinguished Scholar at

the  California Institute of Technology in 1982.  Dr. Graham
Õs research isin combinatorics, number theory, graph theory, algorithms, and combina-
torial geometry.  He has a BS in physics from the University of Alaska,

1958, and an MA and a PhD in mathematics from the University of Cali-
fornia, Berkeley, 1962.  Dr. Graham was awarded the Polya Prize in com-
binatorics in 1972 and the Euler Medal in combinatorics in 1994.  He is a

member of the National Academy of Sciences and a past president of the
American Mathematical Society, and he is a fellow of the American Acad-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTRIBUTORS TO THE NRC PROJECT ON NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY347emy of Arts and Sciences, the New York Academy of Sciences, and theAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science.Martin Hellman is a professor of electrical engineering at Stanford Uni-
versity, where he has been since 1971.  Previously, he was an assistant

professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1969 to 1971
and a staff member at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center from 1968 to
1969.  Dr. Hellman
Õs specialties are information and communication theory,cryptography and data security, and international security.  His BE is from
New York University and his MS and PhD in electrical engineering are

from Stanford University.  He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and

Electronics Engineers and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.Ambassador Julius Katz is president of Hills & Company, International
Consultants.  The firm provides clients with strategic advice and risk

analysis on trade and investment interests abroad.  Ambassador Katz

held the position of deputy U.S. trade representative from 1989 to 1993.
During this period, he was the U.S chief negotiator for the North Ameri-
can Free Trade Agreement.  He also had senior management responsibil-
ity for bilateral and regional negotiations with Europe and the Western
Hemisphere and for the multilateral trade negotiations known as the Uru-
guay Round.  Ambassador Katz previously worked as a public policy

consultant and from 1987 to 1989 was chairman of the Government Re-
search Corporation in Washington, D.C.  From 1980 to 1985, he worked in

the financial services industry, where he was chairman of Donaldson,
Lufkin & Jenrette Futures Inc.  Ambassador Katz joined the U.S. Depart-

ment of State in 1950 and on his retirement from the State Department
after 30 years of service held the position of assistant secretary of state for
economic and business affairs.  While at the State Department, Ambassa-
dor Katz led numerous U.S. delegations in negotiations on trade, com-
modity, and transport matters.Peter G. Neumann is principal scientist in the Computer Science Labora-tory at SRI, where he has worked since 1971.  His projects have involved

computer systems security, high assurance, human safety, and reliability.
He was a member of the Air Force Studies Board database security study
and of the National Research CouncilÕs System Security Study Committeethat produced the report Computers at Risk (National Academy Press,
1991).  He also served on an expert panel for the U.S. House Judiciary

CommitteeÕs Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights.  Dr.
Neumann received his AB, SM, and PhD from Harvard University in
1954, 1955, and 1961, respectively.  In 1960 he received a Dr. rerum

naturarum from the Technische Hochschule, Darmstadt, Germany, whereCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.348APPENDIX Ahe was a Fulbright scholar for 2 years.  From 1976 to 1994, he was editor of
SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes for the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM), and since 1985 he has been chairman of the ACM
Committee on Computers and Public Policy.  Dr. Neumann was awarded

an ACM Outstanding Contribution Award in 1992 and the first SRI Ex-
ceptional Performance Award for Leadership in Community Service, also
in 1992.  He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-

neers, the ACM, and the American Association for the Advancement of
Science.Raymond Ozzie is the founder and president of Iris Associates, the devel-
oper of Lotus Notes.  Iris, which began operations in 1984, is a wholly

owned subsidiary of Lotus Development Corporation and IBM Corpora-
tion.  Before founding Iris, Mr. Ozzie worked at Lotus, where he was the

lead architect and developer of LotusÕ Symphony product.  Prior to Lotus,
he was an engineering manager at Software Arts, the developer of the
first electronic spreadsheet, VisiCalc.  Mr. Ozzie received his degree in

computer science in 1978 from the University of Illinois in Urbana-
Champaign, where he did research in distributed computing and was a
systems programmer for PLATO, a pioneering distributed computer-
based education and collaboration system connecting students and re-
searchers at hundreds of locations worldwide.Edward C. Schmults was senior vice president of external affairs and
general counsel of GTE Corporation from 1984 to 1995.  Previously he

served as a deputy attorney general of the United States from 1981 to
1984, deputy counsel to the President from 1975 to 1976, and undersecre-
tary of the Treasury Department from 1974 to 1975.  Mr. Schmults was a

partner of the New York law firm of White & Case from 1965 to 1973 and
from 1977 to 1981.  He sits on the board of directors of the GreenPoint

Bank, the Germany Fund, and the Central European Equity Fund and is
chairman of the board of trustees of the Refugee Policy Group.  He served

with the U.S. Marine Corps from 1953 to 1955.  Mr. Schmults has a BS

from Yale University and a JD from Harvard University, 1958.Elliot M. Stone has been executive director of the Massachusetts Health
Data Consortium since it was established in 1978 as a private, nonprofit
corporation and a nonpartisan setting for the collection and analysis of
the stateÕs large health care databases.  The consortium publishes annual
reports and sets data standards for a broad constituency of health care
organizations and business coalitions.  Previously, Mr. Stone served as

director of the stateÕs Center for Health Statistics in the MassachusettsDepartment of Public Health.  Mr. Stone has been an advisor to the
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTRIBUTORS TO THE NRC PROJECT ON NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY349Agency for Health Care Policy & Research, the National Center for Health-care Statistics, the Health Care Financing Administration, and the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation.  He is an active member of the National Asso-

ciation of Health Data Organizations and the Association for Health Ser-
vices Research.  Mr. Stone received his BA and MS degrees from Boston

University.  He was a member of the Institute of Medicine study that

produced the report Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, andPrivacy (National Academy Press, 1994).
Willis H. Ware is a member (emeritus) of the Corporate Research Staff atthe RAND Corporation.  His career has spanned all aspects of computer

scienceÑhardware, software, architecture, software development, federalagency and military applications, real-time systems, networks, manage-
ment of computer-intensive projects, and public policy.  In the late 1960s

he developed a research interest in the security of computer systems and
networks, and shortly thereafter, a corresponding interest in the personal
privacy consequences of record-keeping systems.  He has written exten-

sively on both topics.  He was the first chairman of the American Federa-
tion of Information Processing Societies (AFIPS) and in the early 1970s
chaired the SecretaryÕs Advisory Committee on Automated Personal DataSystems of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.  Its report

was the foundation for the Federal Privacy Act of 1974.  Subsequently, he

was appointed to the Privacy Protection Study Commission by President
Ford and served as both commissioner and vice chairman.  Its report

remains the most extensive examination of private sector record-keeping
practices.  He currently chairs the statutory Computer System Security

and Privacy Advisory Board.  Dr. Ware received his BS from the Univer-

sity of Pennsylvania, an SM from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, and a PhD from Princeton UniversityÑall in electrical engineering.He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the
Association for Computing Machinery, and the American Association for
the Advancement of Science, and he was elected to the National Academy
of Engineering in 1985.A.2  ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTORS TO THE PROJECT
The following individuals provided the committee with briefings,discussion, position papers, personal views, and background materials.
They are listed alphabetically.  Individuals who explicitly requested com-

plete anonymity are not listed.Edward Allen, Federal Bureau of Investigation; Edward J. Appel, Na-tional Security Council; John A. Armstrong, IBM (retired); Wendell Bailey,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.350APPENDIX ANational Cable Television Association; Stewart Baker, Steptoe andJohnson; Richard C. Barth, Motorola; Bill Bauriedel; David C. Bedard;
Sheldon R. Bentley, Boeing Computer Services; Jerry Berman, Center for
Democracy and Technology; Tom Berson, Anagram Laboratories; Rose

Biancinello, Department of State; Robert Blandford; Matt Blaze; Eric Blos-
som; William Earl Boebert, Sandia National Laboratories; Barry Briggs, Lo-
tus Development Corporation; David Brin; Ken Bronstein, Hewlett-
Packard; Clinton Brooks, National Security Agency; Melinda Brown, Lotus
Development Corporation; Robert E. Bruccoleri, Bristol-Myers Squibb Phar-

maceutical Research Institute; James Carr, U.S. District Court of Toledo;
Vinton G. Cerf, MCI Telecommunications Corporation; Jesse Choper, Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley; Anthony Clark, House Science Committee;
Judi Clark; Floyd I. Clarke, MacAndrews & Forbes; David Cohen, Central
Intelligence Agency; Leroy L. Cook, MITRE Corporation; Daniel Corcoran,
Electronic Data Systems; Aaron W. Cross, IBM; William Crowell, National
Security Agency; Walter Curtis, National Semiconductor Corporation;
David Decker, GTE Laboratories; Philippe Dejean, Service Central de la
S”curit” des Syst
‘mes dÕInformation, Service du Premier Ministre (France);James X. Dempsey, Center for National Security Studies; Dorothy Denning,
Georgetown University;Whitfield Diffie, Sun Microsystems; M. Nanette DiTosto, U.S. Council forInternational Business; Esther Dyson, EDventure Holdings Inc.; Robert I.
Eachus; Carl Ellison, CyberCash Inc.; Glenn Everhart; Lincoln D. Faurer,
National Security Agency (retired); C. William Ferguson, Semaphore Cor-
poration; Robert Fielding, National Security Agency; Hal Finney; Clifford
S. Fishman, Catholic University of America; William Flanagan, Lotus De-
velopment Corporation; Martin L. Fogelman; Greg Frazier, House Intelli-
gence Committee; Paul Freedenberg, Baker and Botts; Louis Freeh, Federal
Bureau of Investigation; Roger E. French, Digital Equipment Corporation;
A. Michael Froomkin, University of Miami Law School; Robert Gallagher,
Department of Commerce; Roby Gamboa; Richard Garwin, IBM T.J. Wat-

son Research Center; Toby Gati, Department of State; Jeffrey Gaynor,
Department of Defense; Kenneth Geide, Federal Bureau of Investigation;
Thomas A. Gilbert, Network Systems Corporation; Louis Giles, National
Security Agency; John Gilmore, Cygnus Support; Ronald Goldstock, Kroll
Associates; Jamie S. Gorelick, Department of Justice; Rebecca Gould, Busi-
ness Software Alliance; Graham Greenleaf, University of New South Wales;
William F. Hagerty IV, Management Advisory Group; Keith Hall, Depart-

ment of Defense; Bruce Hamilton; Martha Harris, Department of State;
Matthew D. Healy, Yale Center for Medical Informatics; Bruce Heiman,
Business Software Alliance; David A. Hendon, Department of Trade and
Industry (United Kingdom); David Henry, National Security Agency;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTRIBUTORS TO THE NRC PROJECT ON NATIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY351Richard Hertling, Senate Judiciary Committee; R.S. (Bob) Heuman; MackHicks, Bank of America;Richard Hill; K. Mignon Hoffman, Boeing Computer Services; LanceHoffman, George Washington University; Robert Hood, Congressman
Newt GingrichÕs Office; Eric Hughes; Deborah Hurley, Organization forEconomic Cooperation and Development; Rick Jinelsky, Hewlett-Packard;
Michael Paul Johnson; Thomas Kalil, National Economic Council; Raymond
Kammer, National Institute of Standards and Technology; Phil Karn; Sally
Katzen, Office of Management and Budget; Elizabeth Kaufman, Citibank;
Stephen T. Kent, BBN Communications; Gordon Kettler, General Motors;
Raymond Khan, General Motors; Joseph Kielman, Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation; Steve Killion, Federal Bureau of Investigation; Julie Krueger, Atmel
Corporation; Susan Landau, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; P.E.
(Pat) Lanthier, Pacific Bell; Tony Lauck; Joshua Lederberg, Rockefeller Uni-
versity; Ronald Lee, National Security Agency; James Leinweber, Univer-
sity of Wisconsin, Madison; Blaise Liffick, Computer Professionals for So-
cial Responsibility; Steven B. Lipner, MITRE Corporation; Myles Losch;
Robert Lucky, Bell Communications Research; Deborah Malamud, Univer-
sity of Michigan Law School; Noel Matchett, Information Security Inc.;
Timothy May; Bruce McConnell, Office of Management and Budget; Kirk
McConnell, Senate Armed Services Committee; Kate McGee, Oracle Cor-
poration; F. Lynn McNulty, McNulty and Associates;Catherine Medich, CommerceNet; Ken Mendelson, House Judiciary Com-mittee; Douglas Miller, Software Publishers Association; John Millis, House
Select Committee on Intelligence; William Mockler, Drug Enforcement
Administration; Vera A. Murray, IBM; Michael Nelson, Office of Science
and Technology Policy; Robert Nieves, Drug Enforcement Administration;
Edward OÕMalley, OSO Group; Christopher Padilla, AT&T GovernmentAffairs; Donn Parker, SRI International Inc.; Kumar Patel, University of
California, Los Angeles; Bill Patterson; Nick Patterson, Renaissance Tech-
nologies; Craig Paul, University of Kansas; Paul J.J. Payack, Network Sys-
tems Corporation; Mona Peglow, Novell; David Pensak, DuPont Corpora-
tion; Henry H. Perritt, Jr., Villanova University; John Pescatore,
International Data Corporation Government; Charles C. Philipp, Depart-
ment of Energy; John Pignataro, New York City Police Department; John
Podesta, The White House; Carl Pomerance, University of Georgia;
William Poulos, Electronic Data Systems; William Press, Harvard College;
Robert Prestel, National Security Agency (retired); Todd Quinto, Tufts Uni-
versity; Jim Ray; Alfred Reifman, Congressional Research Service; Robert
Rich, National Security Agency (retired); Ed Roback, National Institute of
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.352APPENDIX AStandards and Technology; Bruce Roberts, Unisys; Cesare Rosati, Depart-ment of State;Sholom Rosen, Citibank; Howard Rosenblum, National Security Agency(retired); Marc Rotenberg, Electronic Privacy Information Center; Lee D.
Rothstein, VeriTech; Ira Rubenstein, Microsoft Corporation; Clint Sare; John

Scheibel, House Foreign Affairs Committee; Roger Schell, Novell; Jeff
Schiller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; James Schindler, Hewlett-
Packard; Kurt Schneckenburger; William Richard Scruggs, Department of
Justice; Raymond R. Semko, Department of Energy; William S. Sessions,
Sessions & Sessions, L.C.; Edward Sheehan, Electronic Data Systems; Alan
Shipman, Enterprise Integration Technology, CommerceNet; Gursharan
Sidhu, Apple Computer; Cheryl Simmons, Computer and Communica-
tions Industry Association; Lori S. Sinton, National Semiconductor Corpo-
ration; Landgrave T. Smith, Jr., Institute for Defense Analyses; Peter Smith,
member of Parliament, United Kingdom; Teresa Smith, Central Intelligence
Agency; Oliver Smoot, Information Technology Industry Council; Carl
Snyder, Hewlett-Packard; Bill Sommerfeld; George Spix, Microsoft Corpo-
ration; Edward Springer, Office of Management and Budget; Ross
Stapleton-Gray, TeleDiplomacy Inc.;Vicki Stearn, Discovery Communications Inc.; Shari Steele, Electronic Fron-tier Foundation; John D. Steinbruner, Brookings Institution; Barry Stein-

hardt, American Civil Liberties Union; Ivan Sutherland, Sun Microsystems

Laboratories; Raymond Tate, National Security Agency (retired); Duane
Thompson; George B. Trubow, John Marshall Law School; Roger Ulbrich,
Chevron Corporation; Paul Walker, House Armed Services Committee;
Stephen Walker, Trusted Information Systems Inc.; Lester Waters, Microsoft
Corporation; Daniel Weitzner, Center for Democracy and Technology; Wil-
liam Whitehurst, IBM; Daniel Whiteman, General Motors; Randy Whiting,
Hewlett-Packard; Philip Wilcox, Department of State; Janice Williams, Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency; Charity Wilson, Senate Judiciary Committee; Joan
D. Winston, Office of Technology Assessment; R. James Woolsey, Shey &
Gardner.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.353BGlossaryACCESS (to a system, to data, to a software process)Ñ(n.) in general, the
right to enter or make use of.  In a computer context, entry granted to a

software path that establishes the right to use a system and its resources;
to read, write, modify, or delete data; and/or to use software processes
with various capabilities.  (v.) to achieve the status of having access.
ACCESS CONTROLÑthe granting or denying to a subject of certainpermissions to access a resource (e.g., to view a certain file, to run a
certain program).ALGORITHM AND KEY LENGTHÑthe combination of cryptographicalgorithm and its key length(s) often used to establish the strength of an
encryption process.ASSURANCEÑconfidence that a system design meets its requirements,or that its implementation meets its specification, or that some specific
property is satisfied.ASYMMETRIC CRYPTOGRAPHY (also public-key cryptography)Ñcryptography based on algorithms that enable the use of one key (a public
key) to encrypt a message and a second, different, but mathematically
related, key (a private key) to decrypt a message.  Asymmetric cryptogra-

phy can also be used to perform digital signatures and key exchange.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.354APPENDIX BAUDITINGÑthe process of making and keeping the records necessaryto support accountability.  See 
audit trail.AUDIT TRAILÑthe results of monitoring each operation of subjects onobjects; for example, an audit trail might be a record of all actions taken
on a particularly sensitive file or a record of all users who viewed that file.AUTHENTICATION (OF IDENTITY)Ñan adjunct step to identificationthat confirms an asserted identity with a specified, or understood, level of
confidence.  Authentication can be used to provide high assurance that

the purported identity is, in fact, the correct identity associated with the
entity that provides it.  The authentication mechanism can be based on

something that the entity knows, has, or is (e.g., a password, a smart card
that uses some encryption or random number for a challenge-response
scheme, or a fingerprint).AUTHENTICATION OF A MESSAGE (OR A FILE)Ñthe process ofadding one or more additional data elements to communications traffic
(or files) to ensure the integrity of the traffic (or files).  Such additional

elements are often called Òmessage authenticator(s)Ó and would be an
example of an integrity lock.AUTHENTICITYÑa security service that provides a user with a meansof verifying the identity of the sender of a message, a file, a computer
system, a software process, or even a database or individual software
component.AUTHORIZATIONÑdetermining whether a subject (a user or system)is trusted to act for a given purpose, for example, allowed to read a par-
ticular file.AVAILABILITYÑthe property that a given resource will be usable dur-ing a given time period, for example, that an encrypted file can be de-
crypted when necessary.BACK DOORÑan aspect of a systemÕs mechanism that can be exploitedto circumvent the systemÕs security.BINARY DIGITÑone of the two symbols (0 and 1) that are commonlyused to represent numerical entries in the binary number system.BITÑa contraction of the term Òbinary digit.ÓCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY355BIT STREAM (also digital stream)
Ñthe running stream of binary sym-bols representing digitized information; the term is commonly used to
refer to digital communications.CAPSTONE CHIPÑan integrated circuit chip that implements the Skip-jack algorithm and also includes the Digital Signature Algorithm, the
Secure Hash Standard, the classified Key Exchange Algorithm, circuitry
for efficient exponentiation of large numbers, and a random number gen-
erator using a pure noise source.CAPSTONE/FORTEZZA INITIATIVEÑa government initiative to pro-mote and support escrowed encryption for data storage and communica-
tions.CERTIFICATE AUTHORITYÑsynonym for certification authority.CERTIFICATE MANAGEMENTÑthe overall process of issuing, stor-ing, verifying, and generally accepting responsibility for the accuracy of
certifications and their secure delivery to appropriate consumers.CERTIFICATIONÑthe administrative act of approving a computer sys-tem or component for use in a particular application.CERTIFICATION AUTHORITYÑa specially established trusted orga-nization or part of a larger organization that accepts the responsibilities of
managing the certificate process by issuing, distributing, and verifying
certificates.CIPHERTEXTÑliterally, text material that has been encrypted; also usedin a generic sense for the output of any encryption process, no matter
what the original digitized input might have been (e.g., text, computer
files, computer programs, or digitized graphical images).CLEARTEXT (also plaintext)
Ñthe material entering into an encryptionprocess or emerging from a decryption process. ÒTextÓ is used categori-
cally for any digitized material.CLIPPER CHIPÑan escrowed encryption chip that implements the Skip-jack algorithm to encrypt communications conducted over the public
switched network (e.g., between telephones, modems, or facsimile equip-
ment).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.356APPENDIX BCLIPPER INITIATIVE Ña voluntary program to improve the security oftelephone communications while meeting the legitimate needs of law
enforcement.CoComÑCoordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, be-gan operations in 1950 to control export of strategic materials and tech-
nology to communist countries; participants include Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom,
and the United States.COLLATERAL CRYPTOGRAPHYÑa collective term used in this reportto include uses of encryption for other than confidentiality; it includes
such services as authentication, integrity checks, authoritative date/time
stamping, and digital signatures.COMPETITIVE ACCESS PROVIDERSÑtelephone carriers that com-pete with local monopoly carriers.CONFIDENTIALITY (communications)Ñthe protection of communica-tions traffic against interception or receipt by unauthorized third parties.CONFIDENTIALITY (data)Ñan assertion about a body of data that issensitive and must be protected against loss, misuse, destruction, unin-
tended change, and unauthorized access or dissemination.COUNTERMEASUREÑa mechanism that reduces vulnerability to athreat.CRYPTANALYSISÑthe study and practice of various methods to pen-etrate ciphertext and deduce the contents of the original cleartext mes-
sage.CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMÑa mathematical procedure, used inconjunction with a closely guarded secret key, that transforms original
input into a form that is unintelligible without special knowledge of the
secret information and the algorithm.  Such algorithms are also the basis

for digital signatures and key exchange.CRYPTOGRAPHYÑoriginally, the science and technology of keepinginformation secret from unauthorized parties by using a code or a cipher.
Today, cryptography can be used for many applications that do not in-
volve confidentiality.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY357DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES)Ña U.S. government stan-dard (FIPS 46-1) describing a cryptographic algorithm to be used in a
symmetric cryptographic application.DATE/TIME STAMPÑthe date and time a transaction or document isinitiated or submitted to a computer system, or the time at which a trans-
action is logged or archived.  Often it is important that the stamp be

certified by some authority to establish legal or other special status.  Such

a service can be provided by a cryptographic procedure.DECOMPILINGÑa process through which object code consisting of onesand zeros can be converted into source code in a high-level computer
language such as C or Pascal.DECRYPTIONÑthe cryptographic procedure of transforming ciphertextinto the original message cleartext.DENIAL OF SERVICEÑreducing the availability of an object below thelevel needed to support critical processing or communication, as can hap-
pen, for example, in a system crash.DIGESTÑa much condensed version of a message produced by process-ing the message by a hash algorithm.  Commonly, the digest has a fixed

length and is not dependent on the length of the original message.DIGITAL SIGNATUREÑa digitized analog of a written signature, pro-duced by a cryptographic procedure acting (commonly) on a digest of the
message to be signed.DIGITAL SIGNATURE STANDARD (DSS)Ña U.S. government stan-dard (FIPS 186) describing a cryptographic algorithm for producing a
digital signature.DIGITAL TELEPHONY ACT OF 1995Ña law requiring that the tele-phone industry make such technical changes to its installed equipment as
are needed to comply with court-authorized wiretap orders.DISASSEMBLYÑa process through which object code consisting of ones
and zeros can be converted into its low-level assembly language repre-
sentation.DISCLOSURE (of data)Ñthe act of making available; the instance ofrevealing.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.358APPENDIX BDUAL-USE SYSTEMÑa system with both military and civilian applica-tions.ESCROWED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (EES)Ña voluntary U.S. gov-ernment standard for key-escrowed encryption of voice, fax, or computer
data transmitted over circuit-switched telephone systems.EVALUATIONÑ(1) the process of examining a computer product orsystem with respect to certain criteria; (2) the results of that process.EXCEPTIONAL ACCESSÑaccess to encrypted data granted to a recipi-ent other than the originally intended recipient.FEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING STANDARD (FIPS)
Ña cat-egorical term for U.S. government standards applying to computer-based
systems.FIRMWAREÑthe programmable information used to control the low-level operations of hardware.  Firmware is commonly stored in read only

memory (ROM), which is initially installed in the factory and may be
replaced in the field to fix mistakes or to improve system capabilities.FIRST PARTYÑthe originator of a transaction (e.g., an electronic mes-sage or telephone call).FUNCTIONALITYÑthe functional behavior of a system.  Functionality
requirements include, for example, confidentiality, integrity, availability,
authentication, and safety.IDENTIFICATIONÑthe assertion by a person, process, or system wish-ing to communicate with another person, process, or system of the name
by which it is known within the process(es) or system(s) in question.IDENTIFICATION KEYÑa key registered or issued to a specific user.IMPLEMENTATIONÑthe mechanism that (supposedly) realizes thespecified design.INTEGRATED PRODUCTÑa product designed to provide the user acapability useful in its own right (e.g., word processing) and integrated
with encryption capabilities that a user may or may not employ; a prod-
uct in which the cryptographic capability is fully integrated with the other
capabilities of the product.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY359INTEGRITYÑthe property that an object meets an a priori establishedset of expectations.  One example of integrity is that changes must be

accomplished in a specified and authorized manner.  Data integrity, pro-

gram integrity, system integrity, and network integrity are all relevant to
consideration of computer and system security.INTEGRITY CHECKÑa quantity derived algorithmically from the run-ning digital stream of a message and appended to it for transmission, or
from the entire contents of a stored data file and appended to it.  Some

integrity checks are not cryptographically based (e.g., cyclic redundancy
checks), but others are.INTERCEPTORÑa party eavesdropping on communications.ITARÑInternational Traffic in Arms Regulations.KEYÑa sequence of easily changed symbols that, used with a crypto-graphic algorithm, provides a cryptographic process.KEY DISTRIBUTIONÑa secure method for two distant parties to ex-change keys or to receive keys from a central authoritative source.KEY ESCROW ENCRYPTION (also escrowed encryption)Ñan encryp-tion system that enables exceptional access to encrypted data through
special data recovery keys held by a trusted party.KEY MANAGEMENTÑthe overall process of generating and distribut-ing cryptographic keys to authorized recipients in a secure manner.MONITORINGÑrecording of relevant information about each opera-tion by a subject on an object, maintained in an audit trail for subsequent
analysis.NODEÑa computer system that is connected to a communications net-work and participates in the routing of messages within that network.
Networks are usually described as a collection of nodes that are con-
nected by communications links.NONREPUDIATION (of a signed digital message, data, or software)Ñthe status achieved by employing a digital-signature procedure to affirm
the identity of the signer of a digital message with extremely high confi-
dence and, hence, to protect against a subsequent attempt to deny authen-
ticity, whether or not there had been an initial authentication.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.360APPENDIX BOBJECT CODEÑthe ÒexecutableÓ code of ones and zeros that provides a
computer with instructions on what steps to perform.  Contrast with 
sourcecode.OBJECT LINKING AND EMBEDDING (OLE)ÑMicrosoftÕs object-ori-ented software technology.ONE-WAY HASH FUNCTIONÑa function that produces a message di-gest that cannot be reversed to obtain the original.OPERATING SYSTEMÑa program that runs on a computer whose pur-pose is to provide basic services that can be used by applications running
on that computer.  Such functions might include screen displays, file

handling, and encryption.  MS-DOS and Windows 
Ô95 are examples ofoperating systems that run on Intel microprocessors.PASSWORDÑa sequence of characters or words that a subject presentsto a system for purposes of validation or verification.  See 
authentication.PCMCIA CARDÑthe industry-standard Personal Computer MemoryCard Industry Association card and associated electrical interface for vari-
ous computer components (e.g., memory, hard disks, and cryptographic
processes).  Also known as a PC card.
PEN REGISTERÑa device that records numbers dialed from a telephone.PIN (personal identification number)Ña (generally numeric) quantitythat has to be keyed into some device or process to authenticate an indi-
vidual.  A common example is the 4-digit PIN associated with the use of

automated teller machines; another, the 4-digit PIN associated with a
telephone calling card.PLAINTEXTÑa synonym for cleartext.PRIVATE KEYÑthe private (secret) key associated with a given personÕspublic key for a public-key cryptographic system.PUBLIC KEYÑthe publicly known key associated with a given personÕsuse of a public-key cryptographic system.PUBLIC-KEY CERTIFICATEÑa statement, possibly on paper but moreoften transmitted electronically over an information network, that estab-
lishes the relationship between a named individual (or organization) andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY361a specified public key.  In principle, it could (but need not) include collat-
eral information such as mailing address, organizational affiliation, and
telephone number.RC2/RC4 ALGORITHMSÑtwo variable-key-length cryptographic algo-rithms designed by Ronald Rivest of the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology.  Both are symmetric algorithms.
RELIABILITYÑthe ability of a computer or an information or telecom-munications system to perform consistently and precisely according to its
specifications and design requirements and to do so with high confi-
dence.REMAILERÑa computer-based process that automatically redistributeselectronic mail, often to multiple recipients.  Remailers can be anonymous

(i.e., they can be configured to strip off information identifying the sender
of a message, while still enabling a return ÒpathÓ so that recipients can
reply to messages).REVERSE ENGINEERINGÑthe generic name for methods by whichparties attempt to uncover technical details of a microelectronic chip or of
software.RISKÑthe likelihood that a vulnerability may be exploited, or that athreat may become harmful.RSA ALGORITHMÑthe Rivest-Shamir-Adelman public-key encryptionalgorithm.SAFETYÑthe property indicating that a computer system or software,when embedded in its operational environment, does not cause any ac-
tions or events that create unintended potentially or actually dangerous
situations for itself or for the environment in which it is embedded.SECOND PARTYÑthe recipient of a transaction (e.g., an electronic mes-sage or telephone call).SECRET-KEY CRYPTOSYSTEMÑa symmetric cryptographic processthat uses the same secret key (which both parties have and keep secret) to
encrypt and decrypt messages.SECURE HASH FUNCTIONÑa one-way hash function for which theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.362APPENDIX Blikelihood that two messages will yield the same digest is satisfactorilysmall.SECURE HASH STANDARDÑa U.S. government standard (FIPS 180-1)for a secure hash function.SECURITYÑthe collection of safeguards that ensures the confidentialityof information, protects the system(s) or network(s) used to process it,
and controls access to it.  Hence, security safeguards impose appropriate

access rules for computer information.SECURITY-SPECIFIC (OR STAND-ALONE) CRYPTOGRAPHYPRODUCTÑan add-on product specifically designed to provide crypto-graphic capabilities for one or more other software or hardware capabili-
ties.SHAREWAREÑsoftware offered publicly and shared rather than sold.SKIPJACKÑa classified symmetric key encryption algorithm that uses80-bit keys; developed by the National Security Agency.SOURCE CODEÑthe textual form in which a program is entered into acomputer (e.g., Pascal).SPECIFICATIONÑa technical description of the desired behavior of asystem, as derived from its requirements.  A specification is used to de-

velop and test an implementation of a system.SPOOFINGÑillicitly masquerading as a legitimate company, party, orindividual.STU-IIIÑa U.S. government secure telephone system using end-to-endencryption.SYMMETRIC CRYPTOGRAPHY, CRYPTOSYSTEMÑa cryptographicsystem that uses the same key to encrypt and decrypt messages.SYSTEMÑan interdependent collection of components that can be con-sidered as a unified whole; for example, a networked collection of com-
puter systems, a distributed system, an editor, a memory unit, and so on.THIRD-PARTY ACCESSÑeavesdropping on or entry to data communi-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY363cations, telephony, or stored computer data by an unauthorized party.See exceptional access.
THREATÑthe potential for exploitation of a vulnerability.TOKENÑwhen used in the context of authentication, a (usually) physicaldevice necessary for user identification.TRAP AND TRACEÑa device that identifies the telephone numbers fromwhich calls have been placed to a target telephone number.TROJAN HORSEÑa computer program whose execution would resultin undesired side effects, generally unanticipated by the user.  A Trojan

horse program may otherwise give the appearance of providing normal
functionality.TRUSTÑthe concept that a system will provide its intended functional-ity with a stated level of confidence.  The term is also used for other

entities, e.g., trusted software, trusted network, trusted individual.  Some-

times the confidenceÑalso called the assuranceÑcan be measured, butsometimes it is inferred on the basis of testing and other information.TRUSTWORTHINESSÑassurance that a system deserves to be trusted.VULNERABILITYÑa weakness in a system that can be exploited to vio-late the systemÕs intended behavior.  There may be vulnerabilities in secu-
rity, integrity, availability, and other aspects.  The act of exploiting a

vulnerability represents a threat, which has an associated risk of being
exploited.WORK FACTORÑa measure of the difficulty of undertaking a brute-force test of all possible keys against a given ciphertext and known algo-
rithm.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.364APPENDIX C364CA Brief Primer on CryptographyThis appendix provides a brief primer on cryptography, but it is nec-essary to understand from the start that cryptography is not a Òsilver
bulletÓ for information security.  For example, a network may be insecure

in the sense that it is easy for an adversary to obtain information that is
flowing on the network.  End users may use very strong cryptography to
protect this information.  But if sufficiently motivated and skilled, adver-
saries may well attempt to penetrate the systems attached to the network,
where they can obtain the information in the clear.  Or they may be able to

bribe a system operator to obtain it for them.  Nevertheless cryptography

still has value under these circumstances, because it forces the adversary
to alter his or her attack and expend greater effort to obtain information;
furthermore, the use of cryptography will foil some adversaries who are
not motivated or skilled enough to develop alternative attacks.C.1  A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF CRYPTOGRAPHY
For most of its history, cryptography was more an art than a scienceand was devoted primarily to keeping messages and records secret.  To be

sure, mathematical techniques for cryptanalysis and engineering skills for
building devices for encryption and decryption played important roles,
but cryptography itself did not rest on a firm mathematical foundation.The scientific basis for modern cryptography was established in 1949with the development of information theory by Claude Shannon, who
determined for the first time a mathematically rigorous basis for definingCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY365a ÒperfectÓ encryption system that could be made impenetrable, even in
principle, to an adversary with unlimited resources.  Based on this work,

secret-key cryptography (defined below) blossomed, with the most pub-
lic work in this area being the Data Encryption Standard promulgated in
1975 by the National Bureau of Standards (now the National Institute of
Standards and Technology).  The second major revolution occurred in

1976 with the first discussion in the open literature of asymmetric cryp-
tography, inspired by a landmark paper of Whitfield Diffie and Martin
Hellman.1C.2  CAPABILITIES ENABLED BY CRYPTOGRAPHY
Cryptography can help to ensure the integrity of data (i.e., that dataretrieved or received are identical to data originally stored or sent), to
authenticate specific parties (i.e., that the purported sender or author of a
message is indeed its real sender or author), to facilitate nonrepudiation,
and to preserve the confidentiality of information that may have come
improperly into the possession of unauthorized parties.To understand how cryptographic methods span a range of commu-nication and storage needs, consider the general problem of sending a
private message from Party A to Party B.  Centuries ago, such a process

was accomplished by Party A writing a letter containing his or her signa-
ture (authentication).  The letter was sealed inside a container to prevent

accidental disclosure (confidential transmission).  If Party B received the

container with a broken seal, it meant that the letter had been disclosed or
altered and Party B would take appropriate actions (data integrity).  Oth-

erwise, Party B would verify Party AÕs signature and read the message.In the information era, each of the steps remains essentially the same,
except that automated tools perform most of the work and are explained
below.C.2.1  Ensuring the Integrity of Data
Digital information is transmitted (or stored) so that it can be received(or retrieved).  For two reasons, it is possible that the information received

or retrieved might differ from the original information transmitted or
stored:1.  A technical problem may inadvertently alter one or more of the
bits of information in question.  No digital transmission-receiving or stor-
1Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman, ÒNew Directions in Cryptography,Ó IEEE Transac-tions on Information Theory, Volume IT-22, IEEE Press, New York, 1976, pp. 644-654.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.366APPENDIX Cage and retrieval system is perfectÑevery now and then, with a frequencydepending on the particular characteristics of the technology used in the
system and the environment in which it operates, a Ò1Ó will be received or
retrieved when a Ò0Ó is sent or stored and vice versa.
2.  A third party may deliberately alter one or more of the bits of
information in question.  For example, a proposal by Vendor A to a buyer

may offer to undertake a task for $100,000.  Vendor B, competing for the

same contract but wishing to charge $150,000, may intercept the digital
transmission of Vendor AÕs proposal and deliberately alter the $100,000 to$300,000.  Thus, the buyer would be presented with information that

falsely understated the cost-effectiveness of Vendor A and would award
the contract to Vendor B.In some cases, the alteration of one or even many bits may not renderthe information received or retrieved useless (e.g., if the bits constitute a
digital representation of a photograph).  However, for other purposes

(e.g., the transmission of a software program), even a one-bit difference
between what was received and what was transmitted could make all the
difference in the world.It is therefore desirable to ensure that any alterations, whether inad-vertent or deliberate, can be detected if they occur.  An integrity lock or

integrity check is a quantity derived algorithmically from the bits that
constitute the information being transmitted or stored and appended to it
for the purpose of ensuring that the information received or retrieved is
identical to the information being transmitted or stored.Cryptography is relevant to integrity checks that are intended to de-tect deliberate alterations.  In such cases, the integrity check (also known

as a message authenticator) must use a process that involves information
unknown to potential penetrators; that is, it has parts that are secret and
known only to the communicating parties (usually a secret key).2In the example of Party A sending a message to Party B, Party Aattaches a number called a cryptographic checksum that is generated2Protecting against inadvertent alterations is the job of error-correcting codes (e.g., cyclicredundancy checks, Reed-Solomon codes, parity checks).  However, for error correction,

the process and techniques in question will be known commonly to all users.  Thus, if a
message is protected only by error-correcting codes, a person could use this knowledge toconstruct revised error checks that would conceal deliberate alterations.  The use of error-

correcting codes does not ensure integrity against intended subversions of the transmis-sion.Note: Although under some circumstances (e.g., for limited numbers of presumablyrandom and inadvertent alterations), an error-correcting code can correct bits that havebeen changed.Generally, a cryptography-based approach is much more sensitive to changes in themessage than usual error-correction schemes; that is, cryptography provides assurancesboth of confidentiality and of message integrity.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY367BOX C.1Checksums and HashesChecksums were originally used to detect errors in stored or transmitted data.The simplest checksum is a single bit that is the XOR of all message bits.  This can
detect single errors, but not double errors.  Most error-detecting codes add more

complex checksums (often called CRCs, for cyclic redundancy checks) to detectmuch larger numbers of errors.For nonmalicious errors owing to physical error phenomena, such checksumsare fine.  But when an opponent might try to corrupt data, a cryptographically secure
checksum is neededÑone that will detect random errors and prevent malicious er-rors.  For example, one of the federal standards relating to DES describes a message

authentication code (MAC), which is formed by enciphering the message under asecret key known only to authorized parties and adding the last 64 bits (or less if thatsuffices) of ciphertext as a MAC.  Clearly, another authorized user can validate the

MAC by enciphering the message (which is sent in the clearÑnot encipheredÑsinceonly authentication is needed in this application) and comparing the computed MACwith the received MAC.  An opponent who does not know the secret key has as

much trouble computing a modified MAC to go with a corrupted version of the dataas in breaking DES.  (If enciphering and deciphering are mathematically equivalent,it is just as hard to encipher without the key as to decipher without the key.)A hash function is a pseudorandom function that is shorter than its input.  Orig-
inally used in searching and sorting algorithms, where it did not need any crypto-graphic properties, a one-way hash function is useful for digital signatures because
the hash can be signed by the public-key cryptographic system, rather than the muchlonger message.  ÒOne-wayÓ means that it is easy to compute H (message) but com-putationally infeasible to compute any inverse image of a given value HÑor if oneinverse image is known (e.g., if a spoof who has intercepted a message knows themessage and H (message)), it is computationally infeasible to find another inverse
image.  (There are many inverse images since 
H is a compressive function.) The one-
way property is needed because the signature is valid not only for the messagesigned, but also for any other message with the same hash value.In short, a cryptographic checksum depends on a secret key known to the au-thorized transmitter and receiver, whereas a one-way hash value can be computedby anyone.  The hash value is then acted on by the secret key in an asymmetric

cryptographic system to produce a digital signature.algorithmically from specific characteristics of the message (e.g., the let-ters and numbers in the message; see Box C.1.  Party B can use the same

algorithm to compute the checksum of the message received and compare
it to the checksum sent, and if they match, Party B can be confident of the
messageÕs data integrity.C.2.2  Authentication of Users
In many communications systems, it is quite important to establishthe clear and unquestionable identity of the communicating parties; theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.368APPENDIX Cprocess of establishing and verifying the identity of a party is referred toas authentication.3Authentication is based on something that the proper party wouldknow, would have, or would be.  For example, a specially designed elec-

tronic ring might be owned or worn only by individuals authorized to
wear it.4  A secret password might be regarded as being known only to a
certain party.  Another approach based on secret knowledge involves one

party challenging another party to answer certain questions that could be
answered correctly only by one with the proper identity.  In banking

circles, a customerÕs motherÕs maiden name is often an authenticator,since it is assumed that such a fact would not be readily known to an
impersonator (but contemporary dossier-quality databases of personal
information significantly weaken the assurance).  In telephony, humans

frequently authenticate each other merely by the recognized sound of a
voice or simply by the fact that a certain individual answers the telephone
when the number alleged to be that individualÕs number is dialed.  Ven-
dors accepting credit cards use handwritten signatures to authenticate
identities on the assumption that only the proper holder of a credit card
can sign the credit card charge slip in a way that matches the signature on
the card.  Stronger authentication methods often involve hardware
Ñatangible object or artifactÑthat must be associated with authorized usersand that is not easily duplicated.  (The ultimate 
ÒhardwareÓ involved might
3Authentication is almost always a requirement for authorized access (to use a system; toread, write, modify, or destroy data; to run a software process; to make use of computer orcommunications resources).  Access rights have qualifications that are often called privi-

leges (e.g., access to data might include some or all of the privileges of read, write, modify,destroy).  Similarly, not all users of a system will be accorded free run of all the software in
the system (i.e., their privileges will be restricted).  A system electronically accessing an-

other without human intervention typically will not be entitled to all of the latterÕs dataand/or software privileges.  For example, one system might be authorized, or privileged, to
ask for only a certain kind of data (e.g., only the cash value of point-of-sale information will
be exchanged with bankcard authorization systems).For some security requirements, authentication by itself may be sufficient.  For example,the ÒsecurityÓ of the credit card industry is based primarily on authentication mechanisms,
not secrecy mechanisms.  People routinely recite their credit card numbers to anyone and
everyone who wants to be paid for services or products.  Some degree of security is pro-
vided by using other information, such as the expiration date or motherÕs maiden name, toauthenticate the person using that number.  Such authentication is performed only when
the risk of fraud is above a given level (e.g., the purchase of an expensive item or too muchcredit card activity in a given period of time).  Secrecy mechanisms are used, for the most

part, to prevent eavesdroppers from getting oneÕs card number, but most fraud is con-ducted without eavesdropping.  For example, cards are stolen, numbers are stolen from
vendor databases, and merchant employees copy numbers.Authentication and confidentiality are complementary tools for supporting informationsecurity, as the discussion above and that in  Box C.2 make clear.
4ÒDick Tracy Eat Your Heart Out,Ó New York Times, September 4, 1995, p. 38.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY369well be biometric in nature: a personÕs handprint, a fingerprint, or a retinalpattern.)  Of course, except in the case of biometric identifiers, all authenti-
cation systems can be compromised if the secret or the hardware token
belonging only to the proper party is passed on to unauthorized parties.5Even though such mechanisms are not perfect, they are routinelyused to conduct personal and business interactions, and most of those
communications use nonprivate channels.  As we move toward an elec-

tronic economy, conducted over wide-scale communication networks, it
becomes increasingly important to develop stronger authentication
mechanisms that prevent wrongdoers of all types from being able to ac-
cess remote resources without proper authorization.  The reason is that

electronic commerce disconnects consumers and suppliers from the physi-
cal mechanisms that help curb fraud.  For example, vendors accepting

credit cards for face-to-face transactions check the signature on the card
(or else accept liability for not performing the check).  Mail-order and

telephone vendors use the mailing address of a customer to help authen-
ticate a purchase; large orders are generally not sent to an address differ-
ent from the credit card billing address, unless extra steps are taken to
ensure authenticity.  However, when such mechanisms are not available,
electronic commerce will require strong cryptography-based mechanisms
that will help to establish the identity of the consumer.Thus, it is the goal of most communications system designers to pro-vide strong authenticity of the communicating parties.  It should be noted,

however, that in some cases (such as telephone Caller ID services), the
communicating party may wish to be anonymous (or pseudonymous) for
good reason and system designers must take this into account.Cryptography-based authentication could also help to deal with theproblem of controlling the secondary use of data collected from individu-
als (described in Chapter 1).  For example, a requirement to include the

source of personal data (e.g., the original party to which an individual
discloses personal data) with the person-identified information at the time
of disclosure would help the individual keep track of how such informa-
tion is subsequently used.  Such a requirement could be enforced through

the use of a digital signature belonging to the data source being bound to
the personal information before it is disseminated.65For this reason, very strong authentication requires hardware components that can be inthe possession of only one person at a time.  Nevertheless, software-based authentication
has many advantages (such as ease of deployment and perhaps lower costs) that may prove
decisive against the lower levels of confidence that are possible with such methods.  Soft-
ware-based authentication is better than nothing, and the decisions regarding medium willbe made on the basis of business needs for differing levels of confidence.6Personal communication, Marc Rotenberg, Electronic Privacy Information Center, Wash-ington, D.C., March 10, 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.370APPENDIX CFinally, good authentication mechanisms can facilitate the generationof reliable audit trails that allow the investigation of possible wrong-
doing.  Such mechanisms have high value when many individuals are in

a position to compromise the same sensitive data.C.2.3  Nonrepudiation
The authentication of a user and the integrity of a message sent by auser are two different concepts.  For example, being assured of a message
Õsintegrity does not in itself assure the receiver that its purported sender
did in fact send it.Nonrepudiation is a cryptographic capability that combines techniques
for ensuring user authentication and message integrity in such a way that
the signer of a message cannot plausibly deny that it was he who created
it or claim that the message received was not in fact the message sent.  In

other words, nonrepudiation protects against impersonation and denial
of creation.Digital signatures typically are used to provide nonrepudiation.  A
digital signature is a piece of information derived from both information
known only to the sender (Party A) and the exact text of the message
sent.7  On the basis of information freely available to the sender (Party A),
the receiver (Party B), and any evildoer, Party B can check the digital
signature of the message allegedly sent by Party A against the message
actually received.  If nothing improper has occurred,
¥  Party B can be assured that Party A was in fact the sender;
¥  Party B can be assured that the message received was actually the
one Party A sent; and¥  If Party A ever denies having sent the message, Party B can prove
that Party A did.8Again, if the secrets on which authentication is based are compro-mised, a valid signature does not mean that a message was actually sent7Although the entire message could be run through an encryption process and some partof the result used as the digital signature, in normal practice only a digest of the message is
subject to this process to conserve both time and computer resources.  The digest is created
by an algorithm (usually known as a secure hash algorithm) that shortens a message of anylength into a result that is of fixed and known length.  This result (the digest or hash) is

constructed in such a way that the likelihood that different original data items will produceidentical digests is very small.8Strictly speaking, this is true only if an asymmetric authentication system is used.  An
authentication system based on symmetric cryptography and secret keys can protect onlyagainst third-party forgeries, but not against the case in which Party B forges a message,claiming it to be from Party A.  The reason is that Party A and Party B (but not a third party)

both know a common secret key.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY371by the person who would normally be associated with that signature.  If
Party A gives his or her secret to Party C (e.g., a secretary) and Party C
uses Party AÕs secret to send a message, that message is indistinguishablefrom one actually sent by Party A.  Moreover, anyone receiving a message

signed by Party A has a right to expect that Party A sent it and to take
action on that basis.  For example, if Party A completes an electronic

message to buy certain items, that party will digitally sign the message in
preparation for sending it.  However, if Party A
Õs attention is divertedduring this time, Party C might actually send the message to a different
supplier.  This different supplier can verify that the message was signed

by an authorized individual (Party A) and has every right to conclude
that a valid purchase order has been received.Finally, nonrepudiation often includes a time element; for example,one must be able to prove not only that he or she directed a stockbroker to
buy 1,000 shares of Company XYZ at $30 per share, but also when the
order was placed.  Note that if the date and time are part of the message

being signed, then the sender also cannot repudiate that date and time at
which he or she signed the message.  A greater degree of confidence that

the date and time are in fact correct can be provided by secure date/time
stamps.9C.2.4  Preservation of Confidentiality
10It is inherent and assumed in most communications system designthat communications between parties should be controlled in such a way
that unintended access by others is prohibited.  There are three common
9Secure date/time stamping is a technique involving a trusted third party to certify thecreation of a document at a given time.  Conceptually, a digital document is mailed to this
trusted third party, who provides a date/time stamp and a digital signature of the docu-
ment-stamp combination.  If the date/time stamp is inserted correctly by the third party,
the digital signature of that party ensures that the document did indeed exist at the timeand date in the document.  More discussion of this concept can be found in Barry Cipra,

ÒElectronic Time-Stamping: The Notary Public Goes Digital,Ó Science, Volume 261(5118),July 9, 1993, pp. 162-163, and on-line at http://www.surety.com.10Note that in this section (and throughout this report unless otherwise stated explicitly),the term ÒconfidentialityÓ (or, synonymously, secrecy) applies to data in a technical sense.
There is another sense in which the term ÒconfidentialityÓ is often used that refers to a
policy contextÑthe assertion that data are sensitive and must be protected from unautho-rized parties.  In a policy sense, confidentiality can be accomplished by techniques based
entirely on access control and authorizationÑindividuals without proper authorization arenot permitted to view confidential data.Thus, the distinction can be made between data that are confidential (i.e., on policy
grounds, a personÕs AIDS/HIV status may be confidential data; the law recognizes the confi-dentiality of communications between lawyer and client, husband and wife, priest and pa-
rishioner) and data that are made confidential by the technical means described in this section.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.372APPENDIX Cmethods of gaining confidentiality of communications: physical security,obfuscation, and encryption.In the case of physical security, the communicator relies on the fact thatthe attacker will have a very difficult time physically penetrating the commu-
nications media or devices, or that it will be too costly for an attacker to do so.
An example of this is an optical fiber, a medium that is inherently difficult to
tap into without being intrusive to the communication.In the case of obfuscation, the communicator relies upon the fact thatcommunicated information is so well hidden in some surrounding con-
tainer that it will be difficult for an attacker to recognize and thus retrieve
it.  An example of this is steganography, in which data can be hidden in

things such as photographs.11Finally, with encryption, one communicating party encodes informa-tion by using an agreed-upon coding method; the information is transmit-
ted to its destination; then the other communicating party decodes the
information.  In this case, the communicator is relying on the fact that for

someone other than the intended recipient, it will be very difficult to break
the code or discover a secret that the code depends on, such as a key.When used for preserving confidentiality, cryptography enables thesystem designer to separate the security of a message from the security of
the medium used to transmit that message.  Since some of the most useful

and least expensive media in use today are insecure (e.g., wireless com-
munications), such separation has obvious advantages.  Even the most

sophisticated cryptography today requires some keeping of secrets, but a
properly implemented cryptography system reduces the problem of keep-
ing messages secret to the problem of keeping secret a much smaller key,
thereby simplifying the security problem.Note that confidentiality and authentication are tied closely together,as discussed in Box C.2.  Furthermore, systems that provide strong au-

thentication capabilities and those that provide strong confidentiality  can

serve a similar purpose under some circumstances.  For example, confi-

dentiality provided by cryptography can keep hackers from learning a
credit card number that is sent over the Internet, while authentication
provided by cryptography can keep hackers from using that credit card
number once they get it.1211A simple example: most black-and-white pictures rendered in digital form use at most216 (65,536) shades of gray, because the human eye is incapable of distinguishing any more
shades.  Each element of a digitized black-and-white photo would then be associated with
16 bits of information about what shade of gray should be used.  If a picture were digitized
with 24 bits of gray scale, the last 8 bits could be used to convey a concealed message that
would never appear except for someone who knew to look for it.  The digital size of the
picture would be 50% larger than it would have to be, but no one but the creator of theimage would know.12Of course, the problem is that, in practice, many uses of credit card numbers do notCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY373BOX C.2Dependence of Confidentiality on AuthenticationConfidentiality in electronic communications is not possible without authenti-cation.  Suppose that Party A and Party B want to communicate in such a way that
Party C cannot eavesdrop, but that no authentication is performed.  One might con-jecture a system that selects a random session key, without telling Party A and Party
B, and then encrypts everything communicated between them.  Unfortunately, such
a system is not confidential because Party C could place himself between Party Aand Party B, relaying all information between both parties (or only the information
Party C wanted to pass). This is possible because it was assumed that no authentica-tion existed.  That is, by assumption the system cannot distinguish among Party A,
Party B, or Party C, and neither can any of the parties involved.In practice, there are numerous mechanisms that seemingly provide a sufficientlevel of authentication for business or personal communications.  For example, peo-
ple routinely ÒauthenticateÓ the person on the other end of a telephone call by rec-
ognizing the voice.  Unfortunately, this still does not provide the necessary founda-
tion for a secure telephone system.  For example, Party C can simply listen to the
conversation that he or she is relaying between Party A and Party B, without partic-
ipating.  (This scenario illustrates an illicit form of call forwarding; Party C rigs the
telephone system to be called when Party A dials Party BÕs number, and Party Cautomatically dials Party B when a call from Party A is received.) Since the telephone
system has no authentication, by assumption, Party CÕs scheme cannot be preventedeven if Party A recognizes Party BÕs voice (which is a very strong end-to-end authen-tication mechanism).Similarly, one might assume that the telephone system itself does not allow thetype of tampering that Party C needs to place himself between Party A and Party B.
In other words, the telephone system is designed in such a way that when Party Adials Party BÕs number, the call is routed directly to Party BÕs telephone.  This ar-
rangement is characteristic of most telephone systems today.  However, its success

depends on the ability of the telephone system to authenticate the maintainers of thesystem.  Although the population of valid system users is smaller than the population
of telephone users, the former is still relatively large (more than a few people), and
history has shown that wide-ranging networks are difficult, if not impossible, to se-cure without strong authentication mechanisms.For a communications system to be confidential, the system itself must authen-ticate the end users.  Only then can it exchange the secret information needed to
establish a confidential connection between those users.  Authentication is a neces-
sary, but not sufficient, condition for confidentiality.require strong authentication (e.g., telephone orders), even if security procedures are in-tended to minimize the incidence of fraud in such orders (e.g., not shipping an order to an
address other than the billing address on the credit card).  If 
every use of a credit card
required cryptographic authentication, revealing a credit card number to the world wouldnot have much significance.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.374APPENDIX CC.3  BASIC CONSTRUCTS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY
Cryptography began the science of keeping information secret fromthose not authorized to see it.  In this classical application (called encryp-
tion in this report), cryptography has been used for thousands of years.
Today, cryptographic methods help solve critical information-age prob-
lems, including those of data confidentiality (keeping data private), data
integrity (ensuring that data retrieved or received are identical to data
originally stored or sent), and subject authentication (ensuring that the
purported sender or author of a message is indeed its real sender or
author).  Box C.3 contains some additional applications of cryptography.
In general, cryptographic systems involve the following:¥  The message to be sent (usually known as the plaintext); for example,
a sentence written in English.  The plaintext is the message that Party A

composes for reading by Party B.  All plaintext messages can be repre-

sented as numbers (e.g., by using 00 for A, 01 for B, and so on, with 26 for
space, 27 for comma, 28 for period, 29 for semicolon, and 30 for question
mark).¥  The ciphertext (the gibberish that results from encryption) that any-one can see without compromising the plaintext message.¥  An encryption algorithm (a series of mathematical steps) that Party Auses, in combination with an encryption key, to generate the ciphertext.¥  A decryption algorithm that Party B uses, in combination with adecryption key, to retrieve the plaintext from the ciphertext.One of the simplest encryption schemes is the following: for everyletter in the plaintext message (represented by a number), add 1 to obtain
the corresponding ciphertext message letter.  The encryption algorithm is

simple addition, with an encryption key of 1.13  The same encryption
algorithm could be employed using a different encryption key (i.e., a
number other than 1).  The corresponding decryption algorithm is sub-

traction, with a decryption key of 1.One of the fundamental goals of cryptographic research is to developalgorithms that can be used effectively within a specific system and that
are difficult to Òcrack.Ó  (A more precise definition of 
ÒdifficultÓ is pre-
sented in the next section.)  A second goal, pursued under the label of
13In general, such schemes ÒwrapÓ at the end of the alphabet, so that 30 (originally ques-
tion mark) is mapped back to the start of the alphabet (in this case A).  Thus, the complete
cipher is A becomes B, B becomes C, . . . Y becomes Z, Z becomes space, space becomes
comma, comma becomes period, period becomes semicolon, semicolon becomes questionmark, and question mark becomes A.  If, as in our example, the alphabet has 31 characters,
this wrap would be known as Òmod 31.ÓCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY375BOX C.3Additional Capabilities Enabled by CryptographyCryptographic techniques allow a wide variety of other capabilities, includingthe following:¥  Secret sharing.  Cryptography enables the division of a secret among 
mpeople in a way that any k people can reconstruct the secret (for k less than or equal
to m), but also in such a way that any combinations of fewer than k people have no
information at all about the secret.¥  Verifiable secret sharing.  A stronger form of secret sharing enables any of the
k people to verify that he or she has indeed received a real part of the secret.
¥  Secure function evaluation.  Cryptography enables a function to be evaluated
publicly with multiple arguments in such a way that none of the holders of each
argument has any knowledge about what the others are holding.  One application is
electronic voting in such a way that the winner of a vote can be known withoutforcing any individual to reveal how he or she voted.These capabilities are less commonly discussed than the fundamental capabil-ities of enabling confidentiality, signature, and authentication.  However, other ap-
plications in the future may well rest on them.cryptanalytic research, is to develop methods and techniques for trying toread messages that have been encrypted by algorithms that may or may
not be known to the cryptanalyst.In symmetric cryptography (or, equivalently, secret-key or private-key cryptography), the encryption key is the same as the decryption key;
thus, message privacy depends on the key being kept secret.  A major

problem faced by Party A is how to inform Party B of the key that is being
used.  The Data Encryption Standard (DES) is an example of a secret-key

cryptographic system.In one-time pad cryptographic systems, a key is used once and thendiscarded; the key must be as long as the message.  Because an eavesdrop-

per is faced with a constantly changing key pattern that is impossible to
break even with exhaustive search, a one-time pad is provably unbreak-
able provided the key is secure.  However, one-time pad systems are

difficult to use, and keeping the key secure poses a big problem for key
management.In asymmetric (or, equivalently, public-key) cryptographic systems,the encryption key is different from the decryption key.  Message privacy

depends only on the decryption key being kept secret.  The encryption

key can even be published and disseminated widely, so that anyone can
encrypt messages.  Only the recipient Party B needs the decryption key

(which is specific to that party), and Party B never needs to share it with
anyone (since only he or she should be able to read messages encryptedCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.376APPENDIX Cfor transmission to Party B).  The RSA algorithm is a very popular algo-
rithm at the heart of many asymmetric cryptographic systems.  (Box C.4

provides more details on the mathematics of asymmetric cryptography.)In a key-escrow cryptographic system, the decryption key is madeavailable to parties not directly involved in a given communicationÑbutonly under certain circumstances (e.g., under judicial warrant).  How-

ever, without a complete decryption key, these other parties should be
unable to decipher protected communications.  The Clipper initiative is a
key-escrow proposal for secure telephone communications advanced by
the Clinton Administration and described in Chapter 5.Key management is an integral aspect of all cryptographic systems,which entails (1) the generation of appropriate keys and (2) the distribu-
tion of such keys only to the proper parties.  Proper and efficient key

management is quite complex and is needed to ensure the confidentiality,
integrity, and authenticity of the keys used for encryption and decryption.
For example, in a symmetric cryptographic system, each user must estab-
lish his or her own secret key to use with every other party with whom
communication is desired.  Thus, for a system of 
N users who wish to be
able to communicate securely with each other, the number of secret keys
that the parties (taken all together) must manage and keep secret is
N(N  1)/2 (i.e., the number of pairs possible with 
N parties).  When 
N is
small, the key exchange problem can be handled by personal meetings,BOX C.4The Mathematics of Asymmetric CryptographyAsymmetric cryptography is based on the putative existence of one-way func-tions: mathematical functions that are easy to compute but hard to undo.  There is no

mathematical proof that such functions exist, but there are functions that to date haveresisted all attempts to make them easy to undo.  One such function is multiplication
(its inverseÑfactoring).  It is computationally easy to multiply two prime integers, but
in general it is computationally difficult to factor the product.  (Computational ease and
difficulty refer to the computational resources that are required to perform the task.)An asymmetric cryptographic system based on factoring would regard the prod-uct of the two prime integers as the public key and the two prime integers as theprivate key.  The public key can be made knownÑonce it is known, all of the infor-mation about the private key is known in principle too, but it would simply take too
long to attempt to compute it.What does Òtoo longÓ mean?  If the public-key and private-key pair is well
chosen, and if in fact multiplication does represent a true one-way function, it means
that under no foreseeable circumstances could enough computational power be as-sembled to perform the factoring in a time shorter than the age of the universe.Alas, factoring is not provably Òhard,Ó and a variety of techniques have been
used in the last decade to drive down the time needed to perform factoring.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY377but when N is large, face-to-face meetings as a method for key exchange
are impractical.In many ways, the key management problem is conceptually the sameas the cryptographic problem of keeping messages secure, although in
practice the key management system usually handles a smaller volume of
data, and therefore different methods can be used.14  Asymmetric crypto-
graphic systems greatly reduce, but do not eliminate, the problem of key
distribution.  For example, people using an asymmetric cryptographic

system can (in principle) publish their public keys in the equivalent of a
telephone book that can be distributed freely.  Each user must keep track

of only N  1 keys (and can even keep them in a public place with no
security), and he or she needs to keep secret only one piece of informa-
tionÑthe userÕs own private key.  Note also that the need for face-to-facemeetings is eliminated.Another approach to managing cryptographic keys that does not useasymmetric cryptography is the use of a key distribution center (KDC).  A

KDC is a trusted agent that knows each userÕs master key.  This master
key is employed to exchange session keys for use by users in direct com-
munication.  The advantages over link encryption are that only one node
is vulnerable to attack (the KDC) and that the users can converse directly
(after the initial connection protocol in which both must communicate
with the KDC to set up the exchange of session keys).Note that key management for data communications is very differentthan for data storage.  When encrypted data are communicated, parties

have incentives to keep the relevant key only for the duration of the
transmission and to eliminate it permanently once the transmission is
complete (typically measured in seconds or minutes).  When encrypted

data are stored, the storing party has a great deal of incentive to retain the
key as long as the data may be important (perhaps years or decades).1514The primary exception to this rule is that keys in a one-time pad are as large as themessage itself; thus, the key management system for a one-time pad must be as efficient as
the cryptographic system itself.15One practical qualifier is important.  Another constraint on data storage entirely apart
from encryption is the fact that archived data must in general be copied periodically and
rewritten in order to ensure that the then-current generation of technology will be able toaccess it.  For example, in the early days of desktop computing (10 years ago), many com-
puters used 8-inch floppy disks.  Today, it is difficult to find an 8-inch floppy disk drive,

and data stored on an 8-inch floppy disk would be inaccessible without such a drive.  The
careful archivist would have to copy the data from the 8-inch floppies to newer media, suchas 5 1/4-inch floppies or CD-ROMs.  When storage technologies become more capable and

widespread (leading to the obsolescence of todayÕs CD-ROM drives), the same copying andrewriting procedure will have to be followed.Footnote continues on next page.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.378APPENDIX CC.4  ATTACKS ON CRYPTOGRAPHIC SYSTEMS
A cryptographic system involves an encryption algorithm, adecryption algorithm, and keys for encryption and decryption.  Although

the precise boundaries between algorithm and key are fuzzy, for practical
purposes the algorithm can be regarded as whatever in the mathematics
is difficult to change, whereas the key is whatever is easy to change.A basic assumption of cryptographic security is that an eavesdropperknows the relevant decryption algorithm.  The algorithm may (or may

not) be a public one, but the history of all information secrecy suggests
that the best-kept secrets eventually leak.  The use of an easily changed

key thus enables the continued use of an algorithm that is known to an
eavesdropper.  (Any added security that results from the fact that an

eavesdropper may not in fact know the algorithm is simply a bonus.)  Put

differently, the security of a cryptographic system should be judged by
the security provided by the key alone, even if one attempts to keep the
algorithm secret.To compromise a message, an eavesdropper has two alternatives: toobtain the message in plaintext before it has been encrypted (or after it has
been decrypted) or to obtain the ciphertext and decipher it without know-
ing all that the recipient knows about the decryption algorithm and key.
(For the purposes of this appendix, the term ÒcompromiseÓ refers to an
eavesdropper intercepting and being able to read the secret message;
other types of compromise such as preventing Party B from receiving the
message or deliberately garbling it so that even Party B cannot read it are
not addressed here.)  Although cryptography and cryptanalysis are con-

cerned primarily with the latter, an eavesdropper does not particularly
care what methods may be used to obtain the plaintext of a message.
Thus, Party A and Party B must ensure that all elements of their commu-Given that periodic rewriting is necessary (e.g., every 10 years), it is natural to ask if itshould be the originally encrypted data or the unencrypted-and-then-reencrypted data thatshould be rewritten.  There are advantages and disadvantages to both.  Rewriting the origi-nally encrypted data means that it does not need to be decrypted, thus improving possible
losses of confidentiality.  On the other hand, it also means that the key management systemcontemporaneous with the originally encrypted data must be preserved for future use.(Specifically, the key management system is responsible for maintaining a record of the key
used to encrypt the data so that it can be decrypted later.)  Preserving the key management
system has many of the same problems associated with it that preserving the older storagemedia poses.  If the choice is made to rewrite unencrypted-and-then-reencrypted data, then

the originally encrypted data must be decrypted, which opens another channel for loss ofconfidentiality.Different institutions will make this trade-off in different ways, but if the choice is madeto rewrite the unencrypted-and-then-reencrypted data, then the time that the original keymust be preserved is the time between data rewritings, which may be much shorter thanthe time the data is of interest.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY379nications system are secure; if Party A uses a secretary to encrypt themessage and the secretary sells the message to an enemy agent, the best
encryption scheme in the world does not matter.  Similarly, if the eaves-

dropper is able to intercept the decryption key (e.g., because it was trans-
mitted on an insecure channel or because it too was sold by the secretary),
secret messages transmitted with the lost key are vulnerable to compro-
mise.  (The fact that Party B must have the decryption key to decrypt the

message and that somehow the information identifying the decryption
key must be transmitted from Party A to Party B is at the heart of the key
interception problem.)Still, it is often the case that the only real alternative for an eavesdrop-per is to try to decipher an intercepted ciphertext.  How difficult is it for

an eavesdropper to accomplish such a task?The difficulty of cryptanalysis depends on two factors: the size of thekey and the mathematical structure of the algorithm itself.  Key size deter-

mines how long it would take to cryptanalyze the ciphertext by brute
forceÑtrying all possible keys with a given decryption algorithm untilthe (meaningful) plaintext appears.16  With a sufficiently long key, even
16Strictly speaking, this statement is true for symmetric cryptography involving algorithmssuch as DES with a larger key and a few other minor modifications to make it stronger.  Withasymmetric cryptography, the difficulty of the problem rests in knowing the computational
effort needed to invert certain functions (e.g, factoring).  For more discussion, see Section C.5.
For these reasons, the comment of Edgar Allen Poe (Edgar Allen Poe, The Gold-Bug, CreativeEducation Inc., Mankato, Minn., 1990, p. 63) that Òit may well be doubted whether humaningenuity can construct an enigma of the kind which human ingenuity may not, by properapplication, resolveÓ is exactly wrong
Ñthere is every reason to believe that it is possible to
devise an impenetrable cipher.  (The one-time pad is such an example.)
Quantitatively, the effort to encipher and decipher (i.e., with knowledge of the key) inconventional systems is almost independent of the key size (and sublinear in any event).  For
example, both RC2 and RC4 have key initialization routines that take the variable-length key
and expand it into a larger Òexpanded keyÓ used in the encryption and decryption process.
Since the key initialization is done only once per key, it adds a fixed overhead, which isnegligible in most applications because the expanded key is used to encrypt large amounts of
data before the key is changed.  Cryptanalysis, on the other hand, appears to be exponential
in the key size (2b, where 
b is the number of bits).
The bottom line is that cryptanalysis grows exponentially in b, while enciphering anddeciphering grow at worst linearly in bÑa very nice work factor for the cryptographer, but anawful situation for the cryptanalyst.Asymmetric cryptographic systems are more complex.  The best-known algorithms pro-
vide cryptanalytic attacks that grow as exp[c á b1/3 á ln(
b)2/3] (where c is a constant equal to
approximately 1.7) while enciphering and deciphering grow as b3.Finally, one important operational caveat for both asymmetric and symmetric systems isthat one must be able to recognize the output as meaningful before one can know that the keyjust tested was indeed correct.  When the plaintext is an English sentence, it is possible to look
at the resulting sentence and recognize it for what it is.  However, if the 
ÒplaintextÓ is in fact a
computer program or an image file, it may be much more difficult to recognize the output asbeing correct.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.380APPENDIX Can eavesdropper with very extensive computing resources would have totake a very long time (longer than the age of the universe) to test all
possible combinations.  On the other hand, practical considerations re-

lated to implementation issues may force a trade-off between overall se-
curity (of which key size is one element) and cost.1717A relevant issue is that computers can be expected to grow more powerful over time,although there are fundamental limits on computational capability imposed by the struc-
ture of the universe (e.g., nothing travels faster than light in vacuum, and the number ofatoms in the universe available to build computers is large but finite).  Thus, the minimum
key size needed to protect a message against a very powerful opponent will grow as com-
puters become more powerful, although it is certainly possible to choose a key size that willbe adequate for protecting against exhaustive search for all time.Thus, although it is true that dramatic reductions in the cost of computing (or equiva-lently, increases in computational power) have occurred in the past four decades, it doesnot follow that such reductions in cost or increases in power can continue indefinitely.  Thecommonplace belief or instinct that they can continue indefinitely is simply wrong.What is true is that fundamental limits to computation have not yet been reached andwill not be reached for a long time, but this is a result of the fact that early computationaldevices were so far from the fundamental limits of computation that many orders of magni-
tude improvement have been possible.  Two illustrative calculations demonstrate the fact
that there are practical limits:1.  A limit based on the energy output of the sun.  All real computations consume energy.  Onthe basis of standard thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, the energy cost of an irre-versible computation must be on the order of kT, where 
T is the ambient temperature (onan absolute Kelvin scale) and k is BoltzmannÕs constant (equal to 1.4 10
Ð23 joules per
degree Kelvin).  The sun
Õs power output is approximately 3.86 10
26 watts; thus, its total
energy output over its expected lifetime of 10 billion years (3 10
17 seconds) is about
1044 joules.  Assume an ambient temperature of 
T = 10
Ð6 degrees, which will then impose
an energy cost per operation of 1.4  10
Ð29 joules per operation.  Thus, the number of
computational operations possible using the entire energy output of the sun is given byenergy output divided by the energy cost per operation, or about 1073 operations.  If only
one operation were necessary to test a key (in practice, hundreds are necessary), then itwould take 1073 operations to test a key of 73 decimal digits (which is equivalent to about
250 binary bits).  For reference, the number of atoms in the solar system is about 10
60.2.  A limit based on the mass of Earth.  The mass of Earth is about 6 
 10
24 kg.  A proton
mass is 1.6  10
Ð27 kg, so that Earth contains about 4 
 10
51 protons.  Assume one proton
per computer, and that each computer can perform one operation in the time that it takes
light to cross its diameter (i.e., 10Ð15 meters divided by 3 
 10
10 meters per second, or 1/3 
10Ð25 seconds).  Each computer can thus perform 3 
 10
25 operations per second.  If all of
these computers work in parallel, they can perform 4  10
51  3 10
25 operations per
second, or 1077 operations per second.  The age of the universe is on the order of 10 billion
years, or 3  10
17 seconds.  Thus, an earthful of proton-sized computers can perform 3
1094 operations in the age of the universe.  With the assumptions made before, this corre-
sponds to a key size of 95 decimal digits, or about 320 bits.Both of these calculations demonstrate that it is clearly possible to specify a key sizelarge enough to guarantee that an attack based on exhaustive search will never be feasible,
regardless of advances in conventional computational hardware or algorithms.  (The quali-

fication to ÒconventionalÓ computing is for quantum computing, discussed in Section C.6.6.)
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY381Nevertheless, because the cost of brute-force cryptanalysis doublesfor every bit that is added to the length of a key, there is a broad consen-
sus among cryptographers that it is possible today to encrypt data very
inexpensively in a way that would be unbreakable through brute force in
the foreseeable future, regardless of advances in computing technology
that could be used for cryptanalysis.  Put differently, for some sufficiently

long key length, the possibility of brute-force cryptanalysis can be ruled
out categorically for all time.  In practice, 
Òsufficiently longÓ may turn out
to be a key length as short as 168 bits.  (Of course, this analysis does not

address those operational situations, encountered from time to time, in
which the time required to encrypt plaintext must be kept to a minimum;
in such situations, the operational performance requirements of a system
may preclude the use of such a long key.  Nevertheless, in many situa-

tions, the operational requirements are not quite so critical, and the sys-
tem implementer can use very long key lengths without an impact on
performance.)The algorithm itself may provide an alternative to exhaustive search:a weakness in the algorithm, if exploited by an opponent, may categori-
cally rule out certain keys, thereby reducing the number of keys that need
to be tested.  Such weaknesses may be introduced deliberately (resulting

in a ÒtrapdoorÓ that allows someone with such knowledge to decipher a
message secretly) or may be accidental (perhaps as the result of insuffi-
cient analysis).Several attack scenarios are possible for the eavesdropper:¥  Ciphertext only.  If the eavesdropper has only the intercepted
ciphertext and nothing else, it may well be impossible to recover the
plaintext.  This is the least advantageous for the eavesdropper; however,

judgments about the security of a system should not be made on the basis
of this assumption since Party A and Party B may not know that this
condition obtains.¥  Known plaintext.  The eavesdropper may have the intercepted
ciphertext (call it C1) and some other ciphertext (C2), as well as the
plaintext (P2) corresponding to C2.  (For example, C2 may be known to be

an encrypted press release that is then published by Party A the day after
interception.)  If the eavesdropper has reason to believe that C1 (the

ciphertext of the message of interest) has been produced by the same
algorithm and key, he or she may be able to derive the decryption key
with much less work than by exhaustive search or the case in which only
C1 is available (i.e., the ciphertext-only case).¥  Chosen plaintext.  A variant of the known plaintext attack is the
chosen plaintext attack, in which the eavesdropper has been able to insert
words of his or her own into P2.  (An attack of this sort characterized U.S.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.382APPENDIX CNavy intelligence just before the Battle of Midway in World War II.18)  By
controlling the plaintext, the work of the eavesdropper is eased signifi-
cantly (because test cases can be generated easily, among other things).Once the eavesdropper learns the decryption key, he or she can deci-pher easily any subsequent message that uses that key.Note that much of the public debate about the ease or difficulty ofbreaking an encryption scheme is carried out in terms of an ÒidealÓ imple-
mentation of a given algorithm.  However, in actual practice, cryptanalysts

(those trying to break encryption schemes) exploit weaknesses in the way
an algorithm is implemented in practice.  For example, the protection

afforded by algorithm X may require the use of random numbers.  How-

ever, it may turn out that the way in which system A implements algo-
rithm X does not use true random numbers but rather numbers with a
predictable sequence (e.g., consecutive numbers, or even worse, a fixed
number such as zero or one).19  A cryptanalyst who suspects that this
might be true about someone who uses system A to protect communica-
tions may be able to exploit it and therefore reduce by orders of magni-
tude the effort required to decipher those communications.  Put differ-

ently, any cryptographic system that relies on keys has a built-in
vulnerability with respect to the key.  The encryption may be virtually

invulnerable, but the key is always vulnerable.  Even if the key is ulti-

mately divided between multiple parties, the place at which the key is
generated is always a potential vulnerability.Strong cryptography refers to cryptographic systems that are verydifficult to break.  Eavesdroppers with large amounts of time, money, and

computing expertise (e.g., national governments) are in a much better
position to break cryptographic systems of a given strength than are those
with more limited resources (e.g., individuals or corporations).  Orga-

nized crime may also be in a good position to obtain cryptanalytic intelli-18To confirm a cryptanalytic solution, U.S. codebreakers asked the American garrison atMidway to report over an open and unsecured channel a shortage of fresh water.  The

Japanese, monitoring this channel, reported two days later that ÒAFÓ was experiencing a
shortage of fresh water, thus confirming that ÒAFÓ was indeed the Japanese code designa-
tion for Midway.  See David Kahn, 
The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing, MacMillan,New York, 1967, p. 569.19An analogy will illustrate.  Computer users must often 
Òsign onÓ to their computers
using a secret password that cannot be guessed easily.  However, it is quite common to find

computer users who use passwords such as their name or some easily remembered (andtherefore easily guessed) word.  A person (or a computer) trying to guess passwords is
obviously in a much better position if the search can be limited to all eight-character words
in the dictionary and all proper names (analogous to numbers with a predictable sequence),rather than all possible combinations of eight characters (analogous to random numbers).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY383gence because it is able to bring large sums of money to bear on theproblem if the results are worth even more.An interesting technical question is the extent to which it is possibleto build very strong cryptographic systems with no algorithmic weak-
nesses whose decryption keys are sufficiently large to preclude exhaus-
tive search as an effective method of decryption.  If such systems are

possible, a user of such systems can, by definition, be assured that no
eavesdropper can break that encryption system.Finally, the role of operational errors in the penetration of even well-designed cryptographic systems should not be underestimated.  Penetra-
tion is often possible because the user of the cryptographic system has
made a mistake that compromises its security.  One example that has

recently come to light is the successful decryption of certain messages
sent by Soviet agents in the United States regarding nuclear weapons and
the U.S. nuclear program at the end of World War II.  Soviet agents used

a one-time pad; when used properly, a one-time pad is known with math-
ematical certainty to be impenetrable (as described above).  However, a

one-time pad is based on the idea that a certain sequence of random
numbers serving as the encryption key to a message will never be used
more than once.  For some time, Soviet agents used a particular one-time

pad to encode messages, and American analysts were unable to decipher
them.  However, the time came when Soviet agents began to 
reuse num-
bers from the one-time pad, and American cryptanalysts were able to
make substantial headway in deciphering them.20C.5  ELEMENTS OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC SECURITY
To keep eavesdroppers from compromising secret messages, securityexperts may take several approaches.  By far the most common approach
is to change the key frequently, although in practice the problem of key
distribution may complicate matters considerably if a private-key system
is used.  A less frequent (though still common) technique is to encrypt a

message multiple times through the same algorithm with different keys;
an approach based on multiple encryption using DES has been proposed
as an alternative to the Skipjack encryption-decryption algorithm.  (Skip-

jack is the name of the algorithm on which the Clipper chip is based.)Security experts may also attempt to keep the algorithm secret.  Keep-
ing algorithms secret has advantages and disadvantages.  The advantage

is that when an algorithm is kept secret, fewer people have the opportu-20George Johnson, ÒThe SpiesÕ Code and How It Broke,
Ó New York Times, Week in Re-view, July 16, 1995, p. 16.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.384APPENDIX Cnity to learn its potential weaknesses; thus, information about its weak-nesses can be less widespread should any have been overlooked.  In

addition, keeping algorithms secret is a way to keep out of the public
domain information on what constitutes a good algorithm.  The disad-

vantage is the flip side to the same coinÑwhen fewer people can learn itsweaknesses, an algorithm may have vulnerabilities that go undetected by
its users and, thus, may be vulnerable to clandestine compromise.Finally, in principle, it is possible to vary the algorithm as well.  How-
ever, it is very difficult to develop a trusted algorithm, with the result that
algorithms are changed rarely, and the number of useful algorithms is
much smaller than the number of keys possible when even a small key is
used.To summarize, the fundamental question in evaluating cryptographicsystems is how long the system as a whole takes to become obsolete or
whether it will defy obsolescence.  The algorithms and techniques for key

generation and management are important, but it is a mistake to focus
exclusively on these matters.  A cryptographic system may well become

obsolete in a given environment even though its mathematical founda-
tions remain sound.  Extending the time to obsolescence may be desirable

and necessary, but no system can be extended indefinitely.  The continual

evolution of cryptographic techniques and the use of redundant systems
are as important to security as the mathematical correctness of an algo-
rithm and the size of an encryption key.C.6  EXPECTED LIFETIMES OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC SYSTEMS
Because of the rapidly decreasing cost of computation, cryptographicsystems that cost $1 billion to break in 1945 can be broken for approxi-
mately $10 today.  In the same way, today
Õs cryptographic systems shouldhave large safety margins to protect against future advances in technol-
ogy.The need for safety margins varies, depending on the data entrustedto the cryptographic system.  Press releases, encrypted during transmis-

sion for later release, typically need at most a few days of secrecy.  Medi-
cal records, on the other hand, can have privacy time constants on the
order of 50 years.  Because a company or governmental agency typically

uses a single cryptographic system to protect all of its data, ideally the
system should have a safety margin commensurate with the longest pri-
vacy time constant encountered.21Symmetric cryptographic systems allow large safety margins at low21See also footnote 15.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY385cost.  Asymmetric cryptographic systems have a more pronounced rela-
tionship between cost and safety margin, so that it is harder to achieve
large safety margins with asymmetric systems.  Even with conventional

systems, where 50-year safety margins appear possible and cost-effective,
national security and related export considerations may prevent their use.C.6.1  Background
The need for safety margins stems from two general categories oftechnological advances: those due to improvements in computation and
those due to breakthroughs in cryptanalytic attacks.Safety margins needed to protect against improvements in computa-tion are easier to predict because there is a steady trend, manifest since
the 1930s, that is expected to continue for the next few decades and prob-
ably beyond, in which the cost of computation has decreased by an order
of magnitude (i.e., a factor of 10) every 5 to 7 years (e.g., MooreÕs lawpredicts, so far fairly accurately, that microprocessor speed doubles every
18 months, equivalent to a factor of 10 every 5 years).  Consequently, a

computation that costs $1 billion today may cost only $10 in 50 years.22Since some of the information entrusted to cryptographic systems has a
privacy time constant of 50 years and more (e.g., medical records should
be private for at least the duration of the patientÕs life), it is seen that asignificant safety margin is needed.Advances of the second type, breakthroughs in cryptanalysis andrelated techniques, are much harder to predict.  In the case of symmetric

cryptographic systems, there is little public literature to use as a guide,
but asymmetric cryptographic systems offer some data points, and so
they are treated first.C.6.2  Asymmetric Cryptographic Systems
The asymmetric cryptographic systems in primary use today basetheir security on the difficulty of two related computational problems:
factoring integers and finding discrete logarithms.23  Factoring is used as
22This assumes that MooreÕs law will continue to hold.  Today, the technology of silicon
electronics does not run up against fundamental physical constraints, but whether the
MooreÕs law trend will continue to hold for 50 years is open to debate.  Most experts
suggest that for a decade or two, it will probably remain valid.23Although it is not needed to understand what follows, these two problems can be ex-plained easily. In factoring, one is given an integer, for example 493, and asked to find allprime factors. Since 493  17 
 29, the answer here is 
Ò17 and 29.Ó In discrete logarithms, one
is given a, n, and y in the equation 
Òax modulo 
n  yÓ and asked to find 
x. For example, a
solution to Ò2x modulo 11 
  10
Ó is 
x  5. To see this, note that 2
5  32 and 32 modulo 11 
 10.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.386APPENDIX Cthe example in what follows because it is the more studied of these twoproblems.For many years, the progress of factoring was measured by theprogress in factoring what are known as the Fermat numbers, denoted by
Fn, the nth Fermat number.  The 
nth Fermat number is 2^(2n)  1 (where 
^denotes exponentiation).  Hence, 
F2  24 + 1 
 17, 
F3  28 + 1 
 257, etc.  In
general, Fn is an 
n  1 bit number.  Increasing 
n by 1 doubles the size of the
number to be factored, when measured in bits.  In recent history, 
F7 was
factored in 1970, F8 in 1980, 
F9 in 1990, and 
F10 in 1995.
It is interesting to note that F9 was factored by an algorithm that is
much faster for ÒspecialÓ numbers such as 2^(2
n)  1 than for 
ÒgeneralÓnumbers used in asymmetric cryptographic systems.  This was not true of

earlier factoring methods.  Hence, although the history of the Fermat

numbers can be used to illustrate the history of factoring as applied to
asymmetric cryptographic systems, the future does not allow that corre-
spondence.  (More precisely, 
F8 was factored with a method that is not
applicable to breaking asymmetric cryptographic systems.  However, an-

other factoring method that is applicable to breaking asymmetric crypto-
graphic systems was being tested at about the time and would have been
successful in factoring F8 in either 1980 or the next year.)  Also, the factor-
ing of F9 involved a large network of workstations, connected over the
Internet and using idle time.  This networking reduced by several orders

of magnitude the time needed to undertake the relevant computations.
Table C.1 provides a historical record of the factoring of ÒnonspecialÓnumbers.Some of the advances in factoring Fermat numbers were due to thedecreasing cost of computation, which fell by approximately a factor of
100 in each 10-year period.  However, most of the improvement was due

to breakthroughs in factoring algorithms.  For example, the continued

fraction method, used successfully to factor F7 in 1970, would have takenapproximately a million times as much effort to factor F8, or 10,000 timesas long in 1980, given the factor-of-100 speedup in computers.  In contrast,
TABLE C.1  A History of Factoring
YearSize of Number Factored
196420decimal digits (66 bits)
197445decimal digits (149 bits)
198471decimal digits (236 bits)

1994129decimal digits (429 bits)
SOURCE: Andrew Odlyzko, ÒThe Future of Integer Factorization,Ó Cryptobytes, RSA Labo-
ratories, Redwood City, Calif., Volume 1(2), Summer 1995, p. 5.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY387the quadratic sieve, developed in the late 1970s, cut the required compu-tation by a factor of roughly 100,000 when compared to continued frac-
tions.  Qualitatively similar numbers apply to the improvements that

allowed F9 to be factored in 1990.
The data points from the factoring of Fermat numbers give an esti-mate that key size (the size of the number to be factored) must double
every 10 years to keep up with improvements in factoring.  This, in turn,

implies that key size must have a safety factor of 32 to be secure over 50
years (five periods of 10 years, resulting in a key size increase of 25  32).
This estimate is very approximate, and probably conservative, because
the development of asymmetric cryptography gave a tremendous impe-
tus to the study of factoring.  Mathematicians working in what had been

one of the purest of pure areas of mathematics, with little attendant fund-
ing, could suddenly point to immense commercial benefits from their
work.  Also, 
F7 and 
F8 were factored on single-processor machines,
whereas the factorization of F9 made use of the idle time on a network of
approximately 700 workstations scattered around the world, and such an
advance in computational power can come only once.  A less conservative

estimate would therefore be to assume at least one, and probably two,
additional breakthroughs that double the size of the numbers that can be
factored.The above discussion points to a need for a safety factor of 2 to 32 inthe length of the key for asymmetric cryptographic systems, an admit-
tedly large range of uncertainty.  This ambiguity is sometimes eliminated

by real-world considerations.  If, for example, there are significant idle

computational resources available for public-key computations and they
can be done in background mode without delaying current communica-
tions, then a safety margin of a factor of 32 in key size is entirely reason-
able and should be used.  On the other hand, if the computation to use a

factor-of-four margin in key size results in unacceptable delay, one might
use a factor-of-two margin, or no safety margin at all, particularly if the
data has low value and a short privacy time constant.  Export consider-

ations also might limit key size, but in these latter cases users need to be
aware of the danger to their communications, so that they do not trust
valuable data to a system with an inappropriately low safety margin.Today, factoring 512-bit numbers is extremely difficult, while factor-ing 1,024-bit numbers is computationally impossible.  By using 512 bits as

a reasonable security level for asymmetric cryptographic systems whose
data must be secret only in the immediate future, a safety margin of 2 (the
minimal indicated) would dictate the use of 1,024-bit numbers, while a
safety margin of 32 (a much more conservative and safer value) would
lead to roughly 16-kilobit numbers.  The public-key algorithms in use

today have a cost of computation that grows with b3, where b is the num-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.388APPENDIX Cber of bits.  Hence, a safety margin of a factor of 32 in key size requires an
increase in cost of 323 (more than 30,000), an uneconomic situation in most
applications.  At the larger bit sizes, more efficient arithmetic methods can

be used that might reduce the growth curve to approximately b2, but even322  1,024 is a larger cost penalty than most users will be willing to pay.
C.6.3  Conventional Cryptographic Systems
DES is the most widely studied conventional cryptographic system,and so it is used here for illustrative purposes in assessing the security
levels needed in such systems.  The best known 
practical method for break-
ing DES is exhaustive search of all 256 possible keys.  The correct key can
be recognized because it deciphers intercepted ciphertext into meaningful
plaintext.  In 1977 Diffie and Hellman estimated the cost of exhaustive

search at $10,000 per key.24  Their estimate would scale to a cost of at most
$100 per solution in 1994, 14 years (two periods of 7 years) later.This figure of $100 per solution is also supported by recent work ofWiener.25  Using commonly available components, Wiener estimated that
he could build exhaustive search machines for $1 million each, which
could produce a DES key every 3.5 hours.  Amortizing machine cost over

5 years results in a cost of $80 per solution.  Although this estimate ne-

glects costs such as interest, design, maintenance, electricity, etc., these
additional costs do not affect the estimated cost because it is only a
ÒballparkÓ estimate, accurate to at best a factor of two.  More accurate
estimates are not needed because of the rapidly decreasing cost of compu-
tation: an error by a factor of two is erased in 1 to 2 years.  These numbers

might make it seem that DES reached the end of its useful life some time
ago.  That is partly true and partly false for the reasons explained below.
The approximately $100 cost per solution assumes an opponent iswilling to invest several million dollars in the design and production of
exhaustive search cryptanalytic machines.  Exhaustive search on general-

purpose computers is much more expensive, costing on the order of $10
million per solution.  Hence, DES is insecure against opponents who can

afford to build special-purpose cryptanalytic machines, have enough
problems to keep them fully loaded (idle time increases the cost per solu-
tion), and have access to modern integrated circuit technology.  National

intelligence organizations within the developed world meet all of these24Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman, ÒExhaustive Cryptanalysis of the NBS Data En-cryption Standard,Ó Computer, June 1977, pp. 74-84.25M.J. Wiener, ÒEfficient DES Key Search,Ó TR-244, School of Computer Science, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Canada, May 1994; presented at the Rump Session of Crypto Õ93.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY389criteria.  National intelligence organizations in less developed nations
and organized crime possess the budget, but export restrictions and other
government controls on cryptographic technology raise the question of
whether they could purchase the required technology.  Large corpora-

tions also pose a potential threat to DES, but the difficulty of hiding a
several million dollar budget plus government controls make them less
likely threats.  Hence, DES is relatively secure today against industrial

espionage, extremely insecure against major foreign powers, and ques-
tionable against lesser foreign powers and organized crime (which has no
qualms about hiding budgets or conspiracies).  DES
Õs useful lifetimeagainst commercial adversaries is on the order of 15 years, which could
bring the $10 million per solution on general-purpose hardware down to
$10,000 per solution, an amount that many individuals could afford.Advances in cryptanalysis could speed the obsolescence of DES, butthere are few historical data on which to base such an estimate.  Prudence

would dictate doubling the key size over what is indicated by current
algorithms, especially since exhaustive search has been assumed in the
above analysis.  The frequently proposed triple-DES, which uses three

DES devices in series with three different keys, more than meets this
requirement and does not require any new standards.  It does, however,

meet with real-world problems since even single-DES is subject to U.S.
Munitions List controls.Unlike asymmetric cryptographic systems, the cost of increasing thekey size of DES, or of most other conventional cryptographic systems, is
minimal.  Again, for illustrative purposes, DES has a 56-bit key that is

expanded into a 768-bit pseudokey for use by the algorithm.  Aside from

the increased storage required, a 768-bit key could be used with a mini-
mal penalty in the speed of computation.  Since storing the 56-bit key

consumes less than 10% of DESÕs required storage, doubling the key sizeresults in at most a 10% increase in encryption-decryption cost.2626In fact, a small increase in encryption time would occur, because if the DES algorithm isadapted to use a larger key size, it would also be advisable to increase the number ofrounds (iterations), thus increasing the encryption-decryption time. For example, obtainingthe full benefit of a 128-bit DES key would require approximately doubling the number of
rounds, with an attendant doubling of computational time.  Although this increase in time
would be a problem in some applications, in many others it would not (e.g., telephone linecommunications where speeds are relatively slow). In any event, the rate of increase of
computational time (as security is increased) is much slower in symmetric systems such asDES than in asymmetric systems.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.390APPENDIX CC.6.4  Timing Attacks
A different type of attack against a number of cryptographic systemshas been developed by Paul C. Kocher, an independent consultant.27KocherÕs attack differs from traditional cryptanalysis in that it needs ad-ditional information on the time required by each encryption, decryption,
or signing.  However, it often works even when only known ciphertext is

available.  Although such an attack is harder to mount than a ciphertext-

only attack (see definitions above), in most applications it appears compa-
rable in difficulty to obtaining known plaintext and in most applications
is no harder than mounting a chosen text attack.  While the attack can thus

be mounted in only a small fraction of cases, good cryptographic practice
requires treating such attacks seriously.  Good business practice also dic-

tates this approach because it takes only one large loss to result in a loss of
confidence or money.KocherÕs attack makes use of his insightful observation that the com-putation time of many systems depends in a predictable manner on the
first bit of the secret key.  By computing the two running times (when that

bit is 0 and when it is 1) for a large number of observed computations and
correlating them with the observed computation time, the attacker can
make a good guess on the first bit of the secret key.  If this guess is correct,

the computation time depends in a predictable manner on the second bit
of the secret key, which can be attacked in like manner, etc.  Any errors in

early decisions result in poor correlations that signal the error and invite
revisiting the decision.Although his results are very recent and therefore somewhat prelimi-nary, Kocher has estimated that on the order of 1,000 computation times
are sufficient to attack many software implementations of DES, RC5, RSA,
Diffie-Hellman, and the Digital Storage Standard (DSS).  He is investigat-

ing the applicability to other systems as well.One obvious fix to this problem is to implement fixed-time-lengthencryptions to conceal variations in the encryption times.  Of course, such

a fix would also run counter to the often-present desire to minimize com-
putational delay.27See Paul Kocher, Cryptanalysis of Diffie-Hellman, RSA, DSS, and Other Systems UsingTiming Attacks, Stanford, Calif., December 7, 1995; available on-line at http://www.cryptography.com/timingattack.html.  A popular account of this attack is found in John

Markoff, ÒSecure Digital Transactions Just Got a Little Less Secure,Ó New York Times, De-cember 11, 1995, p. A1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY391C.6.5  Skipjack/Clipper/EES
The Skipjack encryption algorithm used in the Escrow EncryptionStandard (EES; ÒClipperÓ) has an 80-bit key size.  Since the algorithm
itself is classified and made available only in silicon, exhaustive search
cannot be contemplated by other than the U.S. government until the algo-
rithm is reverse-engineered.  Many deem that likely to happen within 5 to

10 years, perhaps even sooner at foreign national intelligence organiza-
tions.  Alternatively, the algorithm may have to be divulged to such orga-

nizations if EES is to become international in scopeÑa prerequisite to itsbeing widely used in this country since so much business is international
in nature.  For all these reasons, in what follows, the prudent assumption
is made that the algorithm is known to an adversary.Since Skipjack has a key size that is 24 bits larger than DES, exhaus-tive search takes 224 16 million) times as long and costs 16 million timesas much.  The $100-per-solution cost of DES thus scales to approximately
$1 billion per solution.  (Although 16 million times $100 equals $1.6 bil-

lion, the use of more than an order-of-magnitude estimate would give a
misleading impression of the accuracy of these estimates.)  Skipjack is

thus immune to exhaustive search for some time to come.  If a cost of $1

million per solution is used as ending the utility of a system, SkipjackÕskey size has a safety factor of 1,000, which will be erased in 15 to 21 years
because of the decreasing cost of computation (three periods of 5 to 7
years).If Skipjack is considered usable even at $1,000 per solution, that addsanother 15 to 20 years to its useful life, for a total of 30 to 40 years.  The

figure of $1 million per solution is appropriate since some data will be
worth that much to an opponent.  Again, any cryptanalytic improve-

ments over exhaustive search would decrease the lifetime of Skipjack.  In
summary, SkipjackÕs key size possesses a larger margin of safety thansingle-encryption DES, but that margin is smaller than would be dictated
by purely economic and technical considerations.  (As with DES, increas-
ing the key size of Skipjack does not greatly increase the computation
cost.)C.6.6  A Warning
When issues related to potential weaknesses are raised, the argumentis often made that when a system becomes weak, it can be replaced by a
stronger one.  The implied question is, Why use more security now than is

needed? Although this argument makes sense for some cryptographic
applications, in many cases it is wrong, given that a standard is intended
for universal use.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.392APPENDIX CThe argument is correct for applicationsÑsuch as tactical military orcommercial plansÑin which an opponent gains value only by crypt-
analyzing the system soon after the data have been encrypted.  But strate-

gic plans, as well as medical records and many other forms of individual
and corporate data, have long privacy time constants.  When the old

cryptographic system for such data is in danger of compromise, it does
not help to reencrypt the data in a new, stronger cryptographic system: an
opponent who has recorded and stored the data encrypted in the old
system can attack the old, weaker cryptographic system used to encrypt
the stored data.C.6.7  Quantum and DNA Computing
28Two recent computing proposals may fundamentally alter the aboveanalysis.  Shor has proposed using quantum computing to factor inte-

gers.29  Although such computing requires technology far beyond that
available today, if it could be implemented, it would reduce factoring and
discrete logs to easy problems and kill the currently most popular public-
key cryptographic systems.  Quantum computing is still embryonic, and

it is not clear whether it will be practical.Quantum computing is computing that is based on the properties ofquantum mechanical systems.  In classical computing, a bit is either 0 or 1.

However, a fundamental property of quantum mechanical systems (such
as single quantum particles) is that they can exist in a ÒsuperpositionÓ of
states, fractionally both 0 and 1.  A properly coupled set of 
L quantum bits
(or ÒqubitsÓ) can hold not just one value out of the total N  2L possible
values, but can in principle contain all such values simultaneously.  If
logical operations are now performedÑand the laws of quantum me-chanics do allow such operationsÑthen computations can be performedsimultaneously and in parallel on all the represented numbers.Using these concepts, Shor was able to find a quantum algorithm thatcan, in principle, find the prime factors of a number N in a time propor-
28Material in this section is based on two JASON reports, one on quantum computingcalled Boundaries of Computing, and the second called DNA Computing  (A. Despain et al.,
Boundaries of Computing, JASON Study Report JSR-95-115, MITRE Corporation, McLean,Va., September 19, 1995; N. Lewis and P. Weinberger, DNA Computing, JASON Study Re-port JSR-95-116, MITRE Corporation, McLean, Va., September 12, 1995).  A lay exposition
of quantum computing is contained in Seth Lloyd, ÒQuantum-Mechanical Computers,ÓScientific American, October 1995, pp. 140-145.29Peter Shor, ÒAlgorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete Logarithms and Factor-ing,Ó in Shafi Goldwasser (ed.), 
35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science:Proceedings, IEEE Computer Press, New York, 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY393tional to L, the number of bits of that number, raised to some power (i.e.,in polynomial time).  No factoring algorithm implementable on a classical

computer is known that can factor a number with so few steps; all known
classical factoring algorithms are at best barely subexponential in the num-
ber of bits.  Quantitatively, given the number N and L  log2 N, the quan-tum algorithm can factor N in a time proportional to 
Lk, where k is some
number; all known classical algorithms give times that are worse than this
time.It must be emphasized that it is not known today how to build aquantum computer that could execute a quantum algorithm.  Indeed,

while individual qubits have been created and manipulated in the labora-
tory, no basic circuit has yet been constructed for a quantum computa-
tion, let alone a full-up computer.30  It has been estimated that a quantum
computer that could solve cryptographically interesting problems would
have a minimum of about 1011 quantum logic gates.
Nor is it known how broad is the class of number-theoretic problemsthat can be speeded up with a quantum computer.  ShorÕs factoring algo-rithm makes a very special use of the fast Fourier transform as a key step.
It is possible that some other computationally difficult problems on which
cryptographic systems could be based are not susceptible to this trick and
are equally hard for quantum computers.  This is a fascinating and lively

area of current research.DNA computing is another recently described paradigm for mas-sively parallel computation.  The basic idea is that DNA strands in a test

tube can be used to encode all possible answers to a given problem, such
as a cryptanalytic solution to a given piece of ciphertext encoded with a
known algorithm.  Biochemical techniques are known for sorting out

different strands of DNA; these techniques are logically equivalent to the
execution of an algorithm to obtain only the strands of DNA that repre-
sent the correct answer(s) to the problem.  The power of DNA computing

lies in the ability to prepare and sort through a compilation of all possible
answers to problems of a given computational complexity.A small computational problem has indeed been solved by the use ofa DNA computer.31  This successful demonstration puts DNA computing
on a much firmer foundation than quantum computing.  However, DNA
computing does not fundamentally change the hard nature of cryptana-
lytic problems, such as factoring or breaking DES; it merely changes the
cost of the computation.  At this time, it is not clear if DNA computing for
30See David DiVicenzo, ÒQuantum Computation,Ó Science, Volume 270(5234), October 13,1995, pp. 255-261.31Leonard Adelman, ÒMolecular Computation of Solutions to Combinatorial Problems,ÓScience, Volume 266, November 11, 1994, pp. 1021-1024.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.394APPENDIX Ccryptanalysis will be more or less expensive than electronic computing.  If
DNA cryptanalytic machines can be built more cheaply than electronic
ones, they will require those concerned with information security to adopt
larger safety margins in their encryption schemes (e.g., larger keys) than
they previously envisioned.An approach has been described for using DNA computing to breakDES that would require about 4 months of reaction time and 1 gram of
DNA to succeed.32  Since current laboratory techniques use only micro-
grams, or at most milligrams, of DNA, actually implementing this ap-
proach today would probably be a multimillion dollar project, and it
would reveal only a single DES key.More relevant to the future is the fact that the amount of DNA re-quired is exponential in the size of the problem.  That is, attempting the

decryption problem on a message encoded with a 57-bit key would re-
quire twice the amount of DNA required for the comparable decryption
problem with a 56-bit key.  An 80-bit decryption (required for Skipjack)

would require 16 million grams 16 tons) of DNA.  Thus, over the long
run, it does not appear that even the massively parallel nature of DNA
computing will be able to overcome the ease with which key sizes can be
increased.C.6.8  Elliptic Curve Cryptographic Systems
Variants of the RSA and Diffie-Hellman asymmetric cryptographicsystems have been proposed that use elliptic curves instead of modular
multiplication as the fundamental group operation.  Today the elliptic

curve variants have the advantage that the best-known algorithms for
cryptanalyzing them have computational requirements that grow expo-
nentially in the size of the modulus, as opposed to subexponential behav-
ior for RSA and Diffie-Hellman.  If this exponential behavior continues to

hold, asymmetric cryptographic systems can have significant safety mar-
gins, comparable to those obtainable with conventional cryptographic
systems, without undue economic or time cost to legitimate users.  Cau-

tion is warranted, however, since the elliptic curve systems are fairly
recent and therefore not nearly as well studied as RSA and Diffie-Hellman.C.6.9  Quantum Cryptography
Certain techniques based on fundamental quantum mechanical prop-erties of physical systems can be used to perform key exchange between
two parties that have never met, who share no a priori secret information,32See Dan Boneh, Christopher Dunworth, and Richard J. Lipton, 
Breaking DES Using aMolecular Computer, Technical Report CS-TR-489-95, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J.,
1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY395to enable them to communicate in absolute privacy.33  In particular, the
laws of quantum mechanics allow two particles (such as photons of light
in a fiber-optic cable) to be put in a state of ÒentangledÓ information.  In
such a state, any measurement of one of the particles necessarily disturbs
the entanglement.  Thus, eavesdropping on a quantum channel used to

communicate a key will inevitably be detected by the intended recipient
of the key, at which point a new key can be transmitted.A working quantum cryptography apparatus has been developed,although the sending and receiving mechanisms are only 30 centimeters
apart.  The creators of this apparatus
34 believe that nothing in principle
limits the technique from being used over much greater distances.  At the

same time, they note that quantum key distribution must compete with
classical techniques for key exchange, which are much cheaper over long
distances.33The description in this subsection is taken from Charles Bennett et al., ÒQuantum Cryp-tography,Ó Scientific American, Volume 267(4), October 1992, pp. 50-57.34Bennett et al., ÒQuantum Cryptography,Ó 1992.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.396APPENDIX D396DAn Overview of Electronic Surveillance:
History and Current Status
118 U.S.C. Section 2511(4), (5); 50 U.S.C. Section 1809(c); and 50 U.S.C. Section 1810.2The discussion in this subsection summarizes the relevant provisions.  A more detailed
treatment is given in Clifford S. Fishman, Wiretapping and Eavesdropping, The Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Co., Rochester, N.Y., 1978; and Clifford S. Fishman, Wiretapping andEavesdropping: Cumulative Supplement, Clark Boardman Callaghan, Deerfield, Ill., November1994.  See also Donald P. Delaney, Dorothy E. Denning, John Kaye, and Alan R. McDonald,ÒWiretap Laws and Procedures: What Happens When the U.S. Government Taps a Line,ÓSeptember 1993, available on-line at http://snyside.sunnyside.com/cpsr/privacy/commu-
nications/wiretap/denning_wiretap_procedure_paper.txt and other sites.D.1  THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR DOMESTIC LAW
ENFORCEMENT SURVEILLANCED.1.1  The General Prohibition on Electronic Surveillance
The U.S. Code, in Section 2511 of Title 18 and Sections 1809-1810 ofTitle 50, provides specific criminal and civil penalties for individuals (law
enforcement officials and private citizens alike) who conduct electronic or
wire surveillance of communications (defined below) in a manner that is
not legally authorized.1  Legal authorization for such surveillance is pro-vided for specific circumstances in law enforcement and foreign intelli-
gence collection as described below.D.1.2  Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968 and the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 19862Congress established the statutory authority for law enforcement in-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE397terception of communications in Title III of the Omnibus Crime Controland Safe Streets Act of 1968 (Title III).  In 1986, the Electronic Communica-

tions Privacy Act (ECPA) made significant additions and amendments.
Title III, as amended by ECPA, defines three categories of communica-
tionsÑoral, wire, and electronicÑand provides varying degrees of legalprotection against their unauthorized interception.  Oral communications

are spoken words carried by sound waves through the air.  Electronic

surveillance of oral communications is performed with listening devices,
known as bugs.  Wire communications are human speech carried over a

wire or wire-like cable, including optical fiber.  They may be intercepted

with a wiretap.  (Interception of one end of a conversation by bugging the

room in which a telephone is placed is a case of oral interception.)  Elec-

tronic communications are definedÑwith minor exceptions such as tone-only pagersÑas every other form of electronically transmitted communi-cation, including various forms of data, text, audio, and video.  The

legislative history of ECPA specifically mentions electronic mail, paging
systems, bulletin board systems, and computer-to-computer communica-
tions, among other technologies the act was intended to address.3ECPA defines radio communications, including voice conversations,as electronic, with the exception that voice conversations carried in part
over radio and in part through wires or switches (such as cellular tele-
phone calls) are treated as wire communications.4  Some radio communi-
cations may be intercepted without penalty.  Courts have found, and

ECPA affirms, that if a radio transmission is readily accessible to anyone
with an appropriate receiver, it does not meet the Fourth Amendment test
of a Òreasonable expectation of privacyÓ and is therefore unprotected.
5However, ECPA specifies several forms of radio communication that arenot Òreadily accessibleÓ and therefore are protected from interception.
These include, among others, encrypted or scrambled transmissions (digi-
tal modulation alone does not meet this standard, unless the protocols
have been deliberately concealed from the public to maintain privacy);
common-carrier paging services (except tone-only services); and private
microwave services.  In practice, unprotected radio transmissions gener-

ally relate to radio broadcasting, dispatching, public-safety radio (police,
fire, etc.), amateur radio, citizens band, and similar services.  In the radio
3Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 7.31-7.49.4Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 7.4, 7.5, 7.21-7.28.  See also James G.
Carr, The Law of Electronic Surveillance, Clark Boardman Callaghan, Deerfield, Ill., Septem-ber 1994, section 3.2.5By similar reasoning, messages are unprotected if posted in electronic bulletin boardsystems that are configured to make such messages readily accessible to the general public.Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 7.67.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.398APPENDIX Darena and others, the advance of communications technology, includingencryption and decryption, and the development of new services will
inevitably create the need for further interpretation of Title III and the
ECPA by the courts and/or revision of the federal statutes.6Like all searches and seizures in circumstances where a person nor-mally has a reasonable expectation of privacy, electronic surveillance re-
quires a warrant granted by a judge.7  To obtain a physical search warrant
(e.g., to search a personÕs home), officials must provide certain informa-tion.  This includes a statement of facts demonstrating probable cause to

believe a crime has been or will be committed; the identity of the person
or place to be searched; and a particular description of the object of the
search.  Evidence obtained in violation of these requirements may be

challenged by the defendant in a trial and may be subject to suppression.
Violations leading to suppression may include errors or omissions in the
application for a warrant; warrants that should not have been issued, for
example, for lack of probable cause; and failure to execute the search in
accordance with the terms of the warrant.8In Title III, Congress added significant, new requirements specific tothe electronic interception of oral and wire communications.  These addi-

tional requirements, which are discussed below, set a higher standard
than the physical search and seizure standard of the Fourth Amendment.
They are enforced by criminal and civil penalties, as well as by a statutory
exclusionary rule, which states that violations of these requirements may
lead to suppression of evidence in a later trial.  This suppression may

throw out evidence from electronic surveillance that would ordinarily
meet a Fourth Amendment test.9By law, only certain, serious felonies may be investigated with TitleIII surveillance of oral and wire communications.  These include murder,
kidnapping, child molestation, organized crime, narcotics offenses, and
crimes against national security, among others.10  Before performing elec-
tronic surveillance, investigators must obtain a special type of warrant6Clifford Fishman, personal communication, January 23, 1995.  This process can be seen,
for example, in the Law Enforcement Communications Act of 1994Õs extension to cordlesstelephones of the same Title III protection that applies to cellular telephones.7Surveillance with the consent of one of the parties to a communication (e.g., an infor-mant wearing a hidden microphone) does not require an intercept order  (
On Lee v. UnitedStates, 343 U.S. 747 (1952)).  See Wayne R. LaFave and Jerold H. Israel, 
Criminal Procedure,2nd ed., West Publishing, St. Paul, Minn., 1992, pp. 248, 254-255, 258-259.8Stephen Patrick OÕMeara, ÒOn Getting Wired: Considerations Regarding Obtaining andMaintaining Wiretaps and ÔBugsÕ,Ó Creighton Law Review, Volume 26, 1993, pp. 729-749.9See LaFave and Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, pp. 248-256, for a discussion of Title IIIand the Fourth Amendment.1018 U.S.C. Section 2516(1); and Carr, The Law of Electronic Surveillance, 1994, section 4.2.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE39911Requirements are detailed in 18 U.S.C. Section 2518.  Emergency intercepts may be
performed without first obtaining a warrant in certain circumstances, such as physical dan-ger to a person or conspiracy against the national security.  An application for a warrant
must subsequently be made within 48 hours.  There has been virtually no use of the emer-

gency provision, and its constitutionality has not been tested in court.  See LaFave and
Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, p. 254.12For a concise description of the application procedure, see Delaney et al., ÒWiretapLaws and Procedures,Ó 1993.
13In general, the Supreme Court has significantly diminished the strictness of the statu-tory identification provisions.  Potential telephone users may be listed in the application as

Òothers, as yet unknown.Ó  Evidence obtained in a valid wiretap about crimes other than
the one specified in the application is also admissible.  See Fishman, Cumulative Supplement,1994, sections 49-50, 55-56.14Ronald Goldstock and Clifford Fishman, briefings before the Committee to Study Na-tional Cryptography Policy, Irvine, Calif., February10, 1995.  For a description of FBI and
New York State Police procedures, see Delaney et al., ÒWiretap Laws and Procedures,Ó1993, section2.1.
called an Òintercept order.Ó11  To obtain an intercept order, an applicant
must show that other investigative methods, such as informants or visual
surveillance, have been tried unsuccessfully or would be dangerous or
unlikely to obtain the desired evidence.  The applicant must also provide
specific information, such as the identity of the requesting officer; facts of
the case showing probable cause; period of time that surveillance will be
in effect (up to 30 days, with extensions requiring another application);
surveillance procedures to be followed, including plans for keeping the
interception of irrelevant communications to a minimum; history of pre-
vious intercept applications concerning the same person or location; and
results of the ongoing interception, if the application is for an extension of
an order.12  These requirements are somewhat flexible; not every impro-
priety in a surveillance results in suppression of all the evidence gathered.
Numerous court decisions have found, for example, that incriminating
conversations involving persons or crimes other than those identified in
the warrant are admissible in a trial, as long as the warrant was valid for
the purpose originally intended.13Title III requires that intercept orders be requested and granted byhigher-ranking officers and judges than warrants for physical searches.
In federal investigations, applications must be authorized by a Depart-
ment of Justice official at or above the level of Deputy Assistant Attorney
General.  Only federal district courts and courts of appeals may issue

orders (in contrast to search warrants, which may also be issued by fed-
eral magistrates).  State electronic surveillance laws must designate re-

sponsible state officials and courts of comparable stature.  In addition to

the Title III provisions, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and most
state enforcement agencies have detailed, internal approval procedures
that officers must follow before they (or rather, a U.S. attorney acting on
their behalf) may approach a court with an intercept request.14Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.400APPENDIX DUpon receipt of a court order, communications service providers arerequired by law to assist law enforcement officials.  The service provider

must furnish information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to
accomplish the interception Òunobtrusively and with a minimum of inter-ferenceÓ with the subject
Õs services.15  The provider is entitled to reim-
bursement of expenses and is immune from any civil or criminal penalties
for assisting in court-ordered surveillance.One of the more intrusive aspects of electronic surveillance, in com-parison to physical search and seizure, is the fact that the invasion of
privacy continues over a period of time and is likely to intercept many
communications that are irrelevant to the investigation.  To restrict this

invasion of privacy, Title III requires law enforcement officials to perform
a procedure known as minimization.  In the context of a wiretap or bug,
minimization requires real-time monitoring of the surveillance device.
When conversations are intercepted concerning irrelevant subjects, such
as family gossip, monitoring officers must turn off the device.  At inter-

vals thereafter, they must turn on the device to spot-check for relevant
communications, which may then be recorded.  Minimization procedures

must be described in the application for the intercept order.  Failure to

minimize properly may result in suppression of evidence.16In certain cases, minimization may be postponed.  Foreign-language
conversations may be recorded in their entirety and minimized later, when
a translator is available.17  Similar guidelines would presumably apply to
encrypted communicationsÑthey would be minimized after decryption.ECPA established that electronic communications, like oral and wire com-
munications, are subject to minimization requirements; however, some dif-
ferences in the procedures apply.  For example, a text communication such

as an electronic mail message clearly cannot be Òturned off and onÓ during
interception, since it is read on a full computer screen.  Minimization in this
1518 U.S.C. Section 2518(4).  See Fishman, 
Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 118.  See
also Chapter 6 of this report for a discussion of how the Communications Assistance to Law
Enforcement Act codifies specific obligations for carriers to assist authorized surveillance.16The Supreme Court has interpreted minimization criteria to permit some interceptionof irrelevant communications.  For example, monitoring of a high percentage of all calls

early in the surveillance operation is permissible, provided that officers observe emergingpatterns of conversations with innocent parties and adjust accordingly.  See O
ÕMeara, ÒOnGetting Wired,Ó 1993, p. 743.  In addition, judges rarely respond to minimization failures by
suppressing the entire body of evidence gathered throughout the surveillance.  More typi-
cally, they suppress only the specific conversations or other interceptions that should havebeen minimized and were not.  Clifford Fishman, briefing to the Committee to Study Na-

tional Cryptography Policy, Irvine, Calif., February 10, 1995.17Carr, The Law of Electronic Surveillance, 1994, section 5.7(c).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE401case would consist of deleting irrelevant sections of text and retaining only
the relevant portions for further use.18Following the completion of an interception, the minimized tapes ofthe surveillance must be sealed and delivered to the custody of the court.
This provision of Title III is intended to ensure that evidence used in a
subsequent trial is authentic and has not been altered.  After the intercept

order terminates, the issuing judge must notify the persons named in the
order within 90 days that they have been subject to surveillance, unless
good cause is shown for postponement.19  For evidence to be used in a trial,
the defendant must receive an inventory listing the date of the intercept
order, period of surveillance, and whether any communications were inter-
cepted.  The defendant may move to receive transcripts of the interceptions,

as well as the underlying application and court order.  Failure to provide

notice and inventory may serve as a basis for suppression of evidence if the
defendant can demonstrate prejudice having been shown as a result.
20The procedures discussed above apply to oral and wire intercepts(bugs and wiretaps).  ECPA applied most of the same procedures and

restrictions to surveillance of electronic communications.  It also extended

Title III criminal and civil penalties for unlawful interception to electronic
communications.21  However, it did not set the same standard of protec-
tion for these communications.  For example, any federal felony may be

investigated through electronic interception, and a federal attorney of any
rank may request an electronic communications intercept order.22In addition, the statutory exclusionary rule of Title III for oral andwire communications does not apply to electronic communications.  Evi-
dence may be subject to suppression according to Fourth Amendment
standards (such as probable cause), but ECPA expressly omits electronic
communications from the provision that evidence obtained outside Title
III procedures is suppressible in court.23  As in the case of oral and wire
surveillance, however, state statutes must apply protection at least as
stringent as the federal statute.  The states of Florida and Kansas impose

the same requirements on electronic communications intercepts as on
oral and wire intercepts.2418See Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 151-159.19Delaney et al., ÒWiretap Laws and Procedures,Ó 1993, sections 2.4-2.5.
20Fishman, Wiretapping and Eavesdropping, 1978, section 203; and Fishman, CumulativeSupplement, 1994, section 211.21Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 7.58.22Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 7.32, 42.1, 53.1.23LaFave and Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, pp. 256-257.24Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 42.1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.402APPENDIX DTitle III, when first enacted, regulated only the interception of contentsof communications.  However, ECPA added new regulations on traffic

analysisÑthe use of devices to collect information about origins and desti-nations of communications (particularly, telephone calls) without inter-
cepting their contents.25  Traffic analysis is performed with the aid of pen
registers, which record the numbers dialed from a target telephone, and
trap-and-trace devices, which identify telephone numbers from which calls
are placed to the target telephone.26  ECPA provides that use of these
devices is a criminal offense except when performed by a law enforcement
official with a court order, by a communication service provider for speci-

fied business purposes, or with the consent of the service user.
With respect to law enforcement, ECPA codified the existing judicialrecord on traffic analysis.  Because the Supreme Court has ruled that

traffic analysis information is not protected by the Fourth Amendment,
evidence obtained improperly or without a warrant is not suppressible in
a trial.27  Under ECPA, a pen register or trap-and-trace order may be
requested by any federal attorney and granted by any federal district
judge or magistrate.  States may designate comparable authorities for

requesting and approving orders.  If the request meets the statutory re-

quirements, the court must grant the order.  (By contrast, interception

orders are subject to the judgeÕs discretion.)  The application need not
present a statement of facts showing probable cause, but merely the
applicantÕs certification that probable cause exists.  In practice, one pur-
pose of obtaining an order is to compel the cooperation of communica-
tions service providers and to protect those providers from civil and crimi-

nal liability.28ECPA also governs access to stored wire and electronic communica-tions, such as backup copies of voice mail and electronic mail messages.29ECPA provides criminal and civil penalties for accessing and obtaining or
altering stored communications without permission of the communica-
tions service provider or subscriber.  With a search warrant (for which the

requirements are much less stringent than for a Title III intercept order),25Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 28-29.26Dialed number recorders combine the functions of pen registers and trap-and-tracedevices.27In Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979), the Supreme Court ruled that a person plac-ing a call has no Òreasonable expectation of privacyÓ that the telephone company will not
reveal the fact of the call to third parties; therefore, no warrant was required.  See Fishman,

Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 28.28Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 28.2.29See Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 7.27, 7.39, and 7.46.  Definitions,
procedures, and penalties related to accessing stored oral, wire, and electronic communica-tions are given at 18 U.S.C. Sections 2701-2710.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE403law enforcement authorities may require a service provider to divulgestored communications without prior notice to the service subscriber or
customer.  The details of ECPA
Õs applicability to electronic mail and simi-lar communications are somewhat controversial and have yet to be tested
extensively in court.30  For example, ECPA may make it possible for
investigators to obtain, with a search warrant, electronic mail messages in
temporary storage at an on-line service that the customer has not yet
downloaded or deleted at the time of the investigation.  However, requir-

ing the service provider to copy and divulge all of the electronic mail
addressed to a subscriber over a period of time likely involves a Title III
intercept order.31Tables D.1 and D.2 provide quantitative data on the scope and scaleof electronic surveillance in the United States in recent years.D.1.3  The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
In the mid-1970s, Congress undertook several public investigationsof controversial domestic surveillance activities by U.S. intelligence agen-
cies, such as the Central Intelligence Agency.32  Title III explicitly recog-
nized presidential authority to take measures to protect national security,
and in a 1972 case, United States v. United States District Court (often called
the Keith case), the Supreme Court ruled that it is reasonable and neces-
sary in some circumstances to weigh Fourth Amendment rights against
the constitutional responsibility of the executive branch to maintain na-
tional security.33  In order to achieve a balance among these conflicting
demands, Congress passed the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of
1978 (FISA).  FISA concerns surveillance for gathering foreign intelligence
30The most significant court decision yet made on the subject, itself open to variousinterpretations, is Steve Jackson Games v. United States Secret Service (1993, W.D. Tex.), 816 F.
Supp. 432, 442.  On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit (36 F. 3d 457), examined
the question of whether Òseizure of a computer used to operate an electronic bulletin boardsystem, and containing private electronic mail which had been sent . . . but not read (re-trieved) by the intended recipients, constituted an unlawful intercept under [ECPA]Ó and
affirmed the lower courtÕs decision that it did not.31The Wall Street Journal reported that one of the first publicized instances of law enforce-
ment use of a Title III intercept order to monitor a suspectÕs electronic mail occurred inDecember 1995, when a CompuServe Information Services customer was the subject ofsurveillance during a criminal investigation.  See Wall Street Journal, January 2, 1996, p. B16.32For a brief history of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance ActÕs origins, see James E.Meason, ÒThe Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act: Time for Reappraisal,Ó InternationalLawyer, Volume 24(4), Winter 1990, pp. 1043-1058.
33407 U.S. 297 (1972).  See Allan N. Kornblum and Lubomyr M. Jachnycky, 
ÒAmericaÕsSecret Court: Listening in on Espionage and Terrorism,Ó The JudgeÕs Journal, Summer 1985,pp. 15-19.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.404APPENDIX DTABLE D.1  Court-ordered Electronic Surveillance Authorized Under
Title III, 1994TotalFederalStates
No. of orders authorizeda1,154554600
No. of orders denieda000No. of intercepts installedb1,100549551
No. of extensions authorizeda861458403
Average duration of orders (days)a   Original authorization2930na
c   Extensions2930na
cTotal days in operationb44,50025,14819,352
Main offense specified in ordera   Narcotics876435441
   Racketeering886820
   Gambling86878

   Homicide and assault19415
   Other853946
Type of interceptb   Telephone wiretap768397371
   Microphone eavesdrop524210
   Electronic20871137

   Combination723933
Average no., per installed order, intercepted:b   Persons8411256
   Conversations2,1392,2572,021
   Incriminating conversations373374372
Average cost per orderb$49,478$66,783$32,236
No. of arrestsb,d2,8521,6011,251
No. of convictionsb,d772325447
aAs reported by federal and state judges issuing surveillance orders.bAs reported by prosecuting officials for orders actually installed.cNot available.dAdditional arrests and convictions associated with surveillance authorized in 1994 canbe expected to occur in 1995 and later years.  For more complete arrest and conviction
results from past years, see Table D.3.SOURCE:Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, 
Wiretap Report for the Period January 1,1994 to December 31, 1994, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1995.information, as opposed to law enforcement.  Nevertheless, many of its
procedures parallel those of Title III, and evidence gathered properly
through FISA surveillance may, in some circumstances, be used in a trial.Like Title III, FISA provides statutory procedures for authorizing elec-tronic surveillance within the United States.  Executive Order 12333 spe-

cifically states that no foreign intelligence collection may be undertaken
for the purpose of acquiring information concerning the domestic activi-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE405ties of U.S. persons,34,35 and FISA surveillance may be performed only
against foreign powers or their agents.  FISA regulates signals intelligence

collection conducted in the United States and signals intelligence collec-
tion directed at a known U.S. person located in the United States; Execu-
tive Order 12333 regulates signals intelligence collection directed at a
known U.S. person located outside the United States.36  (See Table D.3 for
a description of what approvals are required for electronic surveillance of
communications in various circumstances.)  To conduct surveillance of a

U.S. person within the United States, the executive branch must demon-
strate to a special court, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (dis-
cussed below), probable cause to conclude that the U.S. person is an
Òagent of a foreign power.Ó  The phrase includes persons who engage in,or aid or abet individuals who engage in, espionage, terrorism, or sabo-
tage.37  Each FISA warrant application is signed, under oath, by the appli-
cant, certified by the Secretary of Defense or Deputy Secretary of Defense
that it is directed against a bona fide Òforeign powerÓ or 
Òagent of aforeign power,Ó reviewed by the Department of Justice and endorsed by
the Attorney General, and approved by a judge of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court.38  The warrant application must also identify the type
of foreign intelligence information sought; communication media, facili-
ties, and persons to be monitored; devices and procedures to be used,
including those for minimization; duration of the order, up to 90 days (or
1 year if the target is a foreign power); review of previous surveillance34Executive Order 12333, Section 2.3(b).35ÒU.S. personsÓ are defined by FISA and by Executive Order 12333 to include U.S.
citizens, permanent resident aliens, corporations incorporated in the United States, andunincorporated associations substantially composed of U.S. citizens or U.S. persons.  See 50

U.S.C. Section 1801(i) and E.O. 12333, Section 3.4(i).36Interception of communications taking place entirely outside the United States, whetheror not the participants include U.S. persons, is not governed by FISA, Title III, or any other
statute.  Executive Order 12333 requires that the Attorney General approve the use for
intelligence purposes, against a U.S. person located abroad, of any technique for which awarrant would be required if undertaken for law enforcement purposes.  In each case, the

Attorney General must find probable cause to conclude that the individual is an agent of aforeign power before collection may begin.3750 U.S.C. Section 1801(b).38Surveillance may take place without a court order for up to 1 year if the AttorneyGeneral certifies that there is very little likelihood of intercepting communications involv-ing U.S. persons and the effort will target facilities used exclusively by foreign powers.
Under limited circumstances, emergency surveillance may be performed before a warrantis obtained (Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 361, 366).For a discussion of FISAÕs applicability in various circumstances, see Fishman, Cumula-tive Supplement, 1994, sections 348-358.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.406APPENDIX DTABLE D.2  Court-ordered Electronic Surveillance, 1984 to 1994
19841985198619871988198919901991199219931994
No. of orders8027867566737407638728569199761,154
authorizedaFederal (%)3631333540413742374648
State (%)6469676560596358635452
No. of orders denieda12202000000
No. of intercepts7737226766346787208128028469381,100
  installed
bTotal days in20.922.120.819.826.427.828.830.032.439.844.5
  operation
b  (thousands)
Main offense (%)a   Narcotics6055465659626063697076
   Racketeering781391112101310108

   Gambling23262520171513117107
   Homicide and
43532322432
     assault

   Other68111211815111077
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE407Average no., perorder, intercepted:b   Persons10210511910412917813112111710084
   Conversations
1,2091,3201,3281,2991,2511,6561,4871,5841,8611,8012,139
   Incriminating298275253230316337321290347364373
   conversations
Average cost per45.036.535.636.949.353.145.145.046.557.349.5
orderb ($ thousands)
No. arrestsb,c3,7194,1783,8303,2443,8594,2223,2502,4593,6682,4282,428
No. convictionsb,c2,4292,6172,4491,9832,4692,3681,5802,5641,9521,325772
Conviction rate (%)6563646164564898493927
   aAs reported by federal and state judges issuing surveillance orders.   bAs reported by prosecuting officials for orders actually installed.   cEntry for each year shows arrests and convictions arising both during and after that year from surveillance authorized during that year.  The
large majority of arrests and convictions occur within 4 years of the surveillance.  Thus, the relatively low numbers in 1993-1
994 can be expected toincrease over time.SOURCE: Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, Wiretap Report for the Period January 1, 1993 to December 31, 1993, U.S. Government PrintingOffice, Washington, D.C., 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.408APPENDIX DTABLE D.3  Approval Requirements for Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance of Various Parties Variously Located (Under FISA in theUnited States and Executive Order 12333 Outside the United States)PartyIn the United StatesOutside the United States
Only if known to be anagent of a foreign
power and a FISAwarrant is approvedOnly if a FISA warrant isapprovedOnly with the approval ofthe Attorney GeneralWithout restrictionU.S. person may betargeted for wire
interceptsNon-U.S. person may betargeted for wireinterceptsrelated to the same target; and certification that the information cannot beobtained through normal investigative methods.39Electronic surveillance governed by FISA includes interception ofwire, radio, and other electronic communications.  Interception of these

communications is regulated only if they take place under conditions of a
reasonable expectation of privacy, in which a warrant would be required
for law enforcement surveillance.  It addresses only communications oc-

curring at least partly within the United States (wholly, in the case of
radio communications), although listening stations used by investigating
officers may be located elsewhere.  FISA also covers the use of pen regis-

ters and trap-and-trace devices.The purpose of FISA surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligenceinformation.  FISA defines this in terms of U.S. national security, includ-

ing defense against attack, sabotage, terrorism, and clandestine intelli-
gence activities, among others.  The targeted communications need not

relate to any crime, although surveillance for counterespionage and coun-
terterrorism purposes clearly has the potential to yield evidence for crimi-
nal prosecution.  FISA surveillance actions are implemented operation-

ally by the FBIÑsometimes on behalf of other intelligence agencies of theU.S. government.FISA established a special court with sole authority to review applica-tions and grant intercept orders.  The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance

Court (FISA court) consists of seven U.S. district court judges appointed
by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.  The FISA court meets in secret
3950 U.S.C. Section 1805.  See Delaney et al., 
ÒWiretap Laws and Procedures,Ó 1993,
section 3.1.  Some of this information may be omitted if the target is a foreign power.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE409twice yearly in Washington, D.C., although the court acts through a singlejudge who is always available.40  One of the seven judges has always been
a judge in the Washington, D.C., area to ensure local availability, and the
other six judges rotate through Washington, D.C.  FISA also provides for

an appeals court.  However, the FISA court has never denied a request for

an order, and the appeals court has never met.  One interpretation of this
history is that the FISA court is a rubber stamp for government requests
for foreign intelligence surveillance.  A second interpretation is that the

authorities who request such surveillance do so only when surveillance is
truly necessary and prepare their cases with such thoroughness that the
FISA court has never found sufficient fault with a request to deny it.
Without a detailed independent review of all requests (a task beyond the
scope of the committee), it is impossible to choose definitively between
these two interpretations.  Members of the committee having personal

experience with the FISA process prefer the second interpretation.  Since

1979, there has been an average of more than 500 FISA orders per year.  In

1994, 576 were issued.  Other information about FISA intercepts is classi-

fied.41Unlike Title III, FISA does not require that the target of surveillanceever be notified that communications have been intercepted.  Evidence

gathered under a FISA order may be used in a trial, with the approval of
the Attorney General.  A defendant whose communications were inter-

cepted then receives a transcript and may move to suppress such evi-
dence if it was gathered unlawfully.  However, the defendant is denied

access to the application and FISA court order if the Attorney General
certifies that national security would be harmed by release of these docu-
ments.  In this case, the appropriate federal district court reviews and

rules on the legality of the warrant ex parte, in camera (without
adversarial representation, in secret).  This may severely restrict the

defendantÕs ability to obtain suppression.42Finally, signals intelligence activities may incidentally generate infor-mation to, from, or about U.S. persons even when they are directed at
foreign individuals.  Information so derived is regulated by one of two

sets of minimization procedures.  One set is statutorily mandated by FISA.
40See Kornblum and Jachnycky, ÒAmericaÕs Secret Court,Ó 1985, for a description of the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, a list of its members, and a review of the judicialrecord on the constitutionality of the court and its procedures.41Benjamin Wittes, ÒInside AmericaÕs Most Secretive Court,Ó Legal Times, February 19,1996, p. 1.42LaFave and Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, pp. 260-261.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.410APPENDIX DEvery FISA surveillance approval is subject to those minimization proce-dures.  The procedures prescribe how information about U.S. persons

acquired during the course of a FISA surveillance may be processed,

retained, and disseminated.43  The other set is mandated by Executive
Order 12333 and regulates all other signals intelligence collection, pro-
cessing, retention, and dissemination involving information on U.S. per-
sons.  This set is approved by the Secretary of Defense and the Attorney

General.  Copies are provided to the Senate and House Intelligence com-

mittees prior to implementation.D.2  HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCEThe right to privacy of communications from electronic surveillance(such as bugging and wiretapping) is protected by several federal and
state statutes and by the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution.  This

was not always the case.  Electronic surveillance of communications first

came before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1927.  In 
Olmstead v. United States,44the Court ruled by a 5-4 vote that interception of telephone conversationsby federal law enforcement officials using a wiretap did not constitute a
search or seizure, because nothing tangible was seized and no premises
were entered and searched.  The Court concluded that wiretapping was

not subject to Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable search
and seizure.New legislation, however, soon removed the wiretap from the reper-toire of evidence-gathering tools.  The Communications Act of 1934 made

it a crime for anyone, including law enforcement officials, to intercept and
subsequently divulge telephone, telegraph, or radio communications
without the consent of the sender.  The statute did not state specifically

that evidence obtained through wiretaps was inadmissible in a trial.  Sub-

sequent court rulings held, however, that wiretap evidence gained with-
out consent could not be used because to divulge it in court would be
against the law.45  Federal officials continued to conduct warrantless wire-
taps, mainly against suspected foreign agents under the PresidentÕs con-stitutional authority to protect national security.46  (These activities were
4350 U.S.C. Section 1801(h).44277 U.S. 438 (1928).  Much of the following discussion of the evolution of electronic
surveillance law is based on the work of LaFave and Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, pp.246-256.45For example, Nardone v. United States, 308 U.S. 338 (1939).  The court also excluded
evidence obtained as a result of information gained in a wiretap.  See LaFave and Israel,
Criminal Procedure, 1992, p. 246.46See LaFave and Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, pp. 259-260.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE411later regulated with the passage of FISA in 1978.)  State law enforcement
agencies also continued to wiretap, where permitted by state laws and
not associated with federally regulated interstate commerce.Technological advances led to the development of other means ofelectronic surveillance that continued, for a time, to be accepted by the
courts.  In particular, electronic bugs were not restricted by the Fourth

Amendment, by the same principle that applied in OlmsteadÑthey seizednothing tangible.  Nor were they subject to the Communications Act pro-

hibition on divulgence of intercepted communications because they inter-
cepted only sound waves, not wire or radio signals.  In Goldman v. UnitedStates,47 the Supreme Court found that federal officers could legally use a
listening device placed against the wall of a room adjoining the one occu-
pied by the target of an investigation.  As long as no physical trespass

took place, the Fourth Amendment did not apply and no search warrant
was needed.  In other cases, the Court also supported the practice of

ÒwiringÓ a consenting party to the communication
Ñsuch as an under-cover agent or informantÑwith a device to record or transmit conversa-tions in the hearing of the person wearing the wire.48Over time, however, a series of decisions eroded the legal frameworkfor bugging.  In 
Silverman v. United States,49 for example, the Court re-
jected agentsÕ use of a 
Òspike mikeÓ driven through an adjacent wall into
the heating ducts of a targetÕs house as a Fourth Amendment violation,even though agents did not physically enter the premises.  Finally, in the

1967 case of Katz v. United States,50 the Court found that federal agents
Õbugging of a public telephone booth known to be used regularly by a
particular suspect was a search and seizure protected by the Fourth
Amendment.  A person using a phone booth was found to have a reason-

able expectation of privacy, which may not be infringed without a valid
warrant based on probable cause to believe that a crime has been or will
be committed.  In this ruling, the Court explicitly overturned 
Olmsteadand Goldman and determined that Fourth Amendment protection applies
to persons, not merely to places that can be entered and searched.With the Katz decision, law enforcement officials were left with nei-
ther bugs nor wiretaps as viable tools for gathering evidence.  Their ab-

sence was significant, particularly since these tools were thought to have
great potential usefulness for investigating and prosecuting conspirato-47316 U.S. 129 (1942).  See discussion in LaFave and Israel, 
Criminal Procedure, 1992, p.248.48On Lee v. United States, 343 U.S. 747 (1952).  See LaFave and Israel, 
Criminal Procedure,1992, pp. 248, 258-259.49365 U.S. 505 (1961).  See LaFave and Israel, 
Criminal Procedure, 1992, p. 248.50389 U.S. 347 (1967).  See LaFave and Israel, 
Criminal Procedure, 1992, p. 248.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.412APPENDIX Drial activities such as organized crime, a high-profile social and politicalissue in the late 1960s.  The judicial record made it clear that electronic

surveillance with a court order would not be prohibited by the Constitu-
tion, but new legislation was needed to define and regulate court-ordered
surveillance.51  At the same time, existing statutes such as the Communi-cations Act inadequately protected communications from malicious inter-
ception and use by private citizens acting outside a law enforcement ca-
pacity.52Congress took action in 1968 to give law enforcement the tools ofelectronic surveillance, subject to constitutional and statutory controls,
and to outlaw electronic interception of communications in most other
circumstances.  Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets

Act of 1968 created the first specific legal framework for electronic sur-
veillance of oral and wire (telephone) communications.  It made an excep-

tion to the Communications ActÕs divulgence prohibition for law enforce-ment officers with a court-issued warrant, thus bringing wiretapping back
into legal use.  To guard against abuse of these politically charged, highly

intrusive techniques, Congress imposed special procedures for obtaining
a warrant and other restrictions beyond those required under the Fourth
Amendment.  These are discussed in detail in Section D.1.2.  Title III also

specified civil and criminal penalties for anyone intercepting private com-
munications outside these approved circumstances.  In addition, it re-

quired state statutes to be at least as restrictive as Title III.53  Currently, 37
states and the District of Columbia have electronic surveillance statutes.54At the time the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act waspassed in 1968, President Johnson strongly objected to Title III, warning
that it could lead to governmental abuses of civil liberties.55  However,
after an initial flurry of court challenges, a rough consensus has emerged
in the nation that wiretapping under the jurisdiction of Title III represents
a reasonable compromise between the rights of individuals and the law
enforcement needs of the state.In 1986, Congress passed the Electronic Communications Privacy Act.One of the actÕs main purposes was to update Title III.  The advance of
51See Carr, The Law of Electronic Surveillance, 1994, section 2.3(d).52LaFave and Israel, Criminal Procedure, 1992, p. 248.53Fishman, Wiretapping and Eavesdropping, 1978, section 5; and Fishman, Wiretapping andEavesdropping: Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 5.54Administrative Office of the United States Courts, Wiretap Report for the PeriodJanuary 1, 1994 to December 31, 1994, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.,1995, p. 3.55Congressional Quarterly Almanac, Congressional Quarterly Inc., Washington, D.C., 1968,p. 225.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE41356For a detailed analysis of ECPAÕs additions to electronic surveillance law, see Fishman,Cumulative Supplement, 1994, sections 7.21-7.28, 7.32.57Fishman, Cumulative Supplement, 1994, section 5.1; and Computer Science and Telecom-munications Board staff communication with Clifford Fishman, January 23, 1995.technology after 1968 brought new forms of communication into commonuse.  Many of these stretched the framework of Title III.  Electronic mail,

data interchange, medical records, and fund transfers are examples of
potentially confidential communications that did not fit within the origi-
nal Title III definitions of oral and wire communications.  With respect to
personal (as opposed to broadcast) radio communications, which grew
rapidly with the advent of cellular and other mobile telephone services,
neither Title III nor the Communications Act provided guidance for law
enforcement surveillance.  Treatment of video images associated with

teleconferencing was also unclear.56ECPA added a new category, electronic communications, to Title IIIÕsprotection of oral and wire communications.  In general, electronic com-

munications are communications carried by wire (including optical fiber)
or radio that do not involve the human voice; rather, they convey infor-
mation such as text, images, and numerical data.  Many of these commu-
nications were protected by ECPA for the first time, with both criminal
and civil penalties defined for infringing on their privacy.  As discussed

in Section D.1.2, however, the privacy of electronic communications with
respect to law enforcement was set at the Fourth Amendment standard of
protection, rather than the additional level of protection given by Title III
to oral and wire communications.  This reflected a political compromise

among several factors, including the interests of law enforcement, the
telecommunications industry, and civil liberties; judicial precedent; and
the judgment of Congress that bugging and telephone wiretapping are
inherently more sensitive than interception of electronic communica-
tions.57  As discussed in Section D.1.2, ECPA also created new regulations
for traffic analysis and for retrieval of stored communications.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.414APPENDIX E414EA Brief History ofCryptography PolicyIn the United States cryptography policy and information about cryp-tography were largely the province of the National Security Agency (NSA)
until the 1970s.  Although a small market existed for unclassified com-

mercial cryptography, the most advanced cryptographic techniques were
classified and were limited largely to military, diplomatic, and intelli-
gence use.1E.1  EXPORT CONTROLS
One policy mechanism for controlling the diffusion of cryptographyis control of exports.  The earliest U.S. use of export controls was in the

Trading with the Enemy Act, passed in 1917 during World War I, which
empowered the President to restrict economic activities with enemy coun-

tries.2  U.S. peacetime export control activities grew to a significant degree
following World War II.  The Export Control Act of 1949 gave the execu-

tive branch broad authority to determine what products or technical data
are subject to export licensing, to run the licensing system, and to penalize
violations.  It also largely exempted the rule-making process, including
1Office of Technology Assessment, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environ-ments, OTA-TCT-606, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1994, p. 115.2Mitchell B. Wallerstein and William B. Snyder, Jr., ÒThe Evolution of U.S. Export ControlPolicy: 1949-1989,Ó in National Research Council, Finding Common Ground, National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991, p. 308.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF HISTORY OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY415determination of what items should appear on the controlled list, frompublic comment and judicial review.3The Export Administration Act of 1969 changed the name of the leg-islation and introduced the first attempt by Congress to balance control of
technology for national security reasons with the goal of expanding U.S.
exports.  For example, Congress recommended for the first time that for-

eign availability of controlled items be taken into account in the licensing
process.  Under the Export Administration Act, the Department of Com-

merce is responsible for administering the Export Administration Regula-
tions (EAR), including maintaining the Commerce Control List.Cryptography is covered on this list.  However, cryptographic prod-
ucts and data are also subject to licensing on the U.S. Munitions List,
along with other items that are Òinherently military in character.Ó  The
U.S. Munitions List is administered by the Department of State under the
Arms Export Controls Act, which provides the basis for the International
Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR).  There is significant overlap between

the ITAR and EAR with respect to cryptography.  At present, however,

most software and hardware for cryptographic systems (such as those
with key lengths of more than 40 bits) remain on the Munitions List
unless the State Department grants jurisdiction to the Commerce Depart-
ment.  As discussed in Chapter 4, the National Security Agency plays a

strong advisory role to the Departments of State and Commerce in decid-
ing issues of licensing cryptographic products for export.E.2  ACADEMIC RESEARCH AND THE CONTROL OF
INFORMATION ABOUT CRYPTOGRAPHYBy the 1970s, interest in cryptography was growing not only in com-mercial but also in academic circles.  This created conflicts due to govern-

ment controls on the dissemination of information about cryptography,
including at open scientific meetings.  Legal basis for government control

of scientific information exists in several sources.  One of the first pieces of

legislation addressing cryptography was a law, passed in the 1920s and
still in effect, that prohibits publication of information about diplomatic
codes and ciphers.  This was a prior restraint on free speech that was

considered justified on national security grounds.4The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 created a category of informationknown as Restricted Data, which encompassed data on the manufacture3Wallerstein and Snyder, ÒThe Evolution of U.S. Export Control Policy,Ó 1991, p. 310.
4James Bamford, The Puzzle Palace: A Report on AmericaÕs Most Secret Agency, HoughtonMifflin, Boston, 1982.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.416APPENDIX Eor use of atomic weapons or special nuclear material.  Restricted Data is
essentially Òborn classified,Ó subject to secrecy from its creation even if
created by a private person such as an academic scientist not involved in
any federal research program.  Applying these rules, a court issued a

preliminary injunction against The ProgressiveÕs publishing an article onthe working of hydrogen bombs, even though it was based on informa-
tion from publicly available sources.5  (The injunction was later lifted
when a newspaper published similar information.)The EAR and ITAR prohibit not only the export of listed items with-out a license, but also the distribution of technical data about items that
are subject to export controls. The restriction on technical data has been
applied to restrict dissemination of academic research, for example, at
open scientific meetings within the United States, because the accessibil-
ity of such data to foreign persons implies the possibility of ÒexportÓ of
the data.6Prepublication review clauses in contracts and grants for governmentsponsored university research, the restricted contact between cryptogra-
phers and foreign visitors, and NSA review of material to be presented at
open meetings have all provoked conflict between the academic and gov-
ernment cryptography communities.  One result of such conflicts (not only

in the area of cryptography) was a National Academy of Sciences review of
scientific communication and national security, which concluded that poli-
cies of Òsecurity through secrecyÓ would chill scientific activity and ulti-
mately weaken U.S. technological capabilities to the point of adversely
affecting U.S. security.7  (The report, published in 1982, recommended lim-its on the use of contract clauses to control scientific information.)In the late 1970s, academic research in cryptography achieved severalmajor advances, prompting responses from NSA.  For example, an NSA

employee unofficially informed the Institute for Electrical and Electronics
Engineers that a conference presentation by Stanford University research-
ers (including Martin Hellman) of work related to public-key cryptogra-
phy could violate export control laws.  After consultation with university

counsel, the presentation went forward.8  NSA also imposed a secrecy
order on a patent application filed by University of Wisconsin professor5Office of Technology Assessment (OTA), Defending Secrets, Sharing Data, U.S. Govern-ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1987, pp. 141-142.6OTA, Defending Secrets, 1987, p. 142.7National Academy of Sciences, Scientific Communication and National Security: A Report,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1982.8Susan Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts: Issues in U.S. Crypto Policy, Association forComputing Machinery Inc., New York, June 1994, pp. 37-38; and Martin Hellman, commu-nication with Computer Science and Telecommunications Board staff, December 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF HISTORY OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY417George Davida; the order was later lifted.  However, at NSA
Õs request, theAmerican Council on Education formed a study group that recommended

a 2-year experiment in which cryptography research would be submitted
to NSA for review, on a voluntary basis, before publication.  This proce-

dure began in 1980 and remains in effect.  Over this time, NSA has made

only a few requests for changes, and there appear to have been no long-
term chilling effects on academic research.9Funding of academic cryptography has also been influenced by se-crecy concerns.  In 1980, Leonard Adleman (another of the RSA

algorithmÕs authors) submitted a grant proposal for research, includingwork on cryptography, to the National Science Foundation (NSF).  NSA

offered to assume all responsibility for funding unclassified cryptographic
research, in place of NSF; this would give NSA the opportunity to subject
all research proposals to secrecy review.  Interpretations vary about the

extent to which this proposal reflected a power struggle between NSA
and NSF; ultimately, a decision at the White House level determined that
both agencies would continue to fund cryptographic research.10E.3  COMMERCIAL CRYPTOGRAPHY
Growing interest and technical capabilities in cryptography withincommercial communities brought cryptography policy into public debate
in the 1970s.11  The spark that began much of this debate was the National
Bureau of Standards (NBS) 1975 proposal for a new cryptographic tech-
nology standard required for government useÑand recommended forcommercial useÑoutside classified (military and intelligence) applica-tions.  This was the Data Encryption Standard (DES).
NBS proposed the DES under its authority, in the Brooks Act of 1965,to recommend uniform data processing standards for federal government
purchasing.12  The proposed DES was based on an IBM-developed tech-
nology.  NSA
Õs role in recommending changes to IBMÕs original algo-rithm raised questions of whether the agency had weakened the stan-
dard.  The reduction in key length from 128 bits in IBM
Õs original versionto 56 bits clearly weakened the algorithm considerably, all else being
equal.13  Public debate also addressed whether the revised algorithm con-
9Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, p. 38.10Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, p. 38; and OTA, Defending Secrets, 1987,pp. 144-145.11Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, pp. 37-38.12OTA, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, 1994, pp. 134-136.13Horst Feistel, ÒCryptography and Computer Privacy,Ó Scientific American, Volume228(5), May 1973, pp. 15-23.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.418APPENDIX Etained a trapdoor or other vulnerabilities.  A review led by Representative
Jack Brooks, however, concluded that changes had been made freely by
IBM.  Apart from the key length reduction, some changes that NSA sug-

gested appear to have strengthened the algorithm against a form of at-
tack, differential cryptanalysis, that was not widely known at the time.14In 1977, the DES was issued as a Federal Information Processing Stan-dard (FIPS).  Its promulgation as a stable, certified technology stimulated

its widespread use in commercial applications.  It has been reviewed

every 5 years for continued suitability in the face of advances in comput-
ing power and techniques available to attackers.  NSA subsequently has

played an important role in testing and certifying products for conformity
to the DES.  By 1986, NSA had certified more than 400 voice, data, and file

encryption products using the DES.In the mid-1980s, however, NSA announced it would stop endorsingDES products after 1988, instead focusing on a set of classified, hardware-
based standards for modular products that were incompatible with the
DES.  (This approach is reflected, for example, in the Fortezza card-based

systems that NSA is now promoting.)  These plans raised immediate

concern about the cost of switching over to new equipment in industries
such as banking that relied heavily on products incorporating the DES.This controversy was one factor that motivated passage of the 1987Computer Security Act, which placed responsibility for standards devel-
opment and product evaluation for nonclassified applications in the Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the renamed NBS.
As an agency of the Department of Commerce, NIST has a mandate to
support U.S. commercial interests.  In cryptography policy making, there-

fore, NIST could be expected to take commercial factors into account
more wholeheartedly than NSA.  NIST recertified the DES in 1988, and

NIST became responsible for assessing product conformity to the stan-
dard.  (The DES was most recently recertified in 1993 and, according to

NIST, may or may not be recertified in 1998.15)  NIST also developed other
cryptographic FIPSs, including standards for algorithms (such as the Digi-
tal Signature Standard) and for implementation of cryptographic systems.Another factor leading to the Computer Security Act was the need toresolve conflicts in agency responsibilities among the Brooks Act, various14OTA, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, 1994, p. 123.15The announcement of the most recent recertification of the DES states, ÒAt the nextreview (1998), the algorithm specified in this standard will be over twenty years old.  NIST

will consider alternatives which offer a higher level of security.  One of these alternatives
may be proposed as a replacement standard at the 1998 review.Ó  See NIST, 
Announcing theData Encryption Standard, FIPS Publication 46-2, December 30, 1993; available on-line athttp://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/fips.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF HISTORY OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY419Office of Management and Budget directives, and the 1984 National Secu-rity Decision Directive 145 (NSDD-145), which created a new process for
setting standards for federal systems to protect Òsensitive but not classi-fiedÓ national security information.  NSDD-145 also made the director of
NSA responsible for evaluating vulnerabilities and reviewing and ap-
proving security standards and systems for government information and
telecommunication systems.16NIST and NSA signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) in1989 delineating the agenciesÕ roles under the Computer Security Act
with respect to cryptography and other issues.  Under the MOU, NIST is

responsible for, among other activities, developing standards and proce-
dures for the protection of sensitive (but not classified) information in
federal computer systems, drawing on computer security guidelines of
NSA where appropriate, and for coordinating with NSA and other agen-
cies to ensure that these standards are consistent with those for protection
of classified information.  NSA provides NIST and other agencies with

technical assistance related to cryptographic algorithms and techniques
and to endorse products for application to secure systems.  The two agen-

cies also agreed to establish a technical working group to review issues of
mutual interest related to protecting unclassified information.17E.4  RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
NSA played a strong role in the development of the Escrowed En-cryption Standard (EES), through the process outlined in the MOU.18  The
standard was in part an effort to forestall a mass market for telephone
encryption devices that would obstruct authorized wiretaps.  In 1992,

AT&T announced plans to produce the first encrypted telephone backed
by the marketing strength of a major corporation, the Model 3600 Tele-
phone Security Device, which used the DES for encryption.19  On April
16OTA, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, 1994, p. 143.17Memorandum of Understanding Between the Director of the National Institute of Standardsand Technology and the Director of the National Security Agency Concerning the Implementation ofPublic Law 100-235; reprinted in OTA, Information Security and Privacy in Network Environ-ments, 1994, p. 197; reprinted also in Appendix N.18It has been a matter of debate whether NSAÕs influence over NIST in the developmentof the EES was so great as to exceed NSAÕs advisory role authorized in the ComputerSecurity Act.  OTA concluded that 
Òinteragency discussions and negotiations by agencystaffs under the MOU can result in delay, modification, or abandonment of proposed NISTstandards activities, without notice or the benefit of oversight that is required by law.ÓOTA also noted that NIST and NSA officials disagreed with this conclusion.  See OTA,

Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, 1994, p. 168.19Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, p. 45.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.420APPENDIX E16, 1993, the White House announced an effort to develop a new standardfor encryption of digitized voice communications that would allow law
enforcement access by recovering an ÒescrowedÓ decryption key.  The
standard would be based on a classified algorithm made available by
NSAÑSkipjackÑimplemented in a hardware device, the Clipper chip.(See Chapter 5 for technical details of Clipper, the Skipjack algorithm, and
key escrow.)In February 1994, following a formal comment period in which virtu-ally all written comments received by NIST were opposed to the pro-
posed standard, NIST announced the adoption of FIPS 185, the EES.20  As
a voluntary standard, EES is available for federal agencies (and private
firms that so desire) to cite in procurement specifications for encrypted
voice products, in lieu of the DES.  AT&T incorporated Clipper into its

encrypted voice product, now called the Surity Telephone Device 3600.  A

second initiative led to standards for data encryption devices using a
smart-card design called Fortezza.  The Fortezza card includes a Capstone

chip, which uses Skipjack for confidentiality and several other algorithms
for integrity and key exchange.  In 1995, Fortezza was specified in a large
procurement (750,000 units) of data encryption products for the Defense
Messaging System.21Recent federal initiatives have sought to promote broader use of es-crowed encryption technologies.  On September 6-7, 1995, NIST spon-

sored a workshop to discuss draft criteria under which software products
with escrow features for authorized third-party access to keys could re-
ceive expedited export licensing review on the Commerce Control List, as
opposed to the U.S. Munitions List.  One criterion allows export of es-

crowed key systems with key lengths up to 64 bits.  On September 15,

1995, another NIST workshop sought comments from private industry on
the development of a new FIPS that would allow for both hardware and
software implementations of escrowed key cryptosystems.  In both of

these areas, additional workshops and discussions are expected to con-
tinue.2220Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, p. 48; NIST, Escrowed Encryption Standard,FIPS Publication 185, February 9, 1994, available from NIST via the Internet at http://
csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/fips.21Kevin Power, Government Computer News, July 31, 1995, p. 1.22NIST, ÒMedia Advisory: U.S. Government Seeks Public Comment on Draft Export Cri-teria for Key Escrow Encryption,Ó November 6, 1995, available on-line at http://
csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow; and committee and staff attendance at workshops.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.421FA Brief Primer on Intelligence NOTE:   Some material in this appendix, including the organizational makeup of the
intelligence community and the stages of the intelligence cycle, is adapted from the CentralIntelligence Agency, ÒFactbook on Intelligence,Ó September 1995, available on-line at http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications. 1As a result of operational successes in the Persian Gulf War, however, increased de-mand by field commanders for real-time access to national intelligence resources, such assatellite reconnaissance, is blurring the boundary between these areas.   See, for example,

Desmond Ball, Signals Intelligence in the Post-Cold War Era: Developments in the Asia-PacificRegion, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore, 1993.Intelligence gathering takes place for both tactical and strategic pur-poses.  Tactical intelligence is primarily the domain of agencies within the

military services.  Tactical intelligence provides advantages on the battle-

field against hostile military forces (or in support of counterterrorist op-
erations) through direct support to operational commanders in areas such
as reconnaissance, mapping, and early warning of enemy force move-
ments.  Intelligence for strategic purposes (national intelligence) serves

foreign policy, national security, and national economic objectives.  Na-

tional intelligence focuses on foreign political and economic events and
trends; strategic military concerns such as plans, doctrine, scientific and
technical resources; weapons system capabilities; and nuclear program
development.1Signals intelligence (SIGINT) is one key source of intelligence, impor-tant to both tactical and national intelligence.  Strictly speaking, SIGINT

encompasses two different forms of intelligenceÑcommunications intel-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.422APPENDIX Fligence (COMINT) and electronic intelligence (ELINT).  ELINT refers to
the capture and analysis of electromagnetic signals from emitters such as
radars; in general, these signals do not carry information in the communi-
cations sense of the term.  In this report, and because it conforms to

conventions that have been established by the public debate to date,
SIGINT is used to refer to communications intelligenceÑthe capture andanalysis of signals (from whatever source) that carry communications
information.It is difficult or impossible to identify a single source that is morecritical or important than all others because the essence of intelligence is the
synthesis of information from all available sources (Òall-sourceÓ synthesis).
No single source is necessarily critical, although any one might be in any
given instance, and it is a matter of judgment as to whether a certain source
should be accorded a higher priority than another.  Many important sources

are open and public, but others are secret or clandestine.  Clandestine infor-

mation gathering, directed toward foreign and domestic military, political,
economic, criminal, and other sources to which open, public access is de-
nied, is a core element of national intelligence activities.The community responsible for all-source synthesis is the intelligencecommunity, which consists of a number of civilian and military agencies.
The Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) is both the coordinator of this
community and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
Under the National Security Act of 1947, the CIA is the coordinating
agency for foreign intelligence analysis and dissemination.  The CIA pro-
duces finished (refined) intelligence for the President and the National
Security Council, and it is engaged in many aspects of information collec-
tion.  The Defense Intelligence Agency and the Bureau of Intelligence and

Research of the Department of State also analyze and produce finished
intelligence, primarily for the Secretaries of Defense and State, respec-
tively.  The National Security Agency (NSA) is responsible for collecting

signals intelligenceÑmonitoring, decrypting, and translating foreign com-
municationsÑand for developing cryptographic and other techniques toprotect U.S. communications and computer security.  Other parts of the

community include intelligence agencies of each of the military services;
the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), through which the Air Force
and CIA jointly manage space-based (satellite) data collection; the Central
Imagery Office, for processing photographic intelligence; and elements of
the Departments of Treasury and Energy, among others.Intelligence (and counterintelligence2) have foreign and domestic com-2Protecting secrets from disclosure to others is the focus of counterintelligence, a closelyrelated activity involving many of the same processes as intelligence.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON INTELLIGENCE423ponents, including infiltration of human agents into organizations operat-ing abroad and in the United States and electronic and photographic sur-
veillance.  The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is responsible for con-

ducting these activities in the United States.  By law, foreign intelligence

agencies such as the CIA and NSA are barred from domestic surveillance.
Transgressions in this area have occurred, however, providing part of the
rationale for creation in the 1970s of the Senate and House Select Commit-
tees on Intelligence.  These committees provide legislative oversight as

well as budget authorization.Finally, it is important to note that intelligence is pursued largely on alevel-of-effort basis, rather than in response to some set of specific needs
that must be met at all costs.  Thus, its importance is more a judgment

question than one based on any analytical argument.  This means, for

example, that it is very hard to exclude or include missions or capabilities
on the basis of a Òmust-haveÓ list.
F.1  THE INTELLIGENCE MISSION
The mission of national intelligence is defined by the National Secu-rity Act and by relevant presidential directives, of which the most recent
is Executive Order 12333, signed by President Reagan on December 4,
1981.  Executive Order 12333 authorizes the DCI to develop and imple-

ment a National Foreign Intelligence Program to provide Ò[t]imely andaccurate information about the activities, capabilities, plans, and inten-
tions of foreign powers, organizations, and persons and their agents.Ó3  Its
primary purpose is to provide the President and designated officials, such
as the National Security Council, with decision supportÑinformation onwhich to base decisions on foreign, defense, and economic policy and the
protection of U.S. national security interests.In the post-Cold War environment, the definition of national securityinterests goes far beyond a focus on a single rival such as the Soviet
Union, and the United States is now concerned with threats throughout
the world.4  Many of these threats are lower in intensity, but in some ways
more complex and difficult to address, than those of the former Soviet
Union.  They include not only conventional military threats, but also

issues such as the proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weap-
ons of mass destruction; terrorism; and political and economic instability,3Ronald Reagan, United States Intelligence Activities, Executive Order 12333, The WhiteHouse, Washington, D.C., December 4, 1981; reprinted in Appendix N.4S. Turner, ÒIntelligence for a New World Order,Ó Foreign Affairs, Volume 70(4), 1991, pp.150-166.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.424APPENDIX Fwhich often leads to demands for U.S. or United Nations military orhumanitarian intervention.Counterterrorism efforts are on the rise.  For example, public reports
indicate that SIGINT was responsible for determining Libyan involvement
in the terrorist bombing of Pan Am flight 103 in 1988.5  During the Persian
Gulf War, intercepted communications enabled identification and forestall-
ment of Iraqi terrorist teams.6  Evidence from wiretaps formed an impor-
tant part of the case against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman in the case of an
alleged conspiracy by Islamic fundamentalists to blow up the United Na-
tions, the Hudson River tunnels, and the federal building in Manhattan.7National security is also increasingly recognized as including broader,nonmilitary areas.  Monitoring and countering the international drug

trade is a relatively new priority for the U.S. intelligence community.
Economic strength, industrial technology development, and environmen-
tal protection contribute to national security, creating demand among
policy makers for collection and analysis of information in areas tradi-
tionally unfamiliar to the intelligence community.The net result is that the number and range of tasks being assigned tothe intelligence community are growing rapidly.  Intelligence efforts have

expanded to include the support of activities in the following areas:¥  Counterproliferation.  The United States has a policy to discourage
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical, bio-
logical) and the capabilities of other countries to acquire such weapons.
(Ballistic missiles are also subject to significant counter-proliferation ef-
forts.)  Since the United States is not the only possible supplier of compo-
nents for these weapons, it must rely on the cooperation of other possible
supplier nations to discourage proliferation.  Thus, intelligence efforts are

directed toward identifying potential suppliers and purchasers, and the
information derived from these efforts is passed to policy makers who
can undertake appropriate actions in response.¥  Sanctions enforcement.  The United States is a supporter of many
sanctions around the world.  For example, the United Nations may decide

to imposeÑand the United States decide to supportÑeconomic sanctionson a nation such that only humanitarian supplies may enter it.  Intelli-

gence efforts are needed to identify potential sources of leakages (e.g.,
sanctioned shipments masquerading as humanitarian supplies).5ÒThere Are Some Secrets the NSA DoesnÕt Want Kept,Ó Newsday, August 21, 1989, p. 54.
6Ball, Signals Intelligence in the Post-Cold War Era, 1993.
7See Joseph P. Fried, ÒSheikÕs Tapped Calls Entered in Terrorism Trial,Ó New York Times,April 23, 1995, p. 45.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON INTELLIGENCE425¥  Economic and trade relations.  U.S. trade relations with the rest of the
world are increasingly important in a globally interdependent economy.
Two key dimensions of such relations are the following:ÑTrade treaties.  U.S. negotiators meet with their foreign counterparts
to secure treaty arrangements that are fair, are equitable, and advance U.S.
interests.  Public sources assert that intelligence efforts sometimes support

the positions of U.S. negotiators.8ÑTrade practices.  U.S. companies often compete against foreign
companies for international contracts.  Although the U.S. intelligence com-
munity does not provide support to individual U.S. companies, it does play
a role in identifying unfair trade practices (e.g., illegal activities undertaken
by foreign governments on behalf of their constituents) and providing in-
formation to U.S. policy makers who might be responsible for remedial
actions.One result of the expanding plate of activities is that the parts of thenational intelligence community that traditionally focus on strategic is-
sues are spending a larger percentage of their time on activities that pro-
vide real-time operational support.  Whereas in the past the intelligence

community concentrated primarily on strategic intelligence (large-scale
trends and the like) that was actionable by policy makers on a scale of
years, the community today must also provide products that are action-
able in the time scale of hours, days, or weeks.  Such time pressures

obviously place greater demands on the intelligence cycle, and in such an
environment real-time information is at a premium.F.2  THE INTELLIGENCE CYCLE
Historically, the process of intelligence production has been cyclical.Planning, which entails the prioritization of information demands and
the allocation of resources, represents both the first and the last stage.
Information is collected from a variety of sources, processed into useful
form, analyzed, by drawing upon all available sources to generate balanced
conclusions, and disseminated to the consumers of intelligenceÑthe Presi-dent, national security officials, and others in the executive and legislative
branches of government with a need for information to support national8For example, public sources reported that the U.S. intelligence community was active insupporting U.S. negotiators on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.  See Craig

Whitney, ÒFrance Accuses 5 Americans of Spying; Asks They Leave,Ó New York Times,February 23, 1995, p. A1; Tim Weiner, ÒC.I.A. Faces Issue of Economic Spying,Ó New YorkTimes, February 23, 1995, p. A1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.426APPENDIX Fsecurity decisions.  Dissemination of finished intelligence products may
stimulate demand for new requests for intelligence information.F.2.1  Planning
National intelligence planning, management, prioritization, and re-source allocation are overseen by the DCI, as well as the Deputy Director
of Central Intelligence.  The DCI chairs the National Foreign Intelligence

Board, which includes officials of the Department of Defense, NSA, FBI,
and other agencies and advises DCI on both analytical and administrative
issues.  The National Intelligence Council, comprised of senior intelli-

gence experts inside and outside the government, produces National In-
telligence Estimates, assesses the quality of analyses, and identifies criti-
cal gaps requiring new collection priorities.  Among others with senior

planning roles are the Executive Director for Intelligence Community
Affairs; the Executive Director and Deputy Director of the CIA and deputy
directors of its Intelligence, Operations, Administration, and Science and
Technology branches; and officials of other intelligence agencies.In the context of the intelligence cycle, planning entails the identifica-tion of collection priorities in response to requests from intelligence con-
sumers.  An example of the planning stage is the determination of how

many surveillance satellites the United States needs, the corresponding
allocation of financial resources made available by Congress, and the
continual process of selecting targets at which the satellitesÕ cameras and
antennas should be aimed.Planning of collection efforts is an essential element of the intelligencecycle because the United States does not have unlimited intelligence col-
lection assets.  A central authority is needed to weigh competing de-

mands for collection and decide which collection assets should be as-
signed to which tasks.  Far more requests for collection are submitted by

various users than are actually approved.F.2.2  Collection
Collection of foreign intelligence relies heavily on technical means.The bulk of the intelligence budget is for acquisition and operation of
technical systems, most of which are related to collection.9  Technical
collection assets include various satellites; ground-based monitoring sta-
tions; and airborne, ocean surface, and underwater platforms.9H. Nelson, ÒThe U.S. Intelligence Budget in the 1990s,Ó International Journal of Intelligenceand Counterintelligence, Volume 6(1), 1993, pp. 195-203.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON INTELLIGENCE427Technical collection methods are categorized broadly as image intelli-gence (IMINT; e.g., overhead photographs) and SIGINT.  IMINT is col-

lected from aircraft, such as the U-2 and the SR-71 Blackbird, and satellites.The NSA is the lead agency for SIGINT, the monitoring of electronicsignals.  These include intercepted radio, microwave, satellite, and tele-

phone communications; telemetry, such as data streams transmitted dur-
ing ballistic missile tests; and radar emissions.  Some signals are inter-

cepted through the antenna arrays of ground stations around the world,
which monitor broadcast, satellite-linked, and other radio communica-
tions.  Space-based SIGINT collection comes from a variety of satellites.
Historically, technical collection means have been critical in the veri-fication of arms control agreements, through monitoring of missile tests,
radiation and seismic detection, and direct observation of nuclear pro-
duction facilities and weapons sites.10Nontechnical intelligence collection can be open or covert.  Although
there is substantial debate over the extent to which the intelligence commu-
nity (particularly the CIA) has made effective use of open-source intelli-
gence,11  it is widely recognized that a great deal of relevant information
about foreign political, economic, military, and other issues is publicly avail-
able.  Other potential open sources of material for intelligence analysis

include foreign broadcasts and newspapers; academic, scientific, and trade
journals; books; scientific conference reports; diplomatic contacts (e.g., for-
eign attach”s); and debriefings of U.S. scientists and businesspeople whoattend international meetings.12Clandestine nontechnical intelligence collection is the concern of hu-man intelligence, or HUMINT.  Case officers, usually operating under

cover as U.S. officials in foreign posts, are the backbone of this effort.
Through their political, economic, and social contacts, case officers recruit
local agents to provide information unavailable through technical means.
Placement of agents under nonofficial ÒdeepÓ cover may facilitate entry
into particularly difficult to penetrate organizations such as drug cartels;
however, deep cover involves potentially greater risk to the agent.1310 J.A. Adam, G. Zorpette, S.M. Meyer, and J. Horgan, ÒPeacekeeping by Technical Means:Special Report/Verification,Ó IEEE Spectrum, Volume 23(July), 1986, pp. 42-80.11R.D. Steele, ÒA Critical Evaluation of U.S. National Intelligence Capabilities,Ó Interna-tional Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence, Volume 6(2), 1993, pp. 173-193.12R. Godson (ed.), Intelligence Requirements for the 1990s: Collection, Analysis, Counterintelli-gence, and Covert Action, Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass., 1989.13Godson, Intelligence Requirements for the 1990s, 1989.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.428APPENDIX FF.2.3  Processing
The information collected by intelligence assetsÑparticularly, techni-cal meansÑmust be converted to a usable form before it can be analyzed.Encrypted communications have to be decrypted for maximum utility (al-
though full decryption may not be necessary for traffic analysis, which
itself provides some useful information); language experts translate SIGINT
into English; IMINT is processed electronically to assist in interpretation of
imagery.F.2.4  Analysis
As noted earlier, all-source analysis is the basis of the intelligence pro-duction effort.  All-source analysis converts collected information from

multiple sources into finished intelligence products that are useful to intel-
ligence consumers.  At the simplest level, clearly, extensive editing and

prioritizing are necessary to reduce and simplify the voluminous stream of
collected data.  The practice of analysis, however, involves more than edit-

ing.  In the traditional view of the intelligence community, all-source analy-

sis is both science and art.  It includes integration and evaluation of all

available data, finding patterns among fragmentary or contradictory
sources, and drawing inferences from incomplete evidence.  Whereas all-

source analysis can add significant value to raw information, it is subject to
potential pitfalls that can lead to major errors.  These include, for example,

a lack of awareness of other cultures, leading to Òmirror imagingÓÑtheassumption that foreign policy makers will behave as Americans would.
Overreliance on clandestine or technical sources, simply because they are
uniquely available to intelligence analysts, is another risk.14Analysts, who are typically regional or subject matter specialists, pre-pare a variety of products for intelligence consumers.  These include,

among others, (1) current intelligence on political and other events; (2)
encyclopedic intelligenceÑcompilations of data for future use, such asmaps or economic statistics; and (3) estimative intelligenceÑpredictionsof trends and events, with a focus on potential threats to U.S. security.
The traditional view of analysis, developed in the CIAÕs early history andincorporated into its training for many years, held that analysis should be
conducted at armÕs length from intelligence consumers.  This distance
would enable analysts to avoid being biased by domestic political con-
cerns.15  More recently, a competing view has emerged within the intelli-
14Victor Marchetti and John D. Marks, The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence, Alfred A. Knopf,New York, 1974.15Godson, Intelligence Requirements for the 1990s, 1989.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A BRIEF PRIMER ON INTELLIGENCE429gence community that analysts should actively seek to meet the specificneeds of policy makers, for example, by identifying opportunities for
proactive measures that advance U.S. policies.F.2.5  Dissemination
 The final step of the cycle is dissemination of the finished product to
consumers.  Finished intelligence prepared under the DCI
Õs direction ishand-carried daily to the President and key national security advisers.
Other selected intelligence products, such as classified papers and en-
crypted electronic documents, are distributed to national security plan-
ners and policy makers on the basis of their need to know, as determined,
in most cases, by the intelligence community.  Broader, longer-range prod-

ucts prepared under the National Intelligence CouncilÕs direction are dis-seminated as National Intelligence Estimates.  As these dissemination

efforts lead to new requirements for information, the intelligence cycle
begins again.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.430APPENDIX G430GThe International Scope ofCryptography PolicyG.1  INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS OF
CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICYAny U.S. cryptography policy must take into account a number ofinternational dimensions, the most important of which is the fact that the
United States today does not have unquestioned dominance in the eco-
nomic, financial, technological, and political affairs of the world as it might
have had at the end of World War II.  Thus, the United States is not in a

position to dictate how the rest of the world should regard cryptographic
technology as it becomes more relevant to nonmilitary and nondiplomatic
matters.A second critical consideration is the international scope of business,as described in Chapter 1.  Increasingly, firms need to be able to commu-

nicate with their subsidiaries or affiliates across national boundaries, as
well as with nonaffiliated partners in joint ventures or in strategic alli-
ances.  Whether multinational or not, U.S. firms will need to communicate

with customers and suppliers on a worldwide basis.  Foreign customers

need to be able to pay U.S. vendors, and vice versa, in a way that respects
different monetary systems; thus, financial transactions occur increasingly
over international boundaries, resulting in a truly global banking and
financial system.  To the extent that these various types of communica-

tions must be secure, cryptography provides a very important tool forCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY431ensuring such security.1  Thus, differing national policies on cryptogra-
phy that lead to difficulties in international communications work against
overall national policies that are aimed at opening markets and reducing
commercial and trade barriers.Related is the fact that U.S. companies, including the high-technologycompanies that manufacture information technology products with
worldwide acceptance and popularity, face the potential of significant
foreign competition, as discussed in Chapter 4.  To the extent that these

companies constitute major U.S. national assets, policy actions that affect
their international competitiveness must be considered very carefully.A final international dimension is that other nations also have theoption to maintain some form of export controls on cryptography, as well
as controls on the import and use of cryptography.  Such controls form

part of the context in which U.S. cryptography policy must be formulated.G.2  SIMILARITIES IN AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE
UNITED STATES AND OTHER NATIONS WITHRESPECT TO CRYPTOGRAPHYDespite the international scope of cryptography policy, the interna-tional scene is dominated by national governments.  All national govern-
ments have certain basic goals in common:¥  To maintain national sovereignty,
¥  To protect public safety and domestic order,

¥  To look after their nationÕs economic interests, and

¥  To advance their national interests internationally.
These common goals translate into policy and interests that are some-times similar and sometimes different between nations.  Perhaps the most

important point of similarity is that national governments are likely to
take actions to mitigate the threat that the use of cryptography may pose
to their ability to achieve the goals listed above.2  A corollary is that
foreign national governments are likely to resist unilateral U.S. decisions1In the international arena, as elsewhere, not all aspects of cryptography are necessarilyequally critical to all problems of security.  For example, to some extent, the security of
international electronic payments and other financial transactions can be enhanced throughcollateral (nonconfidentiality) uses of cryptography, as discussed in Chapter 2.2Experience in other Internet-related matters suggests that many governments are will-ing to wield their influence in areas that they believe affect the public safety and welfare.For example:¥  The CompuServe on-line service suspended access worldwide to approximately 200
Internet ÒnewsgroupsÓ at the request of the German government.  These newsgroups were
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.432APPENDIX Gthat affect the use of cryptographic technologies within their borders (e.g.,by threatening their control over cryptography).  For example, they will

likely oppose the use of cryptographic communications systems within
their borders for which the keys are escrowed solely in the United States.The existence of a range of limited, shared interests among nationsnevertheless suggests at least the possibility of international cooperation
and formal agreements on cryptography policy.  For example, law en-

forcement is a concern that constitutes a generally shared interest.  The

reason is that many nations have a more or less equivalent sense of ac-
tions that should subject an individual to the sanction of law, at least in
certain domainsÑmurder and kidnapping are examples of actions thatare crimes in almost every nation.3  Some aspects of law enforcement have
explicitly international dimensions, such as global organized crime and
terrorism.4  A second area of shared interest is in maintaining the integrity
suspected of carrying child pornography.  See John Markoff, 
ÒOn-Line Service Blocks Ac-cess to Topics Called Pornographic,Ó New York Times, December 29, 1995, p. A1.¥  The People
Õs Republic of China declared its intent to supervise the content of allfinancial news reports that collect information in China.  Specifically, it announced that

Òforeign economic information providers will be punished in accordance with the law iftheir released information to Chinese users contains anything forbidden by Chinese lawsand regulations, or slanders or jeopardizes the national interests of China.Ó  See Seth Faison,
ÒCiting Security, China Will Curb Foreign Financial News Agencies,Ó New York Times, Janu-ary 17, 1996, p. A1.  China is also attempting to develop Internet-compatible technology

that will enable a strong degree of government control over the content that is accessible toChinese residents.  See 
ÒChinese Firewall: Beijing Seeks to Build Version of the InternetThat Can Be Censored,Ó Wall Street Journal, January 31, 1996, p. 1.¥  Singapore announced that it would hold providers of access to the Internet and
content providers responsible for preventing information deemed to be pornographic orpolitically objectionable from reaching Internet users in Singapore.  See Darren McDermott,

ÒSingapore Unveils Sweeping Measures to Control Words, Images on Internet,Ó Wall StreetJournal, March 6, 1996, p. B6.3At the same time, differences of national law in certain other important areas should notbe overlooked.  Specifically, the crimes for which an individual may be extradited vary
from nation to nation (e.g., some nations will not extradite a person for financial fraud); inaddition, some nations may criminalize certain activity related to computers and/or elec-
tronic communications that other nations do not.  Enforcement of laws is often difficult
over national boundaries, even if relevant laws in another nation do criminalize particularacts.  The reason is that if Nation A suffers the brunt of actions taken by a citizen resident of

Nation B, Nation B may have little incentive to prosecute those actions even if its lawscriminalize them, since it does not particularly suffer from those actions.  Both of these
factors complicate the feasibility of achieving international agreements.  Some discussion of

different international perspectives on computer crime can be found in the United NationsManual on the Prevention and Control of Computer-Related Crime, available on-line at http://www.ifs.univie.ac.at/~pr2gq1/rev4344.html.4See, for example, Phil Williams, ÒTransnational Criminal Organizations and Interna-tional Security,Ó Survival, Volume 36(1), Spring 1994, pp. 96-113.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY433of the financial systems of each nation, because failures in one part of aninterconnected financial system may well ripple through the entire sys-
tem.  Individual privacy is another common interest; in some nations, for
example, the notion of widespread government surveillance of communi-
cations in society causes public and political concern, as it would in the
United States.5On the other hand, there are many national differences that poten-tially obstruct the achievement of agreements:¥  Differing expectations regarding citizensÕ rights (e.g., rights to privacy,rights to trial, rights to express dissent freely, the relative balance of per-
sonal versus societal rights) and methods by which such rights can be enforced.For example, the United States has a tendency to enforce privacy rights
through market mechanisms, whereas many European governments gen-
erally take a more active policy role in protecting such rights.  Moreover,

the United States has a rich tradition of public debate and argument, and
dissenting discourse is far more the rule than the exception compared to
most foreign nations, whose publics tend to exhibit a greater willingness
to grant certain powers to the state, a less adversarial relationship toward
the government, and more trust in the ability of government to do what is
in the national interest.  (Indeed, at a public meeting a representative of

the National Security Agency noted complaints from foreign intelligence
services that the U.S. policy debate had raised public visibility of the
cryptography issue within their countries.)¥  Business-government relationships.  In some nations, it is the expecta-
tion that national intelligence services will cooperate with and assist busi-
nesses that in the United States would be regarded as entirely separate
from government.  Indeed, many foreign nations operate with fewer and

more blurred lines between government and ÒprivateÓ businesses than is
true in the United States.  In areas such as standards setting that are

relevant to businesses, the United States tends to rely on market forces
rather than government much more than other nations do.¥  What constitutes ÒfairÓ business practices.  In principle, many nations
give lip service to the idea of confidentiality in commercial transactions
and the notion of fair competition, but the actual practices of nations are
often at variance with these statements.¥  Status.  As a global power, the U.S. scope of activities for monitor-
ing external traffic (i.e., traffic between two other nations) is greater than
that of other nations, which are concerned mostly about communications5For example, a disclosure that a Spanish military secret service intercepted hundreds ofmobile telephone conversations caused considerable public uproar.  See 
ÒSpaniards Stunnedby Military Eavesdropping,Ó New York Times, June 16, 1995, p. A5.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.434APPENDIX Ginto and out of their borders.  The status of the United States as a global
power also makes its citizens and facilities high-profile targets for terror-
ist attacks throughout the world.¥  Access to technology.  On average, U.S. citizens tend to have a higher
degree of access to and familiarity with information technology than do
citizens of other nations.  Furthermore, the information technology de-

ployed internationally has tended to be less sophisticated than that de-
ployed in the United States; with some exceptions, this lack of sophistica-
tion is reflected generally as well in the level of deployed technology that
supports security.6  Thus, the body politic in the United States arguably
has more at stake than that in other nations.Finally, the foreign governments relevant to the policy issues ofcryptography range from very friendly to very hostile.¥  Some nations are very closely aligned with the United States, and
the United States has no real need to target their communications (nor
they ours).¥  Some nations are allies in some domains and competitors in others,
and the circumstances of the moment determine U.S. needs for access to
their communications.¥  Some nations are pariah or rogue nations, and as a general rule, the
United States would be highly interested in the substance of their com-
munications.G.3  FOREIGN EXPORT CONTROL REGIMES
The United States is not the only nation that imposes export controlrestrictions on cryptography.  Many other nations, especially former mem-

bers of the Coordinating Committee (CoComÑsee below), control theexport of cryptography to some extent.7  CoCom nations included Austra-
lia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, the
United Kingdom, and the United States.86For example, 37% of U.S. households have personal computers, compared with 21% inSpain, 9% in Britain, 19% in Germany, 14% in Italy, 15% in France (excluding Minitel), and15% in other European nations.  See John Tagliabue, ÒEuropeans Buy Home PCÕs at RecordPace,Ó New York Times, December 11, 1995, p. D1.7The most authoritative study on the laws of other nations regarding controls on theexport, import, and use of cryptography is a study produced by the Department of Com-
merce and the National Security Agency.  See Department of Commerce and National
Security Agency, A Study of the International Market for Computer Software with Encryption,Washington, D.C., released January 11, 1996.8National Research Council (NRC), Finding Common Ground, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C., 1991, p. 62 (footnote).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY435CoCom was a Western response to the threat of the Soviet Union inthe days of the Cold War.9  Under the CoCom export control regime,
member nations agreed to abide by regulations governing the export of
many militarily useful items, including cryptography, to nations that were
potential adversaries of the West (generally Eastern bloc nations and
rogue nations).The regime was more successful in those instances in which the tech-nology in question was U.S. source, and thus what was needed from other
CoCom members was control over re-export, or in which there was strong
cooperation based on political agreement that the technology should be
kept away from controlled destinations, despite its general availability in
other CoCom nations.  CoCom controls did not work perfectly, but they

had some nontrivial impact.  For example, export controls did not prevent

the Soviets from obtaining certain types of computers, but they probably
had fewer of those computers than if there had been no export controls.
This had some advantages for the West: the Soviets were locked into old
first-generation computers in many cases; also, they did not have many
and, thus, had to use them only on their highest-priority projects.On the other hand, CoCom controls were less successful when¥  Non-CoCom countries (e.g., Taiwan and Korea) developed indig-
enous capabilities to produce CoCom-controlled technologies and a will-
ingness to sell them;¥  CoCom member nations disagreed among themselves about the
danger of exporting certain products to Eastern bloc nations;  and
¥  The items in question were dual-use items.
All of these conditions currently or potentially obtain with respect tocryptography,10 although they should not be taken to mean that coopera-
tive, multinational CoCom-like controls on cryptography would be hope-
less.  Also, it is important to note that the intent of the CoCom export

control regime was to prevent militarily significant technologies (includ-
ing cryptography) from falling into the hands of the Eastern bloc, rather
than to inhibit mutually advantageous sharing of military technology
among the member states.History demonstrates that the United States has always appliedtighter export controls for security and foreign policy reasons than any
agreement with other nations might otherwise mandate.11  For example,
9For detailed discussion of the CoCom regime, see NRC, Finding Common Ground, 1991,and NRC, Balancing the National Interest, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1987.10For example, most countries have not yet attained the degree of success in producingshrink-wrapped software applications incorporating cryptography that the United Stateshas; potentially, they could do so and become significant suppliers of such applications.11For example, see NRC, Finding Common Ground, 1991, pp. 99-100.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.436APPENDIX Gsince cryptography is in general controlled by the United States as a mu-nitions item, the same export controls on cryptography apply to products
destined for England (a CoCom member) and Saudi Arabia (a non-CoCom
member), though the decision-making process might well generate differ-
ent answers depending on the receiving nation.  A staff study by the U.S.
International Trade Commission found that the export controls on en-
cryption maintained by many other nations apply for the most part to
certain proscribed (or ÒrogueÓ) nations.  Thus, there are in general more
restrictions on the export of products with encryption capability from the
United States than from these other nations, even though all of the nations
in question maintain export controls on encryption.12G.4  FOREIGN IMPORT AND USE CONTROL REGIMES
A number of nations discourage cryptography within their jurisdic-tions through a combination of import controls and use controls.  Import

controls refer to restrictions on products with encryption capability that
may be taken into a given nation; use controls refer to restriction on the
use of such products within their jurisdictions.At the time of this writing (early 1996), Finland, France, Israel, Russia,and South Africa assert the authority, through an explicit law or decree, to
exercise some degree of explicit legal control over the use and/or import
of cryptography within their borders;13 a number of other nations are
reported to be investigating the possibilities of legal restrictions.  On the

other hand, the fact that a law regulating the use of cryptography is on the
books of a nation does not mean that the law is consistently enforced.  For

example, at the International Cryptography Institute 1995 conference,14speakers from France and Russia both noted the existence of such laws in
their nations and observed that for the most part those laws generally
were not enforced and thus did not inhibit the widespread use of cryptog-
raphy in those nations.1512Office of Industries, U.S. International Trade Commission, Global Competitiveness of theU.S. Computer Software and Service Industries, Staff Research Study #21, Washington, D.C.,June 1995, Chapter 3.13Department of Commerce and National Security Agency, A Study of the InternationalMarket for Computer Software with Encryption, 1996, Part II.14International Cryptography Institute (ICI) 1995, George Washington University, Sept.22.15Still, the mere existence of such lawsÑwhether or not enforcedÑserves as an obstacleto large vendors who wish to sell products with encryption capabilities or to provide en-
cryption services, thereby reducing their availability to the average consumer.  In addition,
such nations may well practice selective enforcement of such laws.  For example, a repre-
sentative of a major computer company with a French subsidiary observed at the ICI 1995
conference that although French laws forbidding the use of unregistered encryption werenot regularly enforced against private users, they did inhibit this company from marketingproducts with encryption capabilities in France.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY437The flip side of unenforced laws is the case of a nation that appliesinformal controls: a nation without explicit laws forbidding the use of
secure communications devices may nonetheless discourage their im-

port.16  In addition, nations have a variety of mechanisms for influencing
the use of cryptography within the country:¥  Laws related to the public telephone system.  In most nations the gov-
ernment has the legal authority to regulate equipment that is connected to
the public telephone network (e.g., in homologation laws).  In the event

that a nation wishes to discourage the use of encrypted telephonic com-
munications, it may choose to use existing homologation laws as a pretext
to prevent users from connecting to the network with secure telephones.¥  Laws related to content carried by electronic media.  In some nations,
the transmission of certain types of content (e.g., sexually explicit mate-
rial) is prohibited.  Thus, a nation could argue that it must be able to read

encrypted transmissions in order to ensure that such content is indeed not
being transmitted.¥  Trade laws or other practices related to the protection of domestic indus-tries.  Many nations have trade policies intended to discourage the pur-
chase of foreign products and/or to promote the purchase of domestic
products; examples in the United States include Òbuy AmericanÓ laws.
Such policies could be used selectively to prevent the import of products
with encryption capabilities that might pose a threat to the law enforce-
ment or national security interests of such a nation.  In other nations, laws

may be explicitly neutral with respect to local or foreign purchases, but
long-standing practices of buying locally may prove to be formidable
barriers to the import of foreign products.¥  Licensing arrangements.  A company (especially a foreign one) seek-
ing to do business under the jurisdiction of a particular cryptography-
unfriendly government may have to obtain a number of licenses to do so.
Many governments use their discretionary authority to impose Òunoffi-cialÓ requirements as conditions for doing business or granting the li-
censes necessary to operate (e.g., the need to bribe various government16The feasibility of such practices is documented in a 1992 report by the U.S. Departmentof Commerce, which describes foreign governmentsÕ assistance to their domestic indus-
tries.  This report found that foreign governments assist their industries by creating barriers

to the domestic market (e.g., through tariffs or quotas, testing regulations, investment re-strictions, and product and service standards), by devising incentives for domestic produc-tion (e.g., tax policies and legal regimes for intellectual property that favor domestic indus-
tries), and by aiding in market development (e.g., guaranteeing a certain minimum level ofsales through government purchase, providing foreign aid to buy domestic goods, apply-ing political pressure to potential customers).  See U.S. Department of Commerce, 
ForeignGovernment Assistance to Domestic Industry, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,D.C., September 1992, p. iii.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.438APPENDIX Gindividuals or informal ÒunderstandingsÓ that the company will refrain
from using cryptography).Many anecdotal examples of active government discouragement ofcryptography circulate in the business community.  For example, a

businessperson traveling in a foreign nation brought a secure telephone
for use in her hotel room; a few hours after using it, she was asked by a
hotel manager to discontinue use of that phone.  A press report in the

Karachi daily Dawn reported on February 26, 1995, that the government
of Pakistan shut down a cellular network run by Mobilink, a joint venture
between Motorola and Pakistani SAIF Telecom, because it was unable to
intercept traffic.17Nevertheless, it is possible (or will be in the near future) to circum-vent local restrictions through technical means even if attempts are made
to enforce them.  For example, direct satellite uplinks can carry communi-

cations without ever passing that information through the telecommuni-
cations network of the host nation.18  If available, superencryption (i.e.,
encrypting information before it is entered into an approved encryption
device) can defeat an eavesdropper armed with the key to only the outer
layer of encryption; the use of superencryption cannot even be detected
unless a portion of the encrypted communication is decrypted and ana-
lyzed.  (See also the discussion in Chapter 7 on prohibiting the use of

unescrowed encryption.)To summarize, in some cases, a U.S. vendor that receives an exportlicense from U.S. authorities to sell in a given foreign market may well
encounter additional complications due to the import and use controls of
the target nation.  Indeed, a number of other nations rely on U.S. export

controls to keep strong encryption products out of the market in their
countries.G.5  THE STATE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS TODAY
Today, international communications are conducted with no univer-sally adopted information or communications privacy and security stan-
dards or policies.  This is not surprising; the communications systems in
17According to the article, the company was unable to provide interception services toPakistani intelligence agencies.  According to a Mobilink official, ÒThere are no commercialproducts .  .  .  that enable over-the-air monitoring of calls.
Ó  However, it remains unclear
why agencies would require monitoring of wireless mobile-to-base traffic, instead of inter-cepting at the base station.  Although the Global System for Mobile Communication
Õs digi-tally encrypted wireless traffic may be hard to tap in real time, it is decrypted at the base
station.18There are several systems in preparation that use low-Earth-orbit satellites to providedirect communications links, including Iridium and Odyssey.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY43919Indeed, in the absence of standards, interoperability is often a problem even whencryptography is not involved.use worldwide are highly heterogeneous, are made by many differentmanufacturers, and embody many different standards; under these cir-
cumstances, security-specific aspects of these systems cannot be expected
to be either standardized or government certified.  In the absence of com-

mon understanding, ensuring information privacy or security is an ad
hoc affair.  Cryptographic equipment is freely available, and standards to

ensure interoperability and compatibility emerge, in many cases, through
a market process with no intervention on the part of any national govern-
ment.  Cryptographic equipment on the market is not always tested or

certified by national authorities or any organization with the responsibil-
ity for undertaking such testing.Some of the future consequences of this current are likely to includethe following:¥  Interoperability of communications equipment involving cryptog-
raphy will be difficult.19¥  Some companies and businesses will be able to implement very
high quality security, while others fall victim to the purveyors of shoddy
security products.¥  National governments will be unable to use wiretapping as a tool
for enforcing criminal laws and pursuing national security interests in
many cases.Needless to say, these consequences are undesirable for reasons re-lated to business and commerce, national security, and law enforcement.
How governments have responded to these undesirable consequences is
discussed in Section G.7.G.6  OBTAINING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION ON POLICY
REGARDING SECURE COMMUNICATIONSIf the use of the global information infrastructure (GII) is to grow withthe blessings of governments, common arrangements among govern-
ments are needed.  To the extent that U.S. national cryptography policy

affects communications and information transfer across national bound-
aries, it has international implications.One approach is that the United States will set a standard on securecommunications that accommodates the needs of various national gov-
ernments around the world.  This approach is based on the assumption

that the United States is the dominant player with respect to international
communications and information transfer, and that actions taken by theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.440APPENDIX GUnited States to promote a future global information infrastructure set atleast a de facto standard to which all other parties to the GII will have to
adhere.  The result would be that U.S. national policy becomes the de

facto international policy.The committee does not believe that this approach is feasible today.Rather, the committee proceeds from the belief that the United States will
be an important but not the controlling international player with respect
to international communications and information transfer.  Thus, the

United States cannot operate unilaterally and will have to reach accom-
modation with other national governments.By taking as given the fact that nation-states will continue to try toexert sovereignty over activities within their borders, including the pur-
suit of law enforcement and national security activities, the following
statements seem warranted:1.  Common and cooperative policies are possible if and only if na-
tional governments agree to them.2.  National governments will allow policies to be set in place if thesepolicies are consistent in some overall sense with the equities they seek to
maintain.3.  A national government will not base its policies on the assumption
that it will abuse the rights of its citizens (as it defines them).By assumption, cryptography threatens the ability of national gov-ernments to monitor the communications of others.  Thus, according to

statement 2, controls on the use of cryptography are a plausible govern-
mental policy option as discussed above.  At the same time and despite

this threat, some foreign governments could be willing to allow secure
international communications on a case-by-case basis, where the scope
and nature of use are clearly delimited (i.e., relatively small-scale use,
clearly specified use).  Of course, the United States places no restrictions

at all on the use of secure communications domestically at this time.Over the next 10 years, some of those countries will surely changetheir minds about encryption, though in what direction is as yet not clear.
Other nations are beginning to pay attention to these issues related to
interception of communications and wiretapping and have many of the
same concerns that the U.S. government has.  Indeed, as international

partnerships between U.S. and foreign telecommunications companies
increase, it is likely that foreign intelligence agenciesÕ awareness of these
issues will increase.  Such concerns in principle suggest that an interna-

tional agreement might be possible with respect to these issues.At the same time, the United States has a stronger tradition of indi-vidual liberties than many other nations, and it is conceivable that the
United States might be the Òodd man outÓ internationally.  For example,
the official U.S. view that it will not impose legal restrictions on the use ofCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY441cryptography within its borders may run contrary to the positions takenby other nations.  An international agreement that accommodates such

differing degrees of legal restriction is hard to imagine.A global information infrastructure allows conceptually for two dif-ferent policy structures regarding international communication and data
transmission:1.  Common policies shared and implemented by many nations coop-
eratively, or2.  Individual policies implemented by each nation on its own.
Of course, it may be that some group of nations can agree to a set ofcommon policies, while other nations will operate individually.By definition, individual policies of nations may conflict at nationalborders.20  For nations whose policies on cryptography do not agree,
international interconnection will be possible only through national gate-
ways and interfaces that handle all international traffic.21  For example,
Nations A and B might require users to deposit all cryptographic keys
with the national government but otherwise leave the choice of crypto-
graphic equipment up to the relevant users.  An A national communicat-

ing with a B national might see his or her traffic routed to a switch that
would decrypt AÕs transmission into plaintext and re-encrypt it with theB nationalÕs key for ultimate transmission to the B national.2220Although the notion of a global information infrastructure is based to a large degree onthe idea that national boundaries are porous to information, nations can and do exert someinfluence over what information may cross their borders.  For example, while traffic may
traverse many countries between Nation A and Nation B, it is not inconceivable that an
intermediate nation might attempt to establish a policy on cryptography that any incomingtraffic had to be sent in the clear.  Enforcing such a policy would be technically difficult for
individual nations to accomplish in todayÕs networking environment, but a different archi-tecture might make it easier.21An additional challenge is the emergence of national or commercial parties that willprovide communications that are independent of any physical infrastructure under the
control of any given nation.  For example, a person in Japan might use a portable device to
communicate with someone in Peru, connecting directly through a future American com-munications satellite.  Such a channel might bypass entirely the Japanese and Peruvian

national authorities.  Even more complicated might be the use of a communications satellite
bought from an American manufacturer by Indonesia and launched into orbit by the French.(However, satellite communications are subject to a degree of control over services offered,
in the form of international agreements in the International Telecommunication Union onthe uses of electromagnetic frequency spectrum.)22Policies regarding cryptography are complicated further by policies on data.  For ex-
ample, a number of European nations will not permit the transport of personal data (e.g.,on employees) out of their countries for privacy reasons, even though a multinational firmmight like to be able to process such data in one central location.  To ensure that such data

are not transported, those nations may demand the ability to inspect all transborder dataflows outward.Footnote continues on next page.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.442APPENDIX GThis hypothetical arrangement is insecure in the sense that text can befound in the clear at the border interface points.  It is therefore clumsy and

arguably unworkable on a practical scale.  Thus, the problem of obtaining

international cooperation on policy regarding secure communication is
addressed here.In the export control domain, attempts are under way to establish anorganization known as the New Forum to achieve some common policy
regarding exports.  The mandate of the New Forum is to 
Òprevent desta-bilizing buildups of weapons and technologies in regions of tension, such
as South Asia and the Middle East, by establishing a formal process of
transparency, consultation, and multilateral restraint [in the export of
critical technologies].Ó23  The New Forum is expected to include the
CoCom nations, as well as Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic and
a number of cooperating states.  The New Forum is similar in many ways

to CoCom, but one critical difference is that unlike CoCom, New Forum
members do not have veto power over individual exports involving mem-

ber nations; member states retain the right to decide how to apply the
New Forum export control regime to specific instances.24In the domain of policy regarding the use of encryption, serious at-tempts at international discussion are beginning as of this writing (early
1996).  For example, in December 1995, the Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development (OECD) held a meeting in Paris, France,
among member nations to discuss how these nations were planning to
cope with the public policy problems posed by cryptography.In order to stimulate thought about alternative ways of approachingan international regime for cryptography (with respect to both export
control and use), it is useful to consider how international regimes in
other areas of policy are constructed.  This is to a certain extent a taxo-
Controlling inbound data may pose problems.  For example, a dictatorial government
may assert the right to monitor data flowing into its nation, perhaps to combat subversive
agitation.  Even democratic governments may wish for the ability to monitor certain incom-
ing data to prevent money laundering.Laws governing privacy can conflict with laws on cryptography.  For example, a law on
data privacy may require that certain sensitive data associated with an individual be pro-tected, while a law on cryptography may forbid the use of cryptography.  Such laws wouldobviously conflict if a situation arose in which cryptography were the only feasible tool for
protecting such data.In short, policies regarding data export, import, and privacy are an additional dimen-sion of resolving policy with respect to cryptography.23U.S. State Department, ÒPress Release: New Multilateral Export Control Arrangement,ÓOffice of the Spokesman, Washington, D.C., January 23, 1996.24See Sarah Walking, ÒRussia Ready to Join New Post-CoCom Organization,Ó Arms Con-trol Today, September 1995, pp. 31-33.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY443nomic exercise, but it has the virtue that it opens wider perspectives thanif we limit ourselves to prior arrangements in the law enforcement and
intelligence fields.  Moreover, it permits an analysis to profit from experi-

ence in other fields of foreign policy.  That said, most successful interna-

tional efforts are built on precedents from the past, and therefore it may
be a mistake to start out too ambitiously.Two dimensions should be kept separate, one organizational and theother substantive.  Is there to be an international organization; a treaty;

something less, such as an international agreement; parallel bilateral
agreements; or, at the least ambitious end, merely a coordination of policy
between the U.S. executive branch and other governments?With respect to international agreement on the substantive dimen-sion, four different approaches reflect varying levels of ambition:¥Unification of law in the cooperating countries involved.  Unification
means simply that the law of each cooperating country would be the same.¥Harmonization
.  Harmonization refers to a general similarity of law
among national laws, with purely local differences or relatively unimpor-
tant differences remaining.  These differences would be slight enough to

preclude major distortions of trade or serious policy disagreements among
nations.  Harmonization of law is particularly common in Europe.
¥Mutual recognition.  Under mutual recognition, when one govern-
ment approves a product manufactured within its borders as being con-
sistent with an agreed-upon standard, another government will allow
that product to be imported and used within its territory.  In a world with

a variety of cryptographic options, the options then would have to be
certified by the home government before they could be imported and
used in the territories of cooperating countries.  For example, perhaps

mutual recognition would require that any escrow holder certified by one
government would be acceptable to other governments.¥Interoperability.  Cooperating nations would work, perhaps in part
through telephone companies and PTTs, to ensure that encrypted com-
munications across national borders would remain encrypted but also
conform to national laws.  Interoperability would require some agree-

ment among cooperating nations that limited the kinds of encryption
acceptable domestically and provided for exchange of keys.  (For ex-

ample, a foreign government might require an interface for international
communications at a border through which traffic would have to be
passed in the clear or encrypted in a way that it could read.)  Technical

approaches to interoperability would probably require translation facili-
ties that reconcile policies at national borders, automatic recognition of
protocols being used, and automatic engagement of the necessary tech-
nology.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.444APPENDIX GThe feasibility of a cooperative regime on secure international com-munications is likely to require the consensus of a core group of nations.
Such a consensus would then set standards that other nations would have
to follow if they wanted to share the benefits of interacting with those
core nations; nations that refuse to accept the arrangement would by
implication be cut off from applications that demand cryptographic pro-
tection (although they would still be able to transact and communicate in
the clear).  For obvious reasons, this suggests that the core group of na-

tions would have considerable aggregate economic power and influence.
(Note that a division of the world into core and noncore nations might
require the fractionation of a multinational companyÕs information net-work into those inside and outside the core group.)G.7  THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICYIf the assumption is made that escrowed encryption is the underpin-ning of national governmentsÕ attempting to manage cryptography, three
basic questions arise regarding cryptography policy internationally.G.7.1  Who Holds the Keys?
Any of the agents described in Chapter 5 are candidates for key hold-ers: these include government agencies, private for-profit organizations
that make a business out of holding keys, vendors of escrowed encryption
products, and customers themselves (perhaps the end user, perhaps an
organization within the corporation making the purchase).  The various

pros and cons of different types of escrow agents described in Chapter 5
apply equally in an international context.G.7.2  Under What Circumstances Does the Key Holder
Release the Keys to Other Parties?From the standpoint of U.S. policy, one essential question is whichnationÕs or nationsÕ laws control the actions of escrow agents vis-
‹-vis therelease of keys.  Conceptually, three possibilities exist:
1.  The U.S. government (or escrow agents subject to U.S. law) holds
all keys for all escrowed encryption products used by U.S. persons or soldCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY445by U.S. vendors, regardless of whether these products are used domesti-cally or abroad.252.  The U.S. government (or escrow agents subject to U.S. law) holds
all keys for all escrowed encryption products used by U.S. persons, and
foreign governments (or escrow agents subject to the laws of those for-
eign governments) hold all keys for escrowed encryption products used
by nationals of those governments.263.  Both the U.S. government and Nation X have access to all keys forescrowed encryption products that are used in Nation X, and either the
United States or Nation X can obtain the necessary keys.Products used in Nation X would most likely be purchased in NationX, but this is not a requirement.  Note also that a wide variety of escrow-

ing schemes exist, many of which are described in Chapter 5.For the most part, options 1 and 3 compromise the sovereignty offoreign nations, and it is hard to imagine that a strong U.S. ally would
publicly announce that its citizens and industries were vulnerable to U.S.
spying without their approval.  Early in this study (late 1994), the commit-

tee took testimony from senior Administration officials to the effect that
option 1 was likely feasible, but the Administration appears to have
backed off from this position in its most recent statements (late 1995).Only option 2 is symmetric: the United States holds keys for escrowedencryption products used by U.S. persons or sold in the United States,
and foreign nations do the same for their persons and products.  Option 2

could meet the international law enforcement concern in much the same
way that the law enforcement agencies of various nations cooperate today
on other matters.  Such cooperation might be the focus of explicit bilateral

agreements between the United States and other nations; such agreements
might well build on existing cooperative arrangements for law enforce-
ment (Box G.1), and they are most likely to be concluded successfully if
they are arranged informally, on a case-by-case basis in which the scope
and nature of use are clearly delimited (i.e., relatively small-scale and25Under the Clipper initiative, U.S. policy is that the two escrow agents in the UnitedStates have Clipper/Capstone keys because they are available and put into escrow at the
time they are programmed at the U.S. factory.  Since there is no formal policy governing
what should be done if a foreign nation purchases Clipper-compliant devices, the currentpolicy obtains by default.26An important operational question is the following:  If the keys are generated in the
United States, on what basis could any foreign user be confident that the United States didnot retain a copy of the keys that were issued to him or her?  Such a question arises most

strongly in a hardware-based escrow encryption product with a U.S.-classified design inwhich the United States is the designated key generator for reasons of classification.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.446APPENDIX GBOX G.1On Mutual Assistance Agreements for Law EnforcementThe United States has mutual assistance agreements for law enforcement withmany other nations.  These agreements, managed by the Criminal Division of the
Department of Justice with a State Department liaison, provide for mutual coopera-
tion for the prevention, investigation, and prosecution of crime, to the extent permit-ted by the laws of each nation, in many areas.  In general, these agreements discuss
cooperation in certain listed areas as illustrative, but they usually have a ÒcatchallÓ
category.  Some of the listed areas include:
¥  Assistance in obtaining documents;
¥  Release of interviews and statements of witnesses;
¥  Arrangement of depositions;
¥  Assistance in securing compulsory process (e.g., subpoenas);

¥  Cooperation in obtaining extradition consistent with existing extradition trea-
ties; and¥  Cooperation in obtaining forensic information (e.g., laboratory results and
fingerprints).These agreements are meant to enhance the collection of information and evi-dence in foreign nations when a crime is being committed or planned.  Thus, they
could serve as the vehicle for cooperative action with respect to sharing cryptograph-ic keys available to the government (pursuant to its law enforcement objectives) of a
given nation for specific law enforcement purposes; keys given by Nation A to Na-tion B would be obtained in accordance with the laws of Nation A and the mutualassistance agreement between Nations A and B.  These agreements do not make new
law; unlike treaties, they simply facilitate cooperation with respect to existing law.To adapt these agreements to cover sharing of cryptographic information, thenations involved could use the catchall category or explicitly negotiate agreementscovering this area; the first could suffice until the second was implemented.In general, these agreements have worked well.  Nevertheless, some problems
exist.  For example, they may not work fast enough to provide time-urgent responses
to pressing law enforcement needs.  In addition, some nations that are party to a
mutual assistance agreement may not be trustworthy with respect to certain areas
(e.g., the Colombian government with respect to drugs, the Mexican governmentwith respect to immigration matters and smuggling of aliens).clearly specified use).  Alternatively, access might be requested on an ad
hoc basis as the occasion arises, as is the case for other types of informally
arranged law enforcement cooperation.Option 2 alone will not satisfy U.S. needs for intelligence gatheringfrom the foreign nations involved, because by assumption it requires the
involvement (and hence the knowledge) of an escrow agent that is subject
to another nationÕs jurisdiction.  Further, it is inconceivable that the UnitedStates is a party to any formal or informal agreement to obtain keys fromCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY447nations that are most likely to be the targets of interest to U.S. decisionmakers (e.g., rogue nations).  On the other hand, options 1 and 3 also pose

problems for U.S. intelligence gathering, because even with the ability to
obtain keys individually, the United States loses the ability to conduct good
bulk intercepts.  On the assumption that there is no large-scale 
Òmasterkey,Ó individual keys would still have to be obtained.  This would inevita-
bly be a time-consuming process and could diminish the flow of signals
intelligence information, since obtaining individual keys is a much more
time- and labor-intensive activity than listening to unencrypted traffic.The AdministrationÕs position on foreign escrow agents is stated inone of its proposed criteria for liberalized export consideration for es-
crowed encryption software.  Specifically, it proposes that the relevant

keys be escrowed with Òescrow agent(s) certified by the U.S. Govern-ment, or . . . by foreign governments with which the U.S. Government has
formal agreements consistent with U.S. law enforcement and national
security requirements.Ó27Note that all of the issues discussed in Chapter 5 with respect toliability for unauthorized disclosure of keys necessarily apply in an inter-
national context.28G.7.3  How Will Nations Reach Consensus on International
Cryptography Policy Regarding Exports and Use?Harmonized Export PoliciesAgreement on the following points would be necessary to develop acommon export control policy that would help to preserve law enforce-
ment and intelligence-gathering capabilities by retarding the spread of
cryptography worldwide:¥  Rough concurrence among nations exporting cryptography about
the nations whose access to encryption capabilities should be kept to a
minimum and what policy toward those nations should be;¥  Willingness to allow relatively free trade in products with encryp-
tion capabilities among member nations;¥  Willingness to abide by prohibitions on re-export to rogue nations;
and¥  Agreement among member nations about the types of encryption
capabilities that would constitute a threat if widely deployed.27National Institute of Standards and Technology, Draft Software Key Escrow EncryptionExport Criteria, November 6, 1995; see Box 5.3, Chapter 5.28Some agreements establish the extent and nature of liability in other contexts (e.g., theWarsaw Convention and airline travel), thus suggesting that the international dimensionsof liability for unauthorized release of keys are not necessarily insurmountable.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.448APPENDIX GThe extent to which agreement on these points can be reached is anopen question, although there are precedents to some degree in the U.S.
bilateral arrangements with various other nations for cooperation in law
enforcement matters.  A high degree of concurrence among these nations
(a Òcrypto-CoComÓ) would help to retard the spread of encryption capa-bilities to rogue nations, with all of the attendant benefits for law enforce-
ment and national security.Many problems stand in the way of achieving a plausible crypto-CoCom regime.  These include the following:
¥  The scope of a crypto-CoCom.  Given that the basic algorithms for
cryptography are known worldwide, it is not clear that the developed
nations of the world have a true monopoly on the technology.  Many of

the traditional lesser developed countries in Asia and Latin America are
demonstrating significant interest in modernizing their communications
infrastructures, and they will almost certainly be driven to an interest in
secure communications as well.¥  The absence of a pervasive threat.  With the demise of the Soviet
Union, it has proven much more difficult for the United States to take the
lead in matters requiring international cooperation.¥  The implied connection between third-party decryption for governmentsand export-import controls.  International arrangements will have to satisfythe needs of participating nations for third-party decryption before they
will agree to relax import and use controls.Harmonized Policies Regarding UseAs noted above, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and De-velopment held a December 1995 meeting in Paris among member na-
tions to discuss how these nations were planning to cope with the public
policy problems posed by cryptography.29  What this meeting made clear
is that many OECD member nations are starting to come to grips with the
public policy problems posed by encryption, but that the dialogue on
harmonizing policies across national borders has not yet matured.  More-

over, national policies are quite fluid at this time, with various nations
considering different types of regulation regarding the use, export, and
import of cryptography.29Additional information on this meeting can be found in Stewart Baker, Summary Reporton the OECD Ad Hoc Meeting of Experts on Cryptography, Steptoe and Johnson, Washington,D.C., undated.  Available on-line at sbaker@steptoe.com or check http://www.us.net/
~steptoe/276908.html.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY449The majority view of the assembled nations was that national policieshad to balance the needs of corporate users, technology vendors, indi-
viduals, law enforcement, and national security.  A number of partici-

pants appeared to favor a Òtrusted third-partyÓ approach that would rely
on nongovernment entities (the trusted third party) to serve as the gen-
erators of cryptographic keys for confidentiality for use by the public as
well as escrow agents holding these keys and responding to legally au-
thorized requests for encryption keys for law enforcement purposes.30However, the needs of national security were not mentioned for the most
part.31,3230See, for example, Nigel Jefferies, Chris Mitchell, and Michael Walker, A Proposed Archi-tecture for Trusted Third Party Services, Royal Holloway, University of London, 1995.
31For additional industry-oriented views on international policies concerning the use ofcryptography, see U.S. Council for International Business, Business Requirements for Encryp-tion, New York, October 10, 1994; INFOSEC Business Advisory Group, Commercial Use ofCryptography, statement presented at the ICC-BIAC-OECD Business-Government Forum,Paris, France, December 1995; European Association of Manufacturers of Business Machines
and Information Technology Industry (EUROBIT), Information Technology Association ofCanada (ITAC), Information Technology Industry Council (ITIC), and Japan Electronic In-dustry Development Association (JEIDA), Principles of Global Cryptographic Policy, statementpresented at the ICC-BIAC-OECD Business-Government Forum, Paris, France, December19, 1995.  The statements from the Paris meeting are available on-line at http://
www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/#ici.32Intelligence needs may conflict directly with needs for business information security.For example, U.S. and foreign companies sometimes form consortia that work coopera-tively to make money; national intelligence agencies often funnel information to individual
companies to develop competitive advantage.  One major reason that U.S. companies oper-ating internationally want to have encrypted communications is to protect themselvesagainst the threat of national intelligence agencies.  Thus, they would require that any

escrow arrangements at a minimum include audit trails to ensure that their communica-tions were being monitored in accordance with laws governing criminal investigations andthe like (in the United States, this might be a court order) to ensure that data from wiretaps
were not being funneled to foreign competitors.  However, it is very hard to imagine that a
foreign intelligence agency would be willing to provide such assurances or to live withsuch audit restrictions.  Ultimately, the trade-off might be the willingness of an interna-

tional corporation to bargain with the host nation about the ability to have secure commu-nications, using its willingness to invest in the host nation as its ultimate bargaining chip toforce the host nation to acquiesce.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.450APPENDIX H450HSummary of Important Requirements
for a Public-Key Infrastructure
Based on information from a National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST) document on public-key infrastructure,1 this appendix
briefly summarizes the user, technical, and legal requirements of a federal
public-key infrastructure, as well as other observations obtained through
interviews and the analysis of pertinent standards.¥  Ease of Use.  Certificate infrastructures should not make applica-
tions utilizing digital signature capabilities more difficult to use.  To sup-
port ease of use, the infrastructure must provide a uniform way to obtain
certificates in spite of the possible differences in certificate management
policies employed by different segments of the infrastructure.¥  User Authentication.  To ensure proper linkage of a public key with
a specific user, the identity of that user must be authenticated.  User

authentication is usually conducted by the certification authority (CA)
during the key certification process.¥  Certification Policies.  If the existence of different certification poli-
cies is allowed, certification policies for both individual users and organi-
zational users must be clearly articulated. In addition, mechanisms must1Shimshon Berkovits et al. (MITRE Corporation), Public Key Infrastructure Study: FinalReport, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Md., April 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REQUIREMENTS FOR A PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE451be provided to enable each user to be aware of the policies governing anycertificate that he may encounter. In particular, a user should be able to
establish how carefully and thoroughly the CA authenticated owner iden-
tity of the public key before certifying the association between the user
and the key.¥  Trusted Certificate Authority.  Digital signatures are used to ensure
sender authentication, nonrepudiation, and message integrity. To trust
these security services, the user needs to be assured that the public key
used to verify a signature is actually the key of the person who signed the
transaction.  To ensure that certificates are generated by and obtained

from trusted sources, mechanisms are needed to prevent any user from
creating false certificates that are signed with the userÕs regular privatekey. Even though a signature can be verified by employing the userÕsproperly certified public key, the false certificates must not be accepted as
legitimate.  Then a pretender cannot create signatures that will be ac-

cepted because they are verified using keys obtained from the false certifi-
cates. Since the CA performs user authentication at key certification time
and is responsible for keeping the userÕs name and public key associated,each CA must be a trusted entity, at least to the extent defined in the
pertinent PCA policies.  This implies the provision of some security pro-

tection for each CA, specifically the private key of the CA, so that the CA
cannot be modified or impersonated. Certification policies can specify the
security measures that a particular CA undertakes. Users must determine
whether the CA is sufficiently trustworthy for their applications.  The

basic trust rests in the certification policies and security mechanisms es-
tablished for the infrastructure.¥  User Affiliation.  To have a CA certify a public key, a user must
provide a unique name in addition to the public key that is to be certified.
That name usually contains the userÕs organizational affiliation.  It is
possible, however, that some private citizens may wish to have their keys
certified independently of any organization.  Therefore, provisions for

certifying private citizens must also be made.¥  Privacy of UserÕs Identity.  Some users may wish to remain anony-
mous but still register with a CA. This may require the establishment of
certification agencies that would register users requesting nondisclosure
of their identification information.  Alternatively, policy choices in differ-

ent segments of the infrastructure could include or exclude anonymous
certificates.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.452APPENDIX H¥  Multiple Certificates.  In some instances a user may have several
certificates, each issued by a different CA. This situation may occur if a
user belongs to more than one organization and needs a certificate from
each organization or if a user has a certificate as an employee and another
certificate as a residential user.  If the naming convention includes a user
Õsorganizational affiliation in the personÕs unique name, then a user canhave several unique names with a different certificate associated with
each.  Multiple certificates assigned to a single unique name may be used

to simplify recovery from CA private-key compromise.  The infrastruc-

ture may have to handle multiple certificates for a single user.¥  Certification Revocation Lists.  When a private key is known to be
compromised or even when its compromise is only suspected, it must be
replaced immediately.  The certificate containing the associated public

key must be revoked immediately.  To inform users of such a compromised

key, thus allowing them to identify and reject possibly fraudulent transac-
tions, the certificate is placed on a Certificate Revocation List (CRL).  Plac-

ing a certificate on a CRL can also be used to announce the severing of a
relationship between a signer and the organization with which he or she
was once associated.¥  Services of CA.  CAs will need to certify public keys, create certifi-
cates, distribute certificates, generate CRLs, and distribute CRLs.  Distri-

bution of certificates and of CRLs will be accomplished by depositing
them with a generally available directory service.¥  Security and Legal Efficacy.  There is an inherent linkage between
security and legal efficacy.  The security of electronic messages and records

is not only a business requirement, but also an underlying legal require-
ment.  This linkage determines what is sufficiently secure by considering

what presumptions apply to the particular messageÕs or documentÕspurpose(s) and by considering the risks it confronts.  Legal requirements

should clarify reasonable security procedures without sacrificing needed
flexibility.  The question is not whether to have or not to have security, but
rather whether the implemented security mechanisms provide the degree
of security offered by the digital signatures.  The answer rests squarely on

the strength of the infrastructureÕs security mechanisms.¥  Liability.  The extent of the infrastructure
Õs liability must be foundedon a balance between the interest of the government, which would limit
it, and of the private sector, which would expand it.  Bringing suit must be

allowable, but there must also be a reasonable limit on the extent of the
infrastructureÕs liability.  Different levels of liability limitations can be
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REQUIREMENTS FOR A PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE453offered.  For a price, users might even be allowed to tailor the extent of
protection to their needs.In committee discussions, it was noted that the liability of those pro-viding authentication services is a critical issue.  When the provider of

authentication services is a business with which one is interacting for
other purposes (e.g., to buy something), that business will generally have
to accept liability for the interaction.  Thus, if it wrongly certifies that Joe

is Jack, and if Joe then steals money out of JackÕs account, the bank thatauthenticated the transaction is liable.  Likewise, third-party authentica-

tion services whose job it is to provide authentication services, but noth-
ing more, would or should accept liability.  Appropriate insurance re-

quirements and a legislative framework might be necessary to regulate
such services to ensure that they adhere to good practice.As an agency of the federal government, the infrastructure may beconsidered to have sovereign immunity.  Such immunity would imply

that the infrastructure and its managers cannot be sued for any losses
resulting from their actions or from their inaction.  Although such a status

may be attractive, it undermines the usefulness of the certification infra-
structure.  Without reasonable assurances that potential losses due to

malfeasance will be recoverable, a typical nongovernment user will shy
away from relying on the public-key infrastructure.  Any set of laws and

regulations must strike a balance between protection of the government
from excessive claims and blocking users from any chance of reimburse-
ment.  The following items summarize what may be considered reason-

able limits on the extent of liability to which a CA at any level and ulti-
mately the public-key infrastructure as a whole should be exposed.ÑA CA has no liability associated with the loss of the private keys ofits clients or with their generating weak private keys.ÑA key-generation facility has no liability associated with the com-promise of the private keys it produces unless it can be proved that the
documented policies and procedures relevant to the facility were not fol-
lowed during the key-generation process, resulting in a weak private key
that is more susceptible to compromise or the actual revelation of a pri-
vate key.ÑA key-generation facility has limited liability for the compromise ofa private key during the key distribution process if the documented poli-
cies and procedures relevant to the facility are not followed, resulting in
the revelation of the private key.ÑA CA has no liability associated with forged signatures unless theforgery results because the documented policies and procedures relevant
to the CA were not followed.ÑA CA has no liability associated with the wrongful binding of anindividualÕs identity with an associated public key unless it can be provedCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.454APPENDIX Hthat the documented policies and procedures for identification and au-thentication relevant to the CA were not followed.ÑA CA has limited liability for not revoking certificates accordingto its revocation policy.ÑA CA has limited liability for revoking a certificate for a reasonnot specified in its revocation policy.ÑA CA has limited liability if, despite its having followed pub-lished policies and procedures, a certificate in the database is modified or
deleted.¥  Liability Policy.  The extent of liability in the above situations is
conceivably a part of the policy under which a CA or key-generation
facility operates.  The policy must distinguish between direct liability on

the one hand and indirect and consequential damages on the other.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.455IIndustry-Specific Dimensionsof SecurityThe discussion in Chapter 1 is couched in terms that are relativelyindependent of the specific industry or business involved.  However,

industries differ in the specifics of the information they wish to protect
and in the operational questions they ask about security.  What follows is

an indicativeÑnot exhaustiveÑdiscussion of security issues as they re-
late to specific types of business.1  As discussed in Chapters 1 and 2,
cryptography is only part of an overall approach to dealing with informa-
tion security concerns; other factors also matter, such as administrative
and technical procedures for controlling access to sensitive information
and the trustworthiness of computer operating systems and applications
software, among others.  However, cryptographic technologies for au-

thentication, integrity, and confidentiality can strengthen an organi-
zationÕs overall information security in many ways.I.1  BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Banking and financial services are a good example of how communi-cations underpin the economy.  The flow of currency is largely digital.

Funds are transferred from account to account, from customer to vendor,1These industry-specific comments should not be read as being mutually exclusiveÑconcerns raised in the discussion of one industry may apply to other industries as well.Nevertheless, as presented, they do reflect concerns raised in discussions with representa-tives from the industries indicated.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.456APPENDIX Ifrom bank to bankÑall without the trade of tangible property.  As evi-
denced recently by the economic crisis in Mexico, the rapid transfer of
investments has the ability to make or break an economy, much as the
weather affected economies during the agricultural era.  Network-

enabled communications speed back-office (check and accounts) process-
ing, as well as mortgage and loan application processing, and indeed
interlink financial services, banking, and investment systems worldwide.
Wholly new securities (e.g., derivatives and indexes) and services are
created by the effective use of information communicated in a prompt
and timely fashion.Banks and financial service institutions have had a long history ofbeing a target of nefarious elements in society and thus traditionally have
been willing to spend money on security measures (e.g., safes).  This

history, coupled with their dependence on information technology and
their capability for networked communication among themselves, has led
to a relatively high degree of concern within the banking and financial
services sector for information security.  Given the importance of U.S.

banks in the world economy, large U.S. banks with multinational connec-
tions have needs for security that are quite stringent.In the matter of managing electronic transfers of financial transactioninformation, banks are much more concerned with authentication than
with data confidentiality, although concerns about the latter are growing
as the result of regulation and increasingly common business practices.
The reason is that false authentication may lead to an unrecoverable loss
of financial assets, an event regarded as more disastrous than the loss of
privacy.  Nonetheless, confidentiality is important as well,
2 not so much
because personal financial transactions need to be kept private (they do,
but the ramifications of divulging one personÕs transactions are generallylimited to that person), but because an adversaryÕs understanding of thedata flows within the banking system can itself lead to security break-
downs.  (For example, with access to confidential information, an adver-

sary may learn how to bypass certain access controls.)Banking is extensively international today and will become more soin the future.  Moreover, it has moved relatively quickly to bring custom-

ers (both individual and institutional) on line in an attempt to reduce
costs.  (For example, some banks with South American customers call the

United States and are answered in Spanish or Portuguese from process-
ing and customer service centers in Europe.)  For these reasons, the bank-

ing industry may represent the leading edge of information security needs2Note that banks, as part of a highly regulated industry, are relatively less concernedabout government monitoring of their financial transactions, since governments usuallyhave extensive authority to monitor any aspect of bank transactions in any event.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY457as far as other increasingly internationalized and electronically intercon-nected industries are concerned.  (Box I.1 describes some of the issues that

arise when retail customers might apply for a loan through an electronic
connection.)To date, losses due to electronic penetration of banking systems havebeen a relatively small fraction of the billions of dollars written off every
year in bad loans, unrepayable debt, and the like.3  Yet the fact that any
penetrations at all have occurred raise the specter of much larger losses
(billions rather than millions of dollars) as the result of similar but more
sophisticated actions. In addition, given the central importance of bank-
ing systems in the U.S. economy, a major disruption of service in these
systems could have cataclysmic consequences for the world economy.
Finally, customer and patron trust is at the heart of modern financial
systems around the world, and such trust, once lost, is difficult to regain.
Even small bank lossesÑif made widely knownÑcould adversely affectcustomer trust in banks, and the result could be a significant and wide-
spread loss of trust leading to enormous financial disruption and chaos.I.2  MEDICAL CONSULTATIONS AND HEALTH CARE
Many health care professionals believe that computer-based healthcare information systems, both within individual institutions and net-
worked over a national information infrastructure, hold great potential
for improving the quality of health care, reducing administrative and
clinical costs, increasing access (e.g., through telemedicine in rural areas),
and enabling data aggregation in support of research on the cost and
effectiveness of alternative treatments.  Computer storage, retrieval, and

network accessibility of health care information, such as medical records
and diagnostic test data, can sharply increase the efficiency with which
patients, care providers, and others (such as payers, researchers, and pub-
lic health officials) use that information.4At the same time, the digitization and transmission of such informa-tion raises concerns about the heightened vulnerability of personal infor-3For example, losses on credit cards issued to consumers are considerable, but the amountlost due to outright fraud is small compared to the debts that consumers are simply unableor unwilling to pay.4See, for example, Institute of Medicine, The Computer-Based Patient Record: An EssentialTechnology for Health Care, R.S. Dick and E.B. Steen (eds.), National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 1991; and Information Infrastructure Task Force Committee on Applications
and Technology, Putting the Information Infrastructure to Work, NIST Special Publication 857,U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology,Gaithersburg, Md., 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.458APPENDIX IBOX I.1Loans by NetworkLoans are an essential part of many large transactions such as the purchase ofhouses and automobiles.  Consumers provide information in loan applications which
the loan provider uses as the basis of a loan approval.  The formal approval commits

the lender to a specific interest rate and, when it is accepted, the user to a specificrepayment schedule.  Since only information is exchanged, an application in princi-
ple could be conducted entirely without face-to-face interaction between consumer
and provider, thus freeing the consumer to search the Internet for a provider offeringthe best rate.1In practice, however, the prospect of an Internet loan application raises manyquestions:¥  How is the personal data transmitted from the consumer to the provider to be
protected as it crosses the Internet?  In a face-to-face interaction, the information is
provided at the bank, and so there is no difficulty in protecting the information intransit.¥  How does the consumer know that she or he is sending the data to the proper
bank?  In a face-to-face interaction, the consumer can look at the sign on the front of
the building to verify that it is indeed a branch of First Citibank of Washington, for
example.  (People have been known to send faxes to the wrong fax number.)
¥  How does the consumer know that the institution with which he or she is
interacting is a trustworthy one (e.g., an organization chartered and regulated by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation)?  In a face-to-face interaction, the consumer
can look for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation seal at the front of the build-ing and have some confidence that the seal is indeed associated with the officesinside the building.¥  How do the parties ensure the integrity of a quoted interest rate?  In a face-to-
face interaction (or over the telephone), the parties can simultaneously view a pieceof paper on which a certain interest rate is typed.¥  In many loans, the interest rate is tied in an algorithmic fashion to a market
index of some sort (e.g., 3 percentage points over the prime interest rate).  In a face-to-face interaction, the lender can pull out a copy of the Wall Street Journal and point
to p. B4.¥  How does the lender verify the consumer
Õs identity?  In a face-to-face interac-tion, the consumer can present two photo identification cards and a recent tax return.¥  How can the lender as a commercial entity protect itself against cyber-anar-chists who believe that commercial transactions have no place on the Internet?  In
offering services to consumers on a face-to-face basis, police and security guardsprotect the bank against robbers.1Indeed, laws and regulations governing the granting of credit explicitly orimplicitly forbid the inclusion of factors such as race or ÒcharacterÓ that might
be ascertained in a face-to-face interaction.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY459mation in a profession with a tradition of maintaining the confidentialityof patient records that goes back to the days of Hippocrates.5  Indeed,
patient records may contain a great deal of sensitive information, photo-
graphs and other images, physiciansÕ observations, clinical tests, diag-
noses and treatments, life-style information (e.g., tobacco and alcohol use
and sexual behavior), family medical history, and genetic conditions.  If

divulged to parties outside the patient-caregiver relationship, such infor-
mation carries the risk of causing great personal anguish and/or financial
harm (e.g., loss of insurance, employment).Trends in health care today suggest an increasing aggregation of clini-cal, demographic, and utilization information into a single, patient-based
record6 or the development and deployment of systems for virtually link-
ing these sources of information.7  As a result, the number of access points
to the information contained in computer-based patient records is in-
creasing, thereby increasing its potential vulnerability.  In addition, as the

practice of telemedicine spreads, patient information and conferences
among geographically separated medical professionals treating a single
patient, which are transmitted across communications networks may be
susceptible to interception.Data aggregation presents another concern.  For example, databases
without personal identifiers may be assembled for purposes of research
or public health planning.8  Despite the fact that it may not be necessary to
know the identities of individual patients, it may be possible to cross-
index these databases with others (such as employment histories, insur-
ance records, and credit reports), enabling the determination of personal
identities.9  This might be done, for example, in order to generate a list ofnames and addresses for direct marketing of a pharmaceutical product or
a health service.   Box I.2 describes one cryptographic method that can be
used to reduce the risk of improper data aggregation.The risks of improper disclosure of patient information come from5It is interesting to note that for health care professionals, ÒconfidentialityÓ refers to keep-
ing certain information out of the hands of unauthorized individuals by whatever mecha-
nisms are necessary, whereas for information security providers the term refers to a specificproperty of encrypted information.6L.O. Gostin, J. Turek-Brezina, M. Powers, R. Kozloff, R. Faden, and D.D. Steinauer, ÒPri-vacy and Security of Personal Information in a New Health Care System,Ó Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, Volume 270(20), 1993, pp. 2487-2493.
7Personal communication, E.H. Shortliffe, Stanford University School of Medicine, No-vember 5, 1994.8Institute of Medicine, Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and Privacy, M.S.
Donaldson and K.N. Lohr (eds.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1994.9E. Meux, ÒEncrypting Personal Identifiers,Ó Health Services Research, Volume 29(2), 1994,pp. 247-256.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.460APPENDIX IBOX I.2Preventing the Unauthorized Aggregation ofHealth Care InformationUse of the Social Security Number as a de facto universal identifier gives rise toconcerns on the part of privacy advocates regarding the unauthorized aggregation of
data about individuals collected from many different institutions that have been indi-vidually authorized to release specific data.  Peter Szolovits and Isaac Kohane have
proposed a mechanism based on public-key cryptography that would generate a
unique identifier tied to the individual and a specific institution under which thatindividualÕs information could be stored by that institution.  With such a mechanism
in place, a positive user action would be required to create an identifier, and the
individual would gain control over the parties who could aggregate personal databecause he or she could refuse to create an identifier for any given institution re-questing particular data.In essence, the scheme relies on the individualÕs performing a public-key digitalsignature on the institutionÕs name.  The result of this operation is a piece of data,
usable as an identifier, that only the individual could have created, but that anyone
can verify the individual has created.  More specifically, the individual 
ÒdecryptsÓthe plaintext that gives the name of the institution using his or her private key.  Only
the individual could have created the result, because only the individual knows the
private key.  However, anyone can encrypt the identifier using the individualÕs pub-lic key.  If the result of this encryption is the name of the institution, it can be known
with confidence that indeed the individual generated the identifier.Of course, policy would be needed to support this mechanism as well.  For
example, it might be necessary to conduct random data audits of various institutionsthat would check to see if a given institution was indeed properly authorized by theindividual to receive given data.SOURCE: P. Szolovits and I. Kohane, ÒAgainst Universal Health-care Identifi-ers,Ó Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, Volume 1,1994, pp. 316-319.two sources: disclosure through actions taken by unauthorized ÒoutsideÓparties (e.g., eavesdroppers, hackers, visitors wandering through a hospi-
tal unchallenged, individuals posing over the telephone as physicians
and convincing medical personnel to divulge sensitive information or
grant remote access to an information system) or disclosure through ac-
tions taken by authorized ÒinsideÓ parties who abuse their authorization
(e.g., a hospital staff member snooping out of curiosity into the records of
relatives, friends, or celebrities or a medical records clerk motivated by
financial, political, or other concerns who gives or sells lists of women
with appointments for abortions to an antiabortion political group.10)10Personal communication, E.H. Shortliffe, Stanford University School of Medicine, No-vember 5, 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY461Health care organizations tend to be much more concerned about theÒinsiderÓ than the 
ÒoutsiderÓ threat.  Information systems for health care
organizations are no longer freestanding Òislands of informationÓ; in-stead, because they are increasingly networked beyond their walls, the
number of ÒinsideÓ authorized users is expanding to include other pri-
mary and specialty health care providers, health insurers, employers or
purchasers, government agencies, and the patient or consumer.A final category of concern related to health care information securityis the need to ensure the integrity and the authenticity of data associated
with a patient.  Thus, computer-based patient records must be secure

against improper alteration or deletion of data (data integrity) and known
with high confidence to be associated with the particular individual with
whom they are claimed to be associated (data and user authenticity).This categorization of risks suggests that, within health care organiza-tions, the need for authentication of users and access controls (for both
insiders and outsiders) may well be more important than encryption for
confidentiality (in the information security sense of the term).  The reason

is that good authentication and access controls enable to a very high
degree the creation of audit trails that can help document who has ac-
cessed what information and for what reason.  However, the need for

interorganizational transmission of data is encouraging many health care
administrators to re-evaluate their strategic risk analysis and consider
cryptography for data confidentiality.Some informal discussions with health care leaders reveal that secu-rity issues are generally delegated to their chief information officers and
are not a standing top-priority item in their overall strategic planning.
However, many of the countryÕs foremost health care organizations con-tinuously conduct risk analysis and generally have decided that serving
the needs of authorized patient caregivers for rapid access to clinical in-
formation is their paramount priority.  Any technical or policy approach

to implementing cryptography for confidentiality will always be mea-
sured against this patient care priority.I.3  MANUFACTURING
Large manufacturing companies are increasingly multinational.  For
example, General Motors (GM), the worldÕs largest full-line vehicle manu-facturer of cars, trucks, and automotive systems, has units worldwide
that support all dimensions of its production.  Its divisions range from

those that build mechanical subsystems and components for automobiles
and electronic systems for automotive electronics, telecommunications,
and space and defense electronics to those that provide financing andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.462APPENDIX Iinsurance for dealers and end customers.  GM has about 600,000 employ-
ees in 170 countries worldwide.Manufacturers are placing more emphasis on product variety.11  Varia-
tion inevitably increases costs (e.g., each variant requires considerable engi-
neering; thus, the engineering costs per variant rise).  To amortize these

fixed costs, manufacturers necessarily seek larger markets for these vari-
ants, and the result is often a global market.  For example, a market for a

certain product in a particular foreign nation may exist, and a variant of a
product originally intended for a U.S. market with local content added in
that foreign nation may prove quite successful.  To manage sales globally,

companies may well need to establish company offices in foreign countries
that remain in frequent communication with company headquarters in the
United States.Manufacturing operations must be managed globally as well.  For
example, a problem in a manufacturing plant in Brazil may require an
engineering change order to be generated at an engineering design center
in Germany and synchronized with tooling supplied by Japan and parts
manufactured in Mexico.  A second incentive for global operations is that

labor costs are often lower abroad as well, for both white-collar and blue-
collar workers.The network of vendors and suppliers that serve large manufacturingoperations is also global.  The day is long since gone when it makes

economic sense for a manufacturer to take responsibility for fabricating
every component under its own direct controlÑoutsourcing such fabrica-tion is often much more efficient.  In some cases, foreign suppliers of parts

are used because foreign purchase of parts is an additional incentive for a
foreign nation to buy the finished U.S. product.  However, to obtain the

right mix of price, quality, volume, and timeliness, manufacturers in-
creasingly search globally for subcontractors, and these subcontractors
must be integrated into the manufacturerÕs information network.  At the
same time, it may not be desirable for subcontractors to share the same
level of access as the primary company, especially if these subcontractors
are competitors.  Unauthorized disclosure of information between such

parties constitutes a threat by endangering and presenting a risk to im-
portant communications links between the company and the customers
and suppliers (reducing business trust).  The same is true for manufactur-

ers and customers:  a manufacturer of capital-intensive products may

well wish to share product information with potential customers.  Yet

since potential customers may be competitors among themselves (e.g., an
airplane manufacturer may have several airlines among its customers)11For more discussion, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council, Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research Agenda, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY463and information regarding customer-desired product configurations mayhave competitive significance, the manufacturer has an important require-
ment to keep information about one customer private to that customer.The information flows associated with such activities are enormouslyvaluable to manufacturing firms.  These flows contain sensitive and pro-

prietary information related to:¥  Product design and research and development;
¥  Marketing, sales, and bidding;
¥  Plant operations, capabilities, and efficiencies;
¥  Costs and prices of parts or services being purchased and products
being sold;¥  Strategic plans;
¥  Profits and losses;
¥  Orders to and from suppliers;
¥  Product readiness and repair; and
¥  Product problems and incident investigations.
These information flows need not necessarily be electronic; manycompanies still use people on airplanes with briefcases locked to their
wrists.  In electronic form, however, they can be transmitted instantly via

electronic mail, telephone, fax, and videoconference, and action can be
taken on a much shorter time scale.  Specialized communications infra-

structures can make all the difference in the worldÑone manufacturerreported that before a specialized network was installed, engineers in the
United States were cutting large engineering drawings into 8 1Ú2  11 sheets
and faxing them to their counterparts in another country.At the same time, the compromise of communications can be signifi-cant in manufacturing.  Theft of product design data can result in the loss

of competitive advantage in products; if the products in question have
military significance, such data may well be classified and the compro-
mise of data may lead to a national security threat to the United States.
Premature release of financial information can affect stock prices.  Knowl-

edge of specific problems in a given plant can give competitors unwar-
ranted leverage.  Unauthorized changes to engineering orders can result

in chaos on the assembly line or in operational disaster.  Destruction or

alteration of key data by insiders or outsiders could be as significant as
physical sabotage, and subtle changes to digital designs or software may
be undetectable for an indefinite time with possible consequences such as
product recall.I.4  THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY
The petroleum industry is inherently international; a typical multina-tional oil company may operate in dozens of nations.  Moreover, the scale
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.464APPENDIX Iof oil exploration and production requires substantial collaborative ef-forts, even among potential competitors.  Thus, this industry highlights

the need for protecting sensitive proprietary information that must be
shared worldwide, potentially across telecommunication networks.  Sen-
sitive information of particular significance to the petroleum industry
includes the following:¥  Personnel information.  Top executives of large multinational oil
companies are often placed at substantial physical risk by threats of kid-
napping, extortion, and other criminal activity.  Thus, the whereabouts of

such individuals are often confidential.¥  Personal information.  Midlevel employees who work and live in
politically unstable areas are often concerned about maintaining their
personal safety.  Since they may engage routinely in communications

between home and office that could disclose their whereabouts, compro-
mise of these communications could subject them to personal attack.¥  Seismic and other data indicating the whereabouts of oil and natural gasunderground.  Such data are particularly sensitive because the competitive
advantage of a given oil company may well be in the data it has been able
to collect on a given field.  The use of such data, coupled with advanced

computing capabilities, has saved hundreds of millions of dollars by help-
ing drillers to avoid ÒdryÓ wells.
12¥  Information related to bidding.  Oil companies often bid for rights to
drill or to explore in certain locations, and premature disclosure or disclo-
sure to inappropriate parties of such information could seriously compro-
mise bidding negotiations.¥  Conferences among technical experts.  With worldwide operations, it
may be necessary, for example, for experts at a potential drilling site to
consult with experts located halfway around the world to make a rea-
soned decision about drilling.  These experts display the same seismic

data on their computer screens (data that is confidential as described
above), but the in-house expertise needed to interpret such data (as ex-
pressed in their communications) can be an additional competitive ad-
vantage that cannot be compromised.A significant amplifier of the information security threat relevant toU.S. multinational oil companies is the fact that the oil companies of other
nations are often state owned and operated.  The close integration be-

tween such foreign oil companies and their governments, combined with12Written testimony of Jack L. Brock to the Subcommittee on Science, Technology andSpace of the Senate Commerce Committee, March 5, 1991, p. 4.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY465the large economic stakes involved, raises significant concerns in U.S. oilcompanies that all of the resources of those foreign governments may be
brought to bear against them, including foreign intelligence services.I.5  THE PHARMACEUTICAL AND CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES
The pharmaceutical and chemical industries are also global, sinceforeign nations often possess both the intellectual expertise and the natu-
ral resources needed to be successful in these industries.13  The critical
dimensions of these industries in which information must be protected
involve not products per se but rather other areas:¥  The scientific and technical expertise that allows companies to conceptu-alize new molecules or adapt previously known molecules to new functionality.Research and development of new drugs and chemicals is the lifeblood of
these industries, and information or data in which the creativity of their
chemists is reflected is critical.¥  The regime of intellectual property protection.  Intellectual property
rights are one primary mechanism on which the pharmaceutical and
chemical industries depend to protect their large investments in research
and development.  However, intellectual property rights are generally

granted to the parties that are first with a discovery or invention.14  Thus,
the speed with which discoveries can be made or a patent application
filed becomes a parameter of critical importance; nonrepudiable (i.e., irre-
futable) proof of the integrity of data from clinical trials and of the dates
of patentable discoveries can be useful to strengthen patent claims.  In

addition, given the public nature of much of the science underlying these
discoveries, small intellectual advances that save time may be the only
advantage that a company has in the race to be first.  Premature disclo-

sure of information associated with the protection of intellectual property
rights can lead to patent challenges or even loss of protection and thus
may be extraordinarily damaging.¥  The processes by which drugs and chemicals are manufactured.  In gen-
eral, drugs and chemicals are at the end of a long processing chain in
which raw materials are transformed into the desired substances.  Even
13For example, in August 1995, Upjohn announced a merger with a Swedish competitor(Pharmacia AB) that would result in the ninth-largest drug company in the world, with
34,500 employees worldwide.  See Associated Press, 
ÒUpjohn, Rival Drug Firm PlanMerger,Ó Washington Post, August 21, 1995, p. A6.14In some regimes, ÒfirstÓ means first to discover or invent.  In others, first means first to
file for patent protection.  For purposes of this discussion, the distinction is irrelevant.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.466APPENDIX Ismall process improvements that reduce the volume of raw materialsnecessary, problems of quality control, or the dangers or complexity of
the overall manufacturing process can be reflected in large savings of
time and money. Such improvements may be protected by intellectual
property rights, but enforcement may be difficult if it is not known that a
competitor is using a stolen process improvement.  In other instances

(e.g., safety), widespread publicity of information taken out of context
may cause a company many public relations difficulties.I.6  THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY
The product of the entertainment industry is information, informa-tion that is increasingly migrating to digital form.  The dominant concern

of the entertainment industry is how to protect digitized music, movies,
games, and the like from unauthorized mass distribution without proper
payment of royalties and fees.  A secondary, though still important, con-

cern is how the integrity of such products can be ensured.  For example,

an unprotected digitized movie could be altered unmaliciously (with the
intent of enhancing its appeal, e.g., by colorizing an original black-and-
white movie) or maliciously (e.g., by changing a scene for purposes of
embarrassing the producing company).I.7  GOVERNMENT
The U.S. government is, and will continue to be, a major user ofcryptography, both for internal purposes and in its exchanges with citi-
zens.  As more and more government services are implemented using

electronic methods, it becomes increasingly important to identify and
authenticate individuals and to verify the accuracy of data.  To the extent
that people wish to use electronic means to communicate personal infor-
mation to the government, the need to maintain confidentiality also in-
creases.  Cryptography supports all of these goals in an electronic world.

Several of the many examples of how cryptography will be used in the
federal government are described here.The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is responsible for collecting thetaxes that fuel all government programs.  Every year, citizens and corpo-

rations transmit financial data to the IRS and interact with the agency to
resolve any problems. The agency processes approximately 100 million
individual tax returns and more than 1 billion supporting documents
(e.g., W-2 forms, 1099 forms) annually.  The primary goal of the IRS
Õs TaxSystems Modernization (TSM) effort is to facilitate this process by in-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC DIMENSIONS OF SECURITY467creasing its use of electronic processing and electronic interchange ofinformation.15The TSM effort will allow the IRS to process 100% of all tax returndata on line and will significantly increase the amounts of data that are
submitted electronically.  It is this latter capability that requires the use of

cryptography, primarily in the form of digital signatures, to ensure that
tax returns are submitted in a proper manner.  Currently, the IRS is re-

quired to store the handwritten signature of the person(s) for each and
every tax return, including those submitted electronically.  The use of

digital signatures will allow the IRS to eliminate handwritten signatures
without loss of authentication, which will streamline the data-gathering
process. The IRS will be supporting the Digital Signature Standard, as
well as other signature standards that become de facto commercial stan-
dards.16  While most electronic filing of income tax returns is currently
carried out by authorized tax preparers, the IRS is working on creating a
secure system using cryptography that would enable taxpayers to file
directly from their home computers.Similar to the IRS, the Social Security Administration (SSA) also col-lects data from citizens and corporations on a regular basis. Furthermore,
the SSA is responsible for disbursing funds for old-age and survivorsÕinsurance, disability insurance, and supplemental security income pro-
grams.  The effective and efficient management of these programs in-

creasingly relies on automated data processing and electronic exchanges
among the SSA, citizens, and corporations. The agency is also involved in
the deployment of digital signatures to streamline its operations.  Digital

signatures will allow citizens with home computers to check the status of
their benefits 24 hours a day, rather than waiting for a telephone service
representative to provide the needed information. Without digital signa-
tures, such a service cannot be provided electronically because of con-
cerns about protecting the security of the private information involved in
such an exchange.The wide-scale government use of cryptography will require an ex-tensive infrastructure for maintaining public keys for all citizens, corpora-
tions, and organizations.  The Security Infrastructure Program Manage-

ment Office at the General Services Administration is planning pilot15Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Reviewof the Tax Systems Modernization of the Internal Revenue Service, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C., 1992; and CSTB,  Continued Review of the Tax Systems Modernization of theInternal Revenue Service, 1994.16ÒIRS, SSA to Let Public Try Digital Signatures,Ó Government Computer News, November13, 1995, p. 1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.468APPENDIX Iprojects to test the use of cryptography in electronic communicationsbetween agencies and citizens. Agencies such as SSA, IRS, and the De-
partment of Education will participate. Citizens participating in the pilot
tests will use a personal computer or government kiosk and the Internet
to access Social Security information, file income tax forms, orÑin timeÑapply for a student loan.In the pilot studies, the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) will be responsiblefor issuing the digital signatures that will identify users through the use
of tokens. It will develop an infrastructure for assigning and maintaining
the critical ÒcertificatesÓ that are needed for proper authentication.
17 Many
believe that the USPS is a natural candidate for such a responsibility
because of its vast network of postal offices and operations that are aimed
specifically at providing individual and business services. Furthermore,
the USPS is a ÒtrustedÓ organization that has the backing of legislation toperform its duties, as well as a mature oversight framework.In addition to the citizen-to-government interactions described above,there is a complete spectrum of cryptographic methods used throughout
the government for internal communication and processing purposes.
The Treasury Department has long used cryptographic methods for the
authentication, integrity, and confidentiality of financial transactions.  The

Department of Energy has also been a long-time user and developer of
cryptographic methods, which are employed to safeguard nuclear control
systems, among other things.  A number of nondefense agencies have

begun to adopt Fortezza PCMCIA cards (described in Chapter 5), includ-
ing the Departments of Commerce, Justice, Energy, State, and Treasury,
as well as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the IRS,
and the Coast Guard.  The broad-based use of this system among civilian

agencies is as yet uncertain.18The effort to make the federal government more efficient often increases
the need for and difficulty of protecting copyrighted, private, and propri-
etary information.  For example, improving federal services to citizens by

providing them electronically requires more sharing of information and
resources among agencies and between federal agencies and state or local
agencies. Increased sharing of information requires interagency coordina-
tion of privacy and security policies to ensure uniformly adequate protec-
tion.  During a time of tight federal budgets, information security managers

in federal agencies increasingly must compete for resources and support to
implement the needed safeguards properly. Agencies must look for the
least expensive way to ensure security, and the cost of some encryption
systems currently is prohibitive for some civilian agencies.17Government Computer News, November 13, 1995.18ÒFortezza Faces Uncertain Future,Ó Federal Computer Week, November 13, 1995, p. 12.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.469JExamples of Risks Posed byUnprotected Information
The following cases in which commercial, national security, and othersensitive information was compromised illustrate the variety and serious-
ness of threats to personal assets and privacy, business interests, and
public well-being, among others. No claim is made that cryptography
alone could have prevented these violations, but in the instances cited,
cryptography might have had some role in protecting information against
misappropriation and misuse.  As discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, crypto-

graphic technologies are part of an overall strategy to reduce information
vulnerability.J.1  RISKS ADDRESSED BY CRYPTOGRAPHY FOR
AUTHENTICATION¥  A pair of reporters wrote a controversial book about the hacking
activities of a particular group.  They subsequently found that their tele-

phone had been Òcall forwardedÓ without their permission to another
location where callers were greeted with obscenities, and that their Inter-
net mailboxes had been filled with junk e-mail.1  Cryptography for au-
thentication might have reduced the likelihood that the hackers would be
able to penetrate the telephone switch servicing the reportersÕ homes.¥  Secret documents belonging to General Motors (GM) containing
1Philip Elmer-Dewitt, ÒTerror on the Internet,Ó Time, December 12, 1994, p. 73.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.470APPENDIX Jinformation about a new GM vehicle to be sold in Europe and a top-secretexperimental car were seized at an apartment used by a former GM ex-
ecutive who had since joined Volkswagen.2 Cryptography for authentica-
tion that created an audit trail might have helped to identify the former
executive sooner.¥  Insiders at the First National Bank of Chicago transferred $70 mil-
lion in bogus transactions out of client accounts.  One transaction

exceeded permissible limits, but the insiders managed to intercept the
telephone request for manual authorization.3  Cryptography for authenti-
cation might have helped to deny access of the insiders to the telephone
request for authorization.¥  A Dutch bank employee made two bogus computer-based trans-
fers to a Swiss account, for $8.4 million and $6.7 million, in 1987.  Each

transfer required the password of two different people for authorization;
however, the employee knew someone elseÕs password as well as hisown.4  Cryptography for authentication might have hindered the ability
of a single individual to pretend that he was the second employee.¥  The First Interstate Bank of California received a bogus request to
transfer $70 million over the automated clearinghouse network.  The re-

quest came via computer tape, accompanied by phony authorization
forms, and was detected and canceled only because it overdrew the deb-
ited account.
5  Cryptography for authentication might have demonstrated
that the authorization was invalid.¥  Forty-five Los Angeles police officers were cited from 1989 to 1992for using department computers to run background checks for personal
reasons.6 Cryptography for authentication might have been part of an
audit trail that would have reduced the likelihood of abusing the
departmentÕs computer system.J.2  RISKS ADDRESSED BY CRYPTOGRAPHY FOR
CONFIDENTIALITY¥  According to unclassified sources, a foreign intelligence service
conducted signal intelligence (SIGINT) operations against a major U.S.
airplane manufacturer, intercepting telemetry data transmitted from an
airplane under development during a particular set of flight tests and a2See Frank Swoboda and Rick Atkinson, ÒLopez Said to Order GM Papers; VolkswagenDenies Receiving Documents,Ó Washington Post, July 23, 1993.3See Peter G. Neumann, 
Computer-Related Risks, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995, p.166.4Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p. 168.5Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p. 167.6Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p. 184.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF RISKS POSED BY UNPROTECTED INFORMATION471video teleconference held among company engineers located at varioussites.7  Encryption of the telemetry data and the video conference might
have kept sensitive information away from the foreign intelligence ser-
vice.¥  A bounty of $80,000 was reportedly posted on the Internet in 1994
for a notebook computer belonging to any Fortune 100 executive.8  En-
cryption of the files on the laptop might have helped to keep sensitive
information confidential).¥  A Green Bay Packer football player was overheard calling a male
escort service and making explicit requests.9  A 23-minute conversation
allegedly between Princess Diana and a man who called her Òmy darlingSquidgeÓ was taped by a retired bank manager in Oxford and transcribed
in The Sun.10  The transcript of that conversation has now been circulatedwidely.  Encryption of these communications would have prevented the

disclosure of the information in question.¥  In one instance relayed to the committee, a large multinational
manufacturer dispatched a salesperson to engage in negotiations with a
foreign nation.  A laptop computer that carried a great deal of sensitive

information relevant to those negotiations was seized by the border au-
thorities and returned to the salesperson three days later.  As the negotia-

tions proceeded, it became clear to the salesperson that his opposites had
all of the information carried on his laptop.  In another instance, a major

multinational company with customer support offices in China experi-
enced a break-in in which Chinese nationals apparently copied paper
documents and unencrypted computer files.  Encryption of the stored

files might have reduced the likelihood that the data contained therein
would have been compromised.J.3  RISKS ADDRESSED BY CRYPTOGRAPHY FOR BOTH
AUTHENTICATION AND CONFIDENTIALITYIn the following instances, both authentication and confidentialitymight have had a useful role to play.  Authentication could have been

useful to keep intruders out of the computer systems in question, while
confidentiality could have helped frustrate their attempt to view or obtain7Peter Schweizer, Friendly Spies, Atlantic Monthly Press, New York, 1993, pp. 122-124.8Dan Costa, ÒNot-So-Soft Security,Ó Mobile Office, August 1995, p. 75.9John Flinn, San Francisco Examiner, November 1, 1992; see also Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p. 186.10Flinn, San Francisco Examiner, 1992; see also Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p.186.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.472APPENDIX Jplaintext of information stored on those systems.  However, in any indi-
vidual example, it is not known if cryptographic authentication or en-
cryption was or was not a part of the computer systems or networks that
were penetrated.¥  A reporter for 
Newsweek who wrote an article on malicious hacking
activities was subjected to an electronic bulletin board trial and pro-
nounced guilty.  Subsequently, someone accessed a TRW credit database

to obtain and post the reporterÕs credit card numbers.  As a result, $1,100
in merchandise was charged to him, and his home computer was crashed
remotely via his unlisted telephone number.11¥  An employee of Disney World gained illegal access to Disney
computer systems in 1994, reading confidential data files on employees
and deleting information from the systems.12¥  A major multinational chemical manufacturer headquartered in
the United States has deployed an on-line videotext system that contains
considerable amounts of proprietary information about processes used
by that company.  This manufacturer has disconnected one of its plants,

located in the Far East, from the videotext network because of evidence
that the government of the nation in which the plant is located is both
willing and able to tap into this network to obtain valuable information
that could be passed on to the manufacturerÕs foreign competitors.¥  The domestic security service of a major Western European nationfound information belonging to a major multinational manufacturer head-
quartered in the United States in the private homes of individuals with no
connection to the manufacturer.  This information was found marked for
sale to a competitor of the manufacturer in question and was apparently
obtained through the computer hacking efforts of these individuals.J.4  RISKS ADDRESED BY CRYPTOGRAPHY FOR
DATA INTEGRITY¥  A convicted forger serving a 33-year term was released from jail
after a forged fax had been received ordering his release.  A legitimate fax

had been altered to bear his name.13  Cryptography to ensure data integ-
rity might have helped to detect the forgery.11Neumann, Computer-Related Risks, 1995, p. 137.12Richard Burnett, ÒMore Hackers Speak in Code; Rise in Peeping Toms Alarms CentralFlorida Businesses,Ó The Orlando Sentinel, July 4, 1994, p. 10.13See ÒFraudulent Fax Gets Forger Freed,Ó San Francisco Chronicle, December 18, 1991,p. A3.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF RISKS POSED BY UNPROTECTED INFORMATION473¥  A prison inmate gained access to the on-line prison information
system and managed to alter his release date.  The alteration was detected

by a suspicious deputy comparing the on-line entry with manual records,
after the inmate had bragged about how he was going to get out early.14Cryptography to ensure data integrity might have helped to detect the
alteration of the files.14San Jose Mercury News, December 14, 1984.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.474APPENDIX K474KCryptographic ApplicationsProgramming Interfaces
Modern software systems are built using various techniques that pro-vide flexibility and reliability.  One of the most important techniques

centers on the use of an applications programming interface.An applications programming interface (API) is a well-defined boun-dary between two system components that isolates a specific process or
set of services.  For example, it is quite common now for an application to

interact with an electronic mail (e-mail) server through an e-mail API,
such as MAPI (Microsoft), VIM (Lotus), or AOCE (Apple), to name a few.
In such cases, the API defines a set of services that allow an application to
retrieve or submit mail messages from or to the mail server.  APIs can be

implemented by using hardware, software, or some combination.  Fur-

thermore, software APIs can be implemented by using dynamically linked
libraries, statically linked libraries, remote procedure calls, or any combi-
nation.APIs have evolved as the result of both technical and business pres-sures.  Technically, software developers have moved increasingly to Òopen,Ó

client-server systems.  An open system is one in which interoperable prod-
ucts from different vendors are used to provide the functionality required
by the users.  Such systems depend heavily on commercial standards and

APIs are often used to support those standards.  For example, e-mail ex-

change using the X.400 standard is now supported by the CMC API.  An

API allows multiple vendors to develop interoperable products, even
though individual product versions are continually changing.Although APIs are used to support open standards, a large number ofCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CRYPTOGRAPHIC APPLICATIONS PROGRAMMING INTERFACES475proprietary APIs are also used by vendors to safeguard their technicalinvestments.  Even within these closed environments, APIs provide a

major technical and business benefit for those vendors licensed to de-
velop products using that API.  For example, Novell was one of the first

network operating system vendors to make extensive use of an API to
support a wide range of add-on products.  Under its approach, a

ÒnetwareÓ loadable module (NLM) can be developed by a third-party
developer and incorporated into an operational system by the user.  The

use of a proprietary API allows vendors to maintain the quality of third
party products, to provide a basis for the development of niche products,
and to maintain a competitive advantage.  In Novell
Õs case, the develop-ment of NLMs for major database products has boosted its sales in that
competitive server market.Perhaps the most common API today is MicrosoftÕs object linking andembedding (OLE) software technology, which provides general-purpose
sockets for modules that can undertake many different functions.  For

example, an OLE socket can provide the user with the capability to insert
a module for file encryption or for file compression.  Thus, although it

might be possible to use government regulations to prevent the wide-
spread use of sockets for encryption, it would be difficult to dampen the
spread of a general-purpose socket that has many uses.  OLE interfaces

could plausibly support some level of encryption capability; however,
since OLE interfaces are not specifically designed for security, they may
have weaknesses that render them unsuitable for security-specific appli-
cations.A cryptographic applications programming interface (CAPI) is anAPI specifically designed to support the introduction of cryptographic
functions into products.  It is not necessary to actually provide the crypto-

graphic functions when the system is initially sold.  Users would then be

able to incorporate the cryptographic add-ons of their choice.  Techni-

cally, a CAPI would provide an interface to a set of cryptographic ser-
vices; it would usually include authentication, digital signature genera-
tion, random number generation, and stream or block mode encryption.
Although there are some technical problems specific to CAPIs, most nota-
bly those associated with ensuring the integrity of the security processing,
they exhibit, for the most part, the same advantages as any other API.
That is, there are strong technical and business reasons for incorporating
a CAPI into open systems.CAPIs would enable applications developers to take for granted theexistence of cryptographic functionality and not have to provide for such
functionality themselves.  Moreover, by separating the cryptography from

the baseline product, major system vendors will be able to make changesCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.476APPENDIX Kto the baseline product driven by market considerations without waitingfor an export license review that would be necessary for a product with
built-in cryptographic functionality.Cryptographic APIs are likely to have a profound effect on the rapid-ity with which cryptography will diffuse into various information tech-
nology applications.  If implemented properly (not a trivial task), they can

enhance the security of stored data and communications.  When effective

CAPI technologies are embedded into the operating systems upon which
IT applications build, the result will likely be encrypted files and commu-
nications galore.  Operating systems will be shipped with default crypto-
graphic modules that are active Òout of the box,Ó and users will have the
option of replacing default modules with more capable modules pro-
cured from other vendors.The notion of a CAPI is not new.  However, in general, export licenses
for products incorporating CAPIs have been denied, even though such
products, with no cryptographic capabilities built into them, have no cryp-
tographic functionality and are therefore not specifically included in Cat-
egory XIII of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (see Appendix
N).  The reason for such denial has been that strong cryptographic capa-

bilities could be deployed on a vast scale if U.S. vendors exported applica-
tions supporting a common CAPI and a foreign vendor marketed (or
some party made available over the Internet) an add-on module with
strong cryptography, which foreign users could then plug into the base-
line U.S. product.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.477LOther Looming Issues Related toCryptography PolicyL.1  DIGITAL CASH
1National economies are based on money.  The most basic form of
money is cash.  Coins, originally made of valuable metals, had intrinsic

value and came to be more or less universally acceptable.  Paper money

(bills) came to substitute for coins as the value of transactions increased
and it became physically impractical to carry ever-larger volumes of coins.
However, paper money was originally backed by stores of precious met-
als (gold and silver).  In 1971, the United States abandoned its last effec-

tive link to the gold standard, and paper moneyÑwith no intrinsic valueÑ
came to represent value that was backed by the integrity and solvency of
the (increasingly international) banking system.  Other mediums of ex-

change have come to supplement cash, including paper checks written by
consumers; bank-to-bank financial interactions that are electronically
mediated; nonretail business transactions conducted through electronic
data interchange among customers, vendors, and suppliers; and credit
and debit cards used to make retail purchases.Today, interest in so-called digital cash is increasing.  Digital cash is
similar to paper cash in the sense that neither the paper on which paper1This section draws heavily on Cross Industry Working Team, Electronic Cash, Tokens, andPayments in the National Information Infrastructure, Corporation for National Research Initia-tives, 1895 Preston White Drive, Suite 100, Reston, Va., 1994; available on-line at
info-xiwt@cnri.reston.va.us.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.478APPENDIX LBOX  L.1
Characteristics of Digital Cash Tokens¥  Monetary value.  Electronic tokens must have a monetary value; they must
represent either cash (currency), a bank-authorized credit, or a bank-certified elec-tronic check.¥  Exchangeability.  Electronic tokens must be exchangeable as payment for
other electronic tokens, paper cash, goods or services, lines of credit, deposits inbanking accounts, bank notes or obligations, electronic benefits transfers, and the
like.¥  Storability and retrievability.  Electronic tokens must be able to be stored and
retrieved.  Remote storage and retrieval (e.g., from a telephone or personal commu-

nications device) would allow users to exchange electronic tokens (e.g., withdrawfrom and deposit into banking accounts) from home or office or while traveling.  The
tokens could be stored in any appropriate electronic device that might serve as an
electronic Òwallet.Ó¥  Tamper-resistance.  Electronic tokens should be tamper-proof and be difficult
to copy or forge.  This characteristic prevents or detects duplication and double

spending. Counterfeiting poses a particular problem, since a counterfeiter may, innetwork applications, be anywhere in the world and consequently be difficult tocatch without appropriate international agreements.  Detection is essential to deter-

mine whether preventive measures are working.SOURCE: Adapted from Cross Industry Working Team, Electronic Cash, To-kens, and Payments in the National Information Infrastructure, Corporation forNational Research Initiatives, Reston, Va., 1994.money is printed nor the string of bits that represents digital cash hasintrinsic value; value is conferred on a piece of paper or a particular string
of bits if, and only if, an institution is willing to accept responsibility for
them.  The basic characteristics of digital cash are described in Box L.1.
Public interest in digital cash is driven largely by pressures for elec-tronic commerce.  For example, cash is usually the medium of choice in

conducting low-value transactions; present mechanisms for conducting
transactions at a distance make economic sense only when the value is
relatively high (the average credit card transaction is several tens of dol-
lars).  In addition, these mechanisms generally require a preexisting ar-

rangement between vendors and credit card companies: completely spon-
taneous transactions between parties without such arrangements are not
possible with credit cards as they are with cash.  Instant settlement when
conducting financial transactions at a distance and reducing the cost of
managing physical cash are still other advantages.Both cryptography and information technology, including computerCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER LOOMING ISSUES RELATED TO CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY479hardware and software, underlie the feasibility of digital cash.  Strong
cryptographic technologies and secure network architectures are neces-
sary to give users of a digital cash system confidence in its security and
integrity, while the exponentially improving price-performance ratio of
computer hardware is needed for the extensive computation required for
strong cryptography in a mobile environment.  Moreover, important ad-

vances in making electronics tamper-proofÑanother feature needed toensure confidenceÑmay be in the hands of any number of users.  Box L.2
describes the properties that a digital cash system must have.Digital cash raises many basic questions.  For example, if electronic
cash is legal tender, who should be authorized to issue it and how should
the public be assured that a particular issuing authority is legitimate?
How does a digital U.S. dollar affect the U.S. position in the world economy?

How will the money supply be controlled or even measured with digital cashBOX L.2Essential Properties of a Digital Cash SystemIt is widely accepted that a digital cash system must have the following proper-ties:¥  Authentication.  Users must be assured that digital cash tokens cannot be
easily forged or altered and that, if they are altered, evidence of this tampering willbe apparent immediately.¥  Nonrefutable.  Users must also be able to verify that exchanges have taken
place between the intended parties, despite any complications that may result from
delivery of services over long periods of time, interruptions in service, or differencesin billing and collection policies of various service providers.  (
ÒNonrepudiableÓ is
the term used in traditional computer and network security work.)¥  Accessible and reliable.  Users must find the exchange process to be acces-
sible, easy to effect, quick, and available when necessary, regardless of componentfailures in other parts of the system.¥  Private.  Users must be assured that knowledge of transactions will be confi-
dential within the limits of policy decisions made about features of the overall sys-tem.  Privacy must be maintained against unauthorized parties.
¥  Protected.  Users must be assured that they cannot be easily duped or swin-
dled, or be falsely implicated in a fraudulent transaction.  Users must be protected
against eavesdroppers, impostors, and counterfeiters.  For many types of transac-

tions, trusted third-party agents will be needed to serve this purpose.All of these features depend on cryptography and secure hardware in varyingdegrees.SOURCE: Cross Industry Working Team, Electronic Cash, Tokens, and Pay-ments in the National Information Infrastructure, Corporation for National Re-search Initiatives, Reston, Va., 1994.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.480APPENDIX Lin circulation?  Apart from such questions, digital cash also raises policy
issues that are part of cryptography policy writ large.  Based 
largely on the
reference in footnote 1, the discussion below sketches some of the main is-
sues.L.1.1  Anonymity and Criminal Activity
The technology of digital cash will support essentially any degree ofanonymity desired.  Digital cash can be designed so that it is as closely

associated with the user as electronic funds transfer is today (i.e., highly
nonanonymous) or in a way that disassociates it entirely from the user
(i.e., more anonymous than physical cash is today).  Intermediate levels of

anonymity are technically possible as well: for example, transactions could
be anonymous except when a court order or warrant compelled disclo-
sure of the identities of parties involved in a transaction.  Furthermore,

the various partiesÑpayer, payee, and bankÑcould be identified or not,depending on policy choices.Many privacy advocates support digital cash because such a systemcan provide high levels of anonymity for electronic transactions compa-
rable to the anonymity of face-to-face transactions made with physical
cash.  Such anonymity is not generally possible for other types of elec-

tronic payment vehicles.  On the other hand, anonymous perpetrators of

crimes cannot be identified and apprehended.  To the extent that digital

cash facilitates the commission of anonymous crimes, it raises important
social issues.  Box L.3 describes what might be considered a 
ÒperfectcrimeÓ possible with anonymous digital cash.  Fraud, embezzlement, and
transportation of stolen property and information products are other
crimes of direct concern.  Highly anonymous digital cash may also facili-

tate money laundering, a key element of many different types of criminal
activity.  Law enforcement officials consider financial audit trails an es-

sential crime-fighting tool; a digital cash system designed to support the
highest levels of anonymity may put such tools at risk.The important policy issue for digital cash is the extent to which theanonymity possible with physical cash in face-to-face transactions should
also be associated with electronic transactions.  Note that the question of

the appropriate degree of anonymity for a digital cash system replays to a
considerable degree the debate over the conditions, if any, under which law
enforcement officials should have access to encrypted communications.L.1.2  Public Trust
Public confidence in the monetary system is a prerequisite for itssuccess.  Most members of the public have sufficient confidence in the
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER LOOMING ISSUES RELATED TO CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY481BOX L.3A Perfect Crime Using Digital CashAnonymous digital cash provides the user with anonymity and untraceability,attributes that could be used, in theory, to commit a Òperfect crimeÓÑthat is, a crimein which the financial trail is untraceable and therefore useless in identifying and
capturing the criminal.A famous kidnapping case in Tokyo in the early 1970s serves to illustrate theconcept.  A man opened a bank account under the false name Kobayashi and ob-

tained a credit card drawing on the account.  He kidnapped the baby of a famous
actor and demanded that a 5 million yen ransom be deposited in the account.  The
police monitored automated teller machines (ATMs) drawing on KobayashiÕs bank,and when Kobayashi later tried to withdraw the ransom money using his card, theyarrested him.KobayashiÕs use of a physical token, the credit card, unambiguously linked himto the account.  Anonymous digital cash presents the opportunity to eliminate this
link.  Creation of anonymous cash involves a set of calculations performed in turn by
the user who requests the cash and a bank.  The user
Õs calculations involve a blind-ing factor, chosen and known only by him or her.  These procedures yield digital
cash that the merchant and bank can verify is valid when it is presented for a pur-chase, while simultaneously making it impossible to trace the cash to the user who
originally requested it from the bank.Ordinarily, the procedures by which digital cash is created occur in a real-timetransaction between the userÕs and the bankÕs computers.  However, a criminal such
as the kidnapper Kobayashi could choose a set of blinding factors, perform the sub-sequent calculations, and mail the results to the bank along with the ransom de-mand.  Kobayashi could insist that the bank perform its portion of the calculations
and publish the results in a newspaper.  He could then complete the procedures on
his own computer.  This would give Kobayashi valid, untraceable cash, without the

need for any direct link to the bank (such as a visit to an ATM or a dial-in computerconnection) that could reveal him to waiting authorities.SOURCE: Adapted from Sebastiaan von Solms and David Naccache, ÒOn BlindSignatures and Perfect Crimes,Ó Building in Big Brother, Lance J. Hoffman(ed.), Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995, pp. 449-452.exchange of physical cash and checks and of credit or debit cards to makethe system work.  However, the logic underlying these mediums of ex-

change is straightforward by comparison to the mathematics of digital
cash, which are quite complex; a public understanding of how digital
cash works may be essential to the success of any such system and to the
infrastructure needed to support it.A second major trust issue relates to the counterfeiting of digital cash.With paper money, the liability for a counterfeit bill belongs to the one
who last accepted it because that person could have taken steps to checkCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.482APPENDIX Lits legitimacy (e.g., check for a watermark) and thus may not disclaimliability by asserting that it was accepted in good faith.  No such protec-

tion is available with counterfeit digital cash.  An individual can rely only

upon the cryptographic protection built into the digital cash system.  A

forged digital bank note that gets into circulation has by definition broken
through that protection; thus, it is the bank that purportedly issued the
note that must hold the liability.L.1.3  Taxation
If a digital cash system is designed to support the highest levels ofanonymity so that financial transactions are effectively untraceable, the
collection of taxes may become problematic.  Most taxes bear some rela-

tionship to a financial quantity that must be determined, such as the
income collected in a year or the amount of a sales transaction.  When

money flows only between two parties, how will the government deter-
mine how much money has changed hands or even know that a transac-
tion has occurred at all?L.1.4  Cross-Border Movements of Funds
Governments find it desirable as an instrument of policy to be able totrack money flows across their borders.  Today, the 
Òcross-borderÓ move-
ment of funds does not really transfer cash.  Instead, messages direct ac-

tions in, for example, two banks in the United States and two banks in the
United Kingdom to complete a transaction involving dollars-to-pounds
conversion.  Moving cash outside national borders has effects on the

economy, and governments will have to come to terms with these effects.L.2  CRYPTOGRAPHY FOR PROTECTING
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTYMuch of the interest in a global information infrastructure comesfrom the prospect of transporting digitized information objects over com-
munications lines without the need for transport of physical matter.  At

the same time, concerns are raised about the fact that digital information
objects can be retransmitted in the same way by the receiving party.  Thus,

for example, the entertainment industry looks forward to the possibility
of large-scale distribution of its products electronically but is concerned
about how to ensure receipt of appropriate compensation for them.  Even

today, cable television vendors encrypt their transmissions domestically
for that very reason.  The software industry is concerned about the theft

that occurs when a person buys one copy of a software package andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OTHER LOOMING ISSUES RELATED TO CRYPTOGRAPHY POLICY483duplicates it for resale.  Thus, a global information infrastructure raises
many questions about how best to compensate authors and producers of
intellectual property for each use, as well as how to prevent piracy of
intellectual property.2One approach to protecting digital representations of intellectual prop-erty involves the use of cryptography to scramble a digital information
object.3  Without the appropriate decryption key, the encrypted object is
worthless.  The basic notion is that vendors can distribute large digital

objects in an encrypted form to users, who would then pay the vendor for
the decryption key.  Since the decryption key is in general much smaller

than the digital object, the cost of transmitting the decryption key is much
lower and, for example, could be performed over the telephone upon sub-

mission of a credit card number.The AdministrationÕs Working Group on Intellectual Property Rightsconcluded the following:Development of an optimal NII [national information infrastructure] andGII [global information infrastructure] requires strong security as well
as strong intellectual property rights.  Copyright owners will not use the
NII or GII unless they can be assured of strict security to protect againstpiracy.  Encryption technology is vital because it gives copyright owners

an additional degree of protection against misappropriation.4Using cryptography to protect intellectual property raises questionsrelated to the strength of algorithms used to encrypt and decrypt digital
objects.  Specifically, the use of weak cryptography to protect exported

digital objects could well result in considerable financial damage to the
original creators of intellectual property.5  If it proves reasonable to pro-
tect intellectual property through encryption, pressures may well grow to
allow stronger cryptography to be deployed worldwide so that creators
of intellectual property can market their products safely and without fear
of significant financial loss.2See Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF), Working Group on Intellectual Prop-erty Rights, Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastructure, U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office, Washington, D.C., 1995.3For example, see Carl Weinschenk, ÒCablevision to Test Anti-Theft System,Ó Cable World,February 6, 1995, p. 22.4IITF, Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastructure, 1995.5For example, an article in the Wall Street Journal reports that pirates of direct digital
satellite television broadcasts are able to obtain decoders that are capable of decryptingencrypted signals that are received, thus allowing these individuals to avoid the monthly
fee for authorized service.  See Jeffrey Trachtenberg and Mark Robichaux, 
ÒCrooks CrackDigital Codes of Satellite TV,Ó Wall Street Journal, January 12, 1996, p. B1.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.484APPENDIX LCryptography may also support the embedding of digital Òwater-marksÓ into specific pieces of intellectual property to facilitate tracing the
theft to an original copy.  Such a scheme would insert information that

would not affect the use of the object but could be subsequently identified
should ownership of that work be called into question.  For example, a

digital watermark might embed information into a digital representation
of a photograph in such a way that it did not affect the visual presentation
of the photograph; nevertheless, if the photograph were copied and dis-
tributed, all subsequent copies would have that hidden information in
them.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.485MFederal Information Processing
Standards
Agencies at all levels of government set regulatory standards for prod-ucts and processes in order to protect health, safety, and the environment.
They also produce specifications for public procurement of goods and
services.  The 
Federal Register regularly publishes requests for comments
on standards proposed by federal agencies.  Some of these are developed

by agencies, while others originate as voluntary standards set in the pri-
vate sector and are adopted by reference within the text of regulations
and specifications.In 1965 the Brooks Act gave responsibility for federal informationtechnology procurement standards to the National Bureau of Standards,
now the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).1  To
meet this requirement, NIST produces Federal Information Processing
Standards (FIPSs).  All federal agencies are encouraged to cite FIPSs in

their procurement specifications.NIST has traditionally relied on private sector standards-setting pro-cesses when developing FIPSs.2  Many standards-setting bodies follow
1Carl Cargill, Information Technology Standardization, Digital Press, Bedford, Mass., 1989,pp. 212-213.2Many standards related to information used in private industry are developed throughvoluntary consensus processes.  Among the most active information technology standards
developers are the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), a professionalsociety; the Information Technology Industry Coalition (ITIC), which administers informa-
tion processing standards development in Committee X3; and the Alliance for Telecommu-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.486APPENDIX Mconsensus standards development procedures promulgated by the Ameri-can National Standards Institute (ANSI).  These include open participa-

tion of volunteer technical experts in standards-writing committees; con-
sensus among committee members in support of any proposed standard;
and elements of administrative due process, such as opportunities for
comment and voting by affected parties.  These procedures increase the

likelihood of achieving a broad-based consensus and enhancing the ac-
ceptance of the resulting standard.3NIST personnel are frequent participants in consensus standards com-mittees, and FIPSs generally cite or draw on consensus and de facto in-
dustry standards.4  This practice is consistent with government-wide
policy; Office of Management and Budget Circular A-119 requires that all
federal agencies cite existing consensus standards in regulation and pro-
curement wherever possible, rather than develop government-uniquenications Industry Solutions (ATIS), coordinator of Committee T1 for telecommunicationstandards.  The American Banking Association sponsors Committee X9, which is currently

developing a cryptographic standard for interbank transactions based on the triple-DESalgorithm.  The Internet Engineering Task Force determines the protocols that are used (in
varying degrees of compliance) to communicate between Internet sites.Other private sector standards result from competition in the commercial marketplace.When one firmÕs product becomes so widespread that its specifications guide the decisionsof other market participants, those specifications become a de facto industry standard.
Firms may promote their technologies as de facto standards in pursuit of goals such asgaining economies of scale, protecting or increasing market share, and obtaining revenuesfrom licensing intellectual property, among others.  The IBM-compatible personal com-

puter architecture is an example of a de facto industry standard.  See Michael Hergert,
ÒTechnical Standards and Competition in the Microcomputer Industry,Ó in H. Landis Gabel(ed.), Product Standardization and Competitive Strategy, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.,Amsterdam, 1987.In recent years, some firms in the information technology industry have tried to estab-lish de facto standards by promoting them through industry consortia.  The Open Software
FoundationÕs efforts to set a de facto UNIX operating system standard are an example.  See
Carl Cargill and Martin Weiss, ÒConsortia in the Standards Development Process,Ó Journalof the American Society for Information Science, Volume 43(8), 1992, pp. 559-565.The decentralized nature of standard setting in the United States can be confusing andinefficient in specific circumstances.  A recent National Research Council study of stan-
dards and international trade in many industry sectors concluded, however, that the exist-
ence of multiple standard-setting processes generally serves the national interest well, forreasons that include flexibility in responding to changing technological and market forcesand competitive pressures placed on rival standards developers.  See National Research

Council, Standards, Conformity Assessment, and Trade, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., 1995, pp. 60-61.3Ross Cheit, Setting Safety Standards: Regulation in the Public and Private Sectors, Universityof California Press, Berkeley, 1990, p. 15.4Cargill, Information Technology Standardization, 1989, pp. 213-214.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING STANDARDS487standards.5  NIST
Õs participation also reflects its recognition of the factthat the standards it sets will be more likely to succeedÑin terms ofreducing procurement costs, raising quality, and influencing the direction
of information technology market developmentÑif they are supportedby private producers and users.6There is an additional benefit to government reliance on industrystandards that is especially relevant to information technology.  Recent

economic analysis and ample experience demonstrate that standards gov-
erning the interoperability of information technology products pose spe-
cial challenges.  Such standards control the ability of separate users, de-

vices, software, and services to work with each other.  Examples include

computer operating systems and cryptographic algorithms used for com-
munication or data exchange.Reliance on de facto industry standards may involve problems aswell.  For example, the establishment of a formal standard based on de

facto informal industry standards may freeze technology prematurely.
User commitments to the use of that standard and a hard-to-change infra-
structure can then restrict the development and deployment of new and
more useful technologies.  Moreover, a standard that is popular in the

marketplace may not necessarily be the most appropriate for all end-user
applications.One vexing problem with industry standards relates to the competi-tive nature of the marketplace.  The setting of a formal standard that has

the effect of favoring any individual company or set of companies could
be viewed as unfair and anticompetitive if it has the effect of suppressing
other, equally useful technologies.  Further problems arise if the payment

of royalties is necessary to use a particular formal standard, and many
standards-setting bodies do not adopt patented technology unless the
patent holders agree to certain terms with regard to licensing those who
wish to implement the standards.The issuance of a FIPS can have enormous significance to the privatesector as well, despite the face that the existence of a FIPS does not legally
compel a private party to adopt it.  One reason has already been statedÑ5Office of Management and Budget, Circular No. A-119, Revised, Federal Register, October26, 1993, p. 57644.  The Department of Defense, among others, has experienced dramatic
reductions in procurement costs by taking advantage of the economies of scale inherent inlarge-volume commercial production relative to production solely for the government mar-
ket.  Purchasing commercial products also reduces significant cost burdens on suppliers of
meeting separate commercial and military-unique standards.  For further discussion of
government use of private standards, see National Research Council, Standards, ConformityAssessment, and Trade, 1995, pp. 54-57.6Cargill, Information Technology Standardization, 1989, p. 213.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.488APPENDIX Mto the extent that a FIPS is based on existing private sector standards, itcodifies standards of existing practice with all of the benefits (and costs)
described above.  A second reason is that a FIPS is often taken as a gov-

ernment endorsement of the procedures, practices, and algorithms con-
tained therein and thus sets a de facto Òbest-practicesÓ standard for the
private sector.  A third reason is related to procurements that are FIPS-

compliant as discussed in Chapter 6.Products such as computers and communication devices that are in-tended to interoperate with other equipment are of little value if they are
based on a standard few others useÑthere is no one to communicatewith.  For this reason, interoperability standards often foster a sudden

acceleration in market share growthÑa bandwagon effectÑin which us-ers afraid of being left out rush to adopt a standard once it appears clear
that most other users will adopt that standard.  The flip side of this phe-

nomenon is the potential for significant delay in development of a market
prior to this takeoff point: users put off purchasing products and services
that might become ÒorphanedÓ in the future.  During a period in which
more than one competing standard exists, the entire marketÕs growth maybe adversely affected.  The failure of a consumer market for AM stereo

receivers, for example, was largely due to the lack of a dominant stan-
dard.7Competing standards developed in the private and public sectorscould be slowing the spread of cryptographic products and services.  The

two cryptography-related FIPSs most recently produced by NIST were
not consistent with existing de facto industry standards.  As discussed

previously, the Escrowed Encryption Standard was adopted as FIPS 185
despite the overwhelmingly negative response from private industry and
users to the public notice in the Federal Register.8  The Digital Signature
Standard was also adopted despite both negative public comments and
the apparent emergence of a de facto industry based on RSAÕs public-keyalgorithm.97For further discussion of the interactions between interoperability standards and devel-opment of markets for goods and services, see Stanley Besen and Joseph Farrell, ÒChoosingHow to Compete: Strategies and Tactics in Standardization,Ó Journal of Economic Perspec-tives, Volume 8(2), Spring 1994, pp. 1-15; and Joseph Farrell and Garth Saloner, ÒCompeti-tion, Compatibility and Standards,Ó Product Standardization and Competitive Strategy, H.Landis Gabel, ed. Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam, 1987.8Susan Landau et al.,  Codes, Keys, and Conflicts:  Issues in U.S. Crypto Policy
, Associationfor Computing Machinery Inc., New York, 1994, p. 48.9Landau et al., Codes, Keys, and Conflicts, 1994, pp. 41-43.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.489N.1 STATUTESN.1.1Wire and Electronic Communications Interception
and Interception of Oral Communications(U.S. Code, Title 18, Chapter 119)Sec. 2510.Definitions.
As used in this chapter:(1)Ôwire communicationÕ means any aural transfer made in whole or in
part through the use of facilities for the transmission of communications by theaid of wire, cable, or other like connection between the point of origin and the
point of reception (including the use of such connection in a switching station)furnished or operated by any person engaged in providing or operating suchfacilities for the transmission of interstate or foreign communications or commu-
nications affecting interstate or foreign commerce and such term includes anyelectronic storage of such communication;NLaws, Documents, and Regulations,Relevant to CryptographyNOTE:  The material presented in this appendix has been reprinted from electronic files
available on the Internet and is intended for use as a general reference, and not for legalresearch or other work requiring authenticated primary sources.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.490APPENDIX N(2)Ôoral communicationÕ means any oral communication uttered by a per-son exhibiting an expectation that such communication is not subject to intercep-tion under circumstances justifying such expectation, but such term does not
include any electronic communication;(3)ÔStateÕ means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territory or possession of the United
States;(4)ÔinterceptÕ means the aural or other acquisition of the contents of any
wire, electronic, or oral communication through the use of any electronic, me-chanical, or other device;(5)Ôelectronic, mechanical, or other deviceÕ means any device or apparatus
which can be used to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication otherthanÑ(a)any telephone or telegraph instrument, equipment or facility, or any compo-
nent thereof, (i) furnished to the subscriber or user by a provider of wire orelectronic communication service in the ordinary course of its business and being
used by the subscriber or user in the ordinary course of its business or furnishedby such subscriber or user for connection to the facilities of such service and usedin the ordinary course of its business; or (ii) being used by a provider of wire or
electronic communication service in the ordinary course of its business, or by an
investigative or law enforcement officer in the ordinary course of his duties;(b)a hearing aid or similar device being used to correct subnormal hearing to
not better than normal;(6)ÔpersonÕ means any employee, or agent of the United States or any State
or political subdivision thereof, and any individual, partnership, association, jointstock company, trust, or corporation;(7)ÔInvestigative or law enforcement officerÕ means any officer of the
United States or of a State or political subdivision thereof, who is empowered by
law to conduct investigations of or to make arrests for offenses enumerated in thischapter, and any attorney authorized by law to prosecute or participate in theprosecution of such offenses;(8)ÔcontentsÕ, when used with respect to any wire, oral, or electronic com-munication, includes any information concerning the substance, purport, or mean-ing of that communication;(9)ÔJudge of competent jurisdictionÕ means
Ñ(a)a judge of a United States district court or a United States court of appeals; and

(b)a judge of any court of general criminal jurisdiction of a State who is autho-
rized by a statute of that State to enter orders authorizing interceptions of wire, oral,or electronic communications;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS491(10)Ôcommunication common carrierÕ shall have the same meaning which is
given the term Ôcommon carrierÕ by section 153(h) of title 47 of the United States
Code;(11)Ôaggrieved personÕ means a person who was a party to any interceptedwire, oral, or electronic communication or a person against whom the interceptionwas directed;(12)Ôelectronic communicationÕ means any transfer of signs, signals, writ-
ing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in
part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photooptical system thataffects interstate or foreign commerce, but does not includeÑ(a)any wire or oral communication;

(b)any communication made through a tone-only paging device; or
(c)any communication from a tracking device (as defined in section 3117 of this
title);(13)ÔuserÕ means any person or entity who
Ñ(a)uses an electronic communication service; and
(b)is duly authorized by the provider of such service to engage in such use;
(14)Ôelectronic communications systemÕ means any wire, radio, electromag-
netic, photooptical or photoelectronic facilities for the transmission of electroniccommunications, and any computer facilities or related electronic equipment for
the electronic storage of such communications;(15)Ôelectronic communication serviceÕ means any service which provides
to users thereof the ability to send or receive wire or electronic communications;(16)Ôreadily accessible to the general publicÕ means, with respect to a radio
communication, that such communication is notÑ(a)scrambled or encrypted;

(b)transmitted using modulation techniques whose essential parameters have
been withheld from the public with the intention of preserving the privacy of suchcommunication;
(c)carried on a subcarrier or other signal subsidiary to a radio transmission;
(d)transmitted over a communication system provided by a common carrier,
unless the communication is a tone only paging system communication;
(e)transmitted on frequencies allocated under part 25, subpart D, E, or F of part
74, or part 94 of the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission, unless, inthe case of a communication transmitted on a frequency allocated under part 74
that is not exclusively allocated to broadcast auxiliary services, the communica-tion is a two-way voice communication by radio; or(f)an electronic communication;
(17)Ôelectronic storageÕ means
Ñ(a)any temporary, intermediate storage of a wire or electronic communication

incidental to the electronic transmission thereof; andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.492APPENDIX N(b)any storage of such communication by an electronic communication service
for purposes of backup protection of such communication; and(18)Ôaural transferÕ means a transfer containing the human voice at any
point between and including the point of origin and the point of reception.Sec. 2511.Interception and disclosure of wire, oral, or electronic communica-
tions prohibited.(1)Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter any person
whoÑ(a)intentionally intercepts, endeavors to intercept, or procures any other person
to intercept or endeavor to intercept, any wire, oral, or electronic communication;(b)intentionally uses, endeavors to use, or procures any other person to use or
endeavor to use any electronic, mechanical, or other device to intercept any oral
communication whenÑ(i)such device is affixed to, or otherwise transmits a signal through, a wire,
cable, or other like connection used in wire communication; or
(ii)such device transmits communications by radio, or interferes with the trans-
mission of such communication; or(iii)such person knows, or has reason to know, that such device or any compo-

nent thereof has been sent through the mail or transported in interstate or foreign
commerce; or(iv)such use or endeavor to use
(A)takes place on the premises of any business or other commercial establish-
ment the operations of which affect interstate or foreign commerce; or(B)obtains or is for the purpose of obtaining information relating to the opera-
tions of any business or other commercial establishment the operations of which
affect interstate or foreign commerce; or(v)such person acts in the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States; and(A)intentionally discloses, or endeavors to disclose, to any other person the
contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication, knowing or having rea-son to know that the information was obtained through the interception of a wire,
oral, or electronic communication in violation of this subsection; or(B)intentionally uses, or endeavors to use, the contents of any wire, oral, or
electronic communication, knowing or having reason to know that the informa-
tion was obtained through the interception of a wire, oral, or electronic communi-cation in violation of this subsection;shall be punished as provided in subsection (4) or shall be subject to suit asprovided in subsection (5).(2)(a)(i)It shall not be unlawful under this chapter for an operator of a
switchboard, or an officer, employee, or agent of a provider of wire or electronic
communication service, whose facilities are used in the transmission of a wire orelectronic communication, to intercept, disclose, or use that communication in theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS493normal course of his employment while engaged in any activity which is a neces-sary incident to the rendition of his service or to the protection of the rights orproperty of the provider of that service, except that a provider of wire communi-
cation service to the public shall not utilize service observing or random monitor-ing except for mechanical or service quality control checks.(ii)Notwithstanding any other law, providers of wire or electronic communica-

tion service, their officers, employees, and agents, landlords, custodians, or otherpersons, are authorized to provide information, facilities, or technical assistanceto persons authorized by law to intercept wire, oral, or electronic communications
or to conduct electronic surveillance, as defined in section 101 of the ForeignIntelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, if such provider, its officers, employees, oragents, landlord, custodian, or other specified person, has been provided withÑ(A)a court order directing such assistance signed by the authorizing judge, or
(B)a certification in writing by a person specified in section 2518(7) of this title
or the Attorney General of the United States that no warrant or court order is
required by law, that all statutory requirements have been met, and that thespecified assistance is required, setting forth the period of time during which theprovision of the information, facilities, or technical assistance is authorized and
specifying the information, facilities, or technical assistance required. No providerof wire or electronic communication service, officer, employee, or agent thereof,or landlord, custodian, or other specified person shall disclose the existence of any
interception or surveillance or the device used to accomplish the interception orsurveillance with respect to which the person has been furnished a court order orcertification under this chapter, except as may otherwise be required by legal
process and then only after prior notification to the Attorney General or to the
principal prosecuting attorney of a State or any political subdivision of a State, asmay be appropriate. Any such disclosure, shall render such person liable for thecivil damages provided for in section 2520. No cause of action shall lie in any court
against any provider of wire or electronic communication service, its officers,employees, or agents, landlord, custodian, or other specified person for providinginformation, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order
or certification under this chapter.(b)It shall not be unlawful under this chapter for an officer, employee, or agent
of the Federal Communications Commission, in the normal course of his employ-
ment and in discharge of the monitoring responsibilities exercised by the Com-mission in the enforcement of chapter 5 of title 47 of the United States Code, tointercept a wire or electronic communication, or oral communication transmitted
by radio, or to disclose or use the information thereby obtained.(c)It shall not be unlawful under this chapter for a person acting under color of
law to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication, where such person is a
party to the communication or one of the parties to the communication has givenprior consent to such interception.(d)It shall not be unlawful under this chapter for a person not acting under

color of law to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication where suchperson is a party to the communication or where one of the parties to the commu-nication has given prior consent to such interception unless such communicationCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.494APPENDIX Nis intercepted for the purpose of committing any criminal or tortious act in viola-tion of the Constitution or laws of the United States or of any State.(e)Notwithstanding any other provision of this title or section 705 or 706 of the

Communications Act of 1934, it shall not be unlawful for an officer, employee, oragent of the United States in the normal course of his official duty to conductelectronic surveillance, as defined in section 101 of the Foreign Intelligence Sur-
veillance Act of 1978, as authorized by that Act.(f)Nothing contained in this chapter or chapter 121, or section 705 of the Com-
munications Act of 1934, shall be deemed to affect the acquisition by the United
States Government of foreign intelligence information from international or for-eign communications, or foreign intelligence activities conducted in accordancewith otherwise applicable Federal law involving a foreign electronic communica-
tions system, utilizing a means other than electronic surveillance as defined insection 101 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, and procedures inthis chapter or chapter 121 and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978
shall be the exclusive means by which electronic surveillance, as defined in sec-tion 101 of such Act, and the interception of domestic wire and oral communica-tions may be conducted.
(g)It shall not be unlawful under this chapter or chapter 121 of this title for any
personÑ(i)to intercept or access an electronic communication made through an elec-

tronic communication system that is configured so that such electronic communi-cation is readily accessible to the general public;(ii)to intercept any radio communication which is transmitted
Ñ(I)by any station for the use of the general public, or that relates to ships,

aircraft, vehicles, or persons in distress;(II)by any governmental, law enforcement, civil defense, private land mobile,
or public safety communications system, including police and fire, readily acces-
sible to the general public;(III)by a station operating on an authorized frequency within the bands allo-
cated to the amateur, citizens band, or general mobile radio services; or
(IV)by any marine or aeronautical communications system;
(iii)to engage in any conduct which
Ñ(I)is prohibited by section 633 of the Communications Act of 1934; or

(II)is excepted from the application of section 705(a) of the Communications
Act of 1934 by section 705(b) of that Act;(iv)to intercept any wire or electronic communication the transmission of which

is causing harmful interference to any lawfully operating station or consumerelectronic equipment, to the extent necessary to identify the source of such inter-ference; or
(v)for other users of the same frequency to intercept any radio communication
made through a system that utilizes frequencies monitored by individuals en-gaged in the provision or the use of such system, if such communication is not
scrambled or encrypted.(h)It shall not be unlawful under this chapter
Ñ(i)to use a pen register or a trap and trace device (as those terms are defined for
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS495the purposes of chapter 206 (relating to pen registers and trap and trace devices)of this title); or(ii)for a provider of electronic communication service to record the fact that a

wire or electronic communication was initiated or completed in order to protectsuch provider, another provider furnishing service toward the completion of thewire or electronic communication, or a user of that service, from fraudulent, un-
lawful or abusive use of such service.(3)(a)Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection, a person or
entity providing an electronic communication service to the public shall not inten-tionally divulge the contents of any communication (other than one to such per-son or entity, or an agent thereof) while in transmission on that service to any
person or entity other than an addressee or intended recipient of such communi-cation or an agent of such addressee or intended recipient.(b)A person or entity providing electronic communication service to the public

may divulge the contents of any such communicationÑ(i)as otherwise authorized in section 2511(2)(a) or 2517 of this title;
(ii)with the lawful consent of the originator or any addressee or intended re-

cipient of such communication;(iii)to a person employed or authorized, or whose facilities are used, to forward
such communication to its destination; or(iv)which were inadvertently obtained by the service provider and which ap-
pear to pertain to the commission of a crime, if such divulgence is made to a lawenforcement agency.(4)(a)Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection or in subsec-
tion (5), whoever violates subsection (1) of this section shall be fined under thistitle or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
(b)If the offense is a first offense under paragraph (a) of this subsection and is
not for a tortious or illegal purpose or for purposes of direct or indirect commer-cial advantage or private commercial gain, and the wire or electronic communica-
tion with respect to which the offense under paragraph (a) is a radio communica-tion that is not scrambled, encrypted, or transmitted using modulation techniquesthe essential parameters of which have been withheld from the public with the
intention of preserving the privacy of such communication, then(i)if the communication is not the radio portion of a cellular telephone commu-
nication, a cordless telephone communication that is transmitted between the
cordless telephone handset and the base unit, a public land mobile radio servicecommunication or a paging service communication, and the conduct is not thatdescribed in subsection (5), the offender shall be fined under this title or impris-
oned not more than one year, or both; and(ii)if the communication is the radio portion of a cellular telephone communi-
cation, a cordless telephone communication that is transmitted between the cord-
less telephone handset and the base unit, a public land mobile radio service com-munication or a paging service communication, the offender shall be fined notmore than $500.
(c)Conduct otherwise an offense under this subsection that consists of or re-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.496APPENDIX Nlates to the interception of a satellite transmission that is not encrypted orscrambled and that is transmittedÑ(i)to a broadcasting station for purposes of retransmission to the general public; or
(ii)as an audio subcarrier intended for redistribution to facilities open to the
public, but not including data transmissions or telephone calls,is not an offense under this subsection unless the conduct is for the purposes ofdirect or indirect commercial advantage or private financial gain.(5)(a)(i)If the communication is
Ñ(A)a private satellite video communication that is not scrambled or encrypted
and the conduct in violation of this chapter is the private viewing of that commu-
nication and is not for a tortious or illegal purpose or for purposes of direct orindirect commercial advantage or private commercial gain; or(B)a radio communication that is transmitted on frequencies allocated under

subpart D of part 74 of the rules of the Federal Communications Commission thatis not scrambled or encrypted and the conduct in violation of this chapter is notfor a tortious or illegal purpose or for purposes of direct or indirect commercial
advantage or private commercial gain,then the person who engages in such conduct shall be subject to suit by theFederal Government in a court of competent jurisdiction.(ii)In an action under this subsection
Ñ(A)if the violation of this chapter is a first offense for the person under para-

graph (a) of subsection (4) and such person has not been found liable in a civilaction under section 2520 of this title, the Federal Government shall be entitled toappropriate injunctive relief; and
(B)if the violation of this chapter is a second or subsequent offense under
paragraph (a) of subsection (4) or such person has been found liable in any priorcivil action under section 2520, the person shall be subject to a mandatory $500
civil fine.(b)The court may use any means within its authority to enforce an injunction
issued under paragraph (ii)(A), and shall impose a civil fine of not less than $500
for each violation of such an injunction.Sec. 2512.Manufacture, distribution, possession, and advertising of wire, oral,
or electronic communication intercepting devices prohibited.(1)Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person
who intentionallyÑ(a)sends through the mail, or sends or carries in interstate or foreign com-
merce, any electronic, mechanical, or other device, knowing or having reason toknow that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of
the surreptitious interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications;(b)manufactures, assembles, possesses, or sells any electronic, mechanical, or
other device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such device
renders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception ofwire, oral, or electronic communications, and that such device or any componentCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS497thereof has been or will be sent through the mail or transported in interstate orforeign commerce; or(c)places in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any ad-

vertisement ofÑ(i)any electronic, mechanical, or other device knowing or having reason to
know that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of
the surreptitious interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications; or(ii)any other electronic, mechanical, or other device, where such advertisement
promotes the use of such device for the purpose of the surreptitious interception
of wire, oral, or electronic communications, knowing or having reason to knowthat such advertisement will be sent through the mail or transported in interstateor foreign commerce,shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, orboth.(2)It shall not be unlawful under this section for
Ñ(a)a provider of wire or electronic communication service or an officer, agent, or
employee of, or a person under contract with, such a provider, in the normal courseof the business of providing that wire or electronic communication service; or(b)an officer, agent, or employee of, or a person under contract with, the United

States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof, in the normal course of the activi-ties of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof,to send through the mail, send or carry in interstate or foreign commerce, ormanufacture, assemble, possess, or sell any electronic, mechanical, or other deviceknowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders it
primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of wire, oral, orelectronic communications.Sec. 2513. Confiscation of wire, oral, or electronic communication intercept-
ing devices.Any electronic, mechanical, or other device used, sent, carried, manufac-tured, assembled, possessed, sold, or advertised in violation of section 2511 or
section 2512 of this chapter may be seized and forfeited to the United States. Allprovisions of law relating to (1) the seizure, summary and judicial forfeiture, andcondemnation of vessels, vehicles, merchandise, and baggage for violations of the
customs laws contained in title 19 of the United States Code, (2) the disposition ofsuch vessels, vehicles, merchandise, and baggage or the proceeds from the salethereof, (3) the remission or mitigation of such forfeiture, (4) the compromise of
claims, and (5) the award of compensation to informers in respect of such forfei-tures, shall apply to seizures and forfeitures incurred, or alleged to have beenincurred, under the provisions of this section, insofar as applicable and not incon-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.498APPENDIX Nsistent with the provisions of this section; except that such duties as are imposedupon the collector of customs or any other person with respect to the seizure andforfeiture of vessels, vehicles, merchandise, and baggage under the provisions of
the customs laws contained in title 19 of the United States Code shall be per-formed with respect to seizure and forfeiture of electronic, mechanical, or otherintercepting devices under this section by such officers, agents, or other persons
as may be authorized or designated for that purpose by the Attorney General.Sec. 2514.Repealed.
Sec. 2515.Prohibition of use as evidence of intercepted wire or oral communi-
cations.Whenever any wire or oral communication has been intercepted, no part ofthe contents of such communication and no evidence derived therefrom may bereceived in evidence in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before anycourt, grand jury, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, legislative com-
mittee, or other authority of the United States, a State, or a political subdivisionthereof if the disclosure of that information would be in violation of this chapter.Sec. 2516.Authorization for interception of wire, oral, or electronic communi-
cations.(1)The Attorney General, Deputy Attorney General, Associate Attorney
General,1 or any Assistant Attorney General, any acting Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral, or any Deputy Assistant Attorney General or acting Deputy Assistant Attor-
ney General in the Criminal Division specially designated by the Attorney Gen-eral, may authorize an application to a Federal judge of competent jurisdiction for,and such judge may grant in conformity with section 2518 of this chapter an order
authorizing or approving the interception of wire or oral communications by theFederal Bureau of Investigation, or a Federal agency having responsibility for theinvestigation of the offense as to which the application is made, when such inter-
ception may provide or has provided evidence ofÑ(a)any offense punishable by death or by imprisonment for more than one year
under sections 2274 through 2277 of title 42 of the United States Code (relating to
the enforcement of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954), section 2284 of title 42 of theUnited States Code (relating to sabotage of nuclear facilities or fuel), or under thefollowing chapters of this title: chapter 37 (relating to espionage), chapter 105
(relating to sabotage), chapter 115 (relating to treason), chapter 102 (relating toriots), chapter 65 (relating to malicious mischief), chapter 111 (relating to destruc-tion of vessels), or chapter 81 (relating to piracy);1See 1984 Amendment note below.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS499(b)a violation of section 186 or section 501(c) of title 29, United States Code
(dealing with restrictions on payments and loans to labor organizations), or anyoffense which involves murder, kidnapping, robbery, or extortion, and which is
punishable under this title;(c)any offense which is punishable under the following sections of this title:
section 201 (bribery of public officials and witnesses), section 215 (relating to
bribery of bank officials), section 224 (bribery in sporting contests), subsection (d),(e), (f), (g), (h), or (i) of section 844 (unlawful use of explosives), section 1032(relating to concealment of assets), section 1084 (transmission of wagering infor-
mation), section 751 (relating to escape), section 1014 (relating to loans and creditapplications generally; renewals and discounts), sections 1503, 1512, and 1513(influencing or injuring an officer, juror, or witness generally), section 1510 (ob-
struction of criminal investigations), section 1511 (obstruction of State or local lawenforcement), section 1751 (Presidential and Presidential staff assassination, kid-naping, and assault), section 1951 (interference with commerce by threats or vio-
lence), section 1952 (interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid of rack-eteering enterprises), section 1958 (relating to use of interstate commerce facilitiesin the commission of murder for hire), section 1959 (relating to violent crimes in
aid of racketeering activity), section 1954 (offer, acceptance, or solicitation to influ-ence operations of employee benefit plan), section 1955 (prohibition of businessenterprises of gambling), section 1956 (laundering of monetary instruments), sec-
tion 1957 (relating to engaging in monetary transactions in property derived fromspecified unlawful activity), section 659 (theft from interstate shipment), section664 (embezzlement from pension and welfare funds), section 1343 (fraud by wire,
radio, or television), section 1344 (relating to bank fraud), sections 2251 and 2252
(sexual exploitation of children), sections 2312, 2313, 2314, and 2315 (interstatetransportation of stolen property), section 2321 (relating to trafficking in certainmotor vehicles or motor vehicle parts), section 1203 (relating to hostage taking),
section 1029 (relating to fraud and related activity in connection with access de-vices), section 3146 (relating to penalty for failure to appear), section 3521(b)(3)(relating to witness relocation and assistance), section 32 (relating to destruction
of aircraft or aircraft facilities), section 1963 (violations with respect to racketeerinfluenced and corrupt organizations), section 115 (relating to threatening or re-taliating against a Federal official), and section 1341 (relating to mail fraud), sec-
tion 351 (violations with respect to congressional, Cabinet, or Supreme Courtassassinations, kidnaping, and assault), section 831 (relating to prohibited trans-actions involving nuclear materials), section 33 (relating to destruction of motor
vehicles or motor vehicle facilities), section 175 (relating to biological weapons),or section 1992 (relating to wrecking trains);(d)any offense involving counterfeiting punishable under section 471, 472, or

473 of this title;(e)any offense involving fraud connected with a case under title 11 or the
manufacture, importation, receiving, concealment, buying, selling, or otherwise
dealing in narcotic drugs, marihuana, or other dangerous drugs, punishable un-der any law of the United States;(f)any offense including extortionate credit transactions under sections 892,

893, or 894 of this title;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.500APPENDIX N(g)a violation of section 5322 of title 31, United States Code (dealing with the
reporting of currency transactions);(h)any felony violation of sections 2511 and 2512 (relating to interception and

disclosure of certain communications and to certain intercepting devices) of this title;(i)any felony violation of chapter 71 (relating to obscenity) of this title;
(j)any violation of section 11(c)(2) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of

1968 (relating to destruction of a natural gas pipeline) or subsection (i) or (n) ofsection 902 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (relating to aircraft piracy);(k)any criminal violation of section 2778 of title 22 (relating to the Arms Export

Control Act);(l)the location of any fugitive from justice from an offense described in this
section; or2(m)any felony violation of sections 922 and 924 of title 18, United States Code
(relating to firearms);(n)any violation of section 5861 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating

to firearms); and3(o)any conspiracy to commit any offense described in any subparagraph of this

paragraph.(2)The principal prosecuting attorney of any State, or the principal pros-
ecuting attorney of any political subdivision thereof, if such attorney is authorized
by a statute of that State to make application to a State court judge of competentjurisdiction for an order authorizing or approving the interception of wire, oral, orelectronic communications, may apply to such judge for, and such judge may
grant in conformity with section 2518 of this chapter and with the applicable State
statute an order authorizing, or approving the interception of wire, oral, or elec-tronic communications by investigative or law enforcement officers having re-sponsibility for the investigation of the offense as to which the application is
made, when such interception may provide or has provided evidence of the com-mission of the offense of murder, kidnapping, gambling, robbery, bribery, extor-tion, or dealing in narcotic drugs, marihuana or other dangerous drugs, or other
crime dangerous to life, limb, or property, and punishable by imprisonment formore than one year, designated in any applicable State statute authorizing suchinterception, or any conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses.(3)Any attorney for the Government (as such term is defined for the pur-
poses of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure) may authorize an application to
a Federal judge of competent jurisdiction for, and such judge may grant, in con-formity with section 2518 of this title, an order authorizing or approving theinterception of electronic communications by an investigative or law enforcement
officer having responsibility for the investigation of the offense as to which theapplication is made, when such interception may provide or has provided evi-dence of any Federal felony.2So in original. The word ÔorÕ probably should not appear.
3So in original. Probably should be ÔorÕ.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS501Sec. 2517.Authorization for disclosure and use of intercepted wire, oral, or
electronic communications.(1)Any investigative or law enforcement officer who, by any means autho-
rized by this chapter, has obtained knowledge of the contents of any wire, oral, orelectronic communication, or evidence derived therefrom, may disclose such con-
tents to another investigative or law enforcement officer to the extent that suchdisclosure is appropriate to the proper performance of the official duties of theofficer making or receiving the disclosure.(2)Any investigative or law enforcement officer who, by any means autho-
rized by this chapter, has obtained knowledge of the contents of any wire, oral, or
electronic communication or evidence derived therefrom may use such contentsto the extent such use is appropriate to the proper performance of his officialduties.(3)Any person who has received, by any means authorized by this chap-
ter, any information concerning a wire, oral, or electronic communication, or
evidence derived therefrom intercepted in accordance with the provisions of thischapter may disclose the contents of that communication or such derivative evi-dence while giving testimony under oath or affirmation in any proceeding held
under the authority of the United States or of any State or political subdivisionthereof.(4)No otherwise privileged wire, oral, or electronic communication inter-
cepted in accordance with, or in violation of, the provisions of this chapter shalllose its privileged character.(5)When an investigative or law enforcement officer, while engaged in
intercepting wire, oral, or electronic communications in the manner authorizedherein, intercepts wire, oral, or electronic communications relating to offenses
other than those specified in the order of authorization or approval, the contentsthereof, and evidence derived therefrom, may be disclosed or used as provided insubsections (1) and (2) of this section. Such contents and any evidence derived
therefrom may be used under subsection (3) of this section when authorized orapproved by a judge of competent jurisdiction where such judge finds on subse-quent application that the contents were otherwise intercepted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Such application shall be made as soon as practi-cable.Sec. 2518.Procedure for interception of wire, oral, or electronic communica-
tions.(1)Each application for an order authorizing or approving the interception
of a wire, oral, or electronic communication under this chapter shall be made inwriting upon oath or affirmation to a judge of competent jurisdiction and shallCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.502APPENDIX Nstate the applicantÕs authority to make such application. Each application shallinclude the following information:(a)the identity of the investigative or law enforcement officer making the ap-

plication, and the officer authorizing the application;(b)a full and complete statement of the facts and circumstances relied upon by
the applicant, to justify his belief that an order should be issued, including (i)
details as to the particular offense that has been, is being, or is about to be commit-ted, (ii) except as provided in subsection (11), a particular description of the na-ture and location of the facilities from which or the place where the communica-
tion is to be intercepted, (iii) a particular description of the type of communicationssought to be intercepted, (iv) the identity of the person, if known, committing theoffense and whose communications are to be intercepted;
(c)a full and complete statement as to whether or not other investigative proce-
dures have been tried and failed or why they reasonably appear to be unlikely tosucceed if tried or to be too dangerous;
(d)a statement of the period of time for which the interception is required to be
maintained. If the nature of the investigation is such that the authorization forinterception should not automatically terminate when the described type of com-
munication has been first obtained, a particular description of facts establishingprobable cause to believe that additional communications of the same type willoccur thereafter;
(e)a full and complete statement of the facts concerning all previous applica-
tions known to the individual authorizing and making the application, made toany judge for authorization to intercept, or for approval of interceptions of, wire,
oral, or electronic communications involving any of the same persons, facilities or
places specified in the application, and the action taken by the judge on each suchapplication; and(f)where the application is for the extension of an order, a statement setting

forth the results thus far obtained from the interception, or a reasonable explana-tion of the failure to obtain such results.(2)The judge may require the applicant to furnish additional testimony or
documentary evidence in support of the application.(3)Upon such application the judge may enter an ex parte order, as re-
quested or as modified, authorizing or approving interception of wire, oral, orelectronic communications within the territorial jurisdiction of the court in which
the judge is sitting (and outside that jurisdiction but within the United States inthe case of a mobile interception device authorized by a Federal court within suchjurisdiction), if the judge determines on the basis of the facts submitted by the
applicant thatÑ(a)there is probable cause for belief that an individual is committing, has com-
mitted, or is about to commit a particular offense enumerated in section 2516 of
this chapter;(b)there is probable cause for belief that particular communications concerning
that offense will be obtained through such interception;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS503(c)normal investigative procedures have been tried and have failed or reason-
ably appear to be unlikely to succeed if tried or to be too dangerous;(d)except as provided in subsection (11), there is probable cause for belief that

the facilities from which, or the place where, the wire, oral, or electronic commu-nications are to be intercepted are being used, or are about to be used, in connec-tion with the commission of such offense, or are leased to, listed in the name of, or
commonly used by such person.(4)Each order authorizing or approving the interception of any wire, oral,
or electronic communication under this chapter shall specifyÑ(a)the identity of the person, if known, whose communications are to be inter-
cepted;
(b)the nature and location of the communications facilities as to which, or the
place where, authority to intercept is granted;(c)a particular description of the type of communication sought to be inter-

cepted, and a statement of the particular offense to which it relates;(d)the identity of the agency authorized to intercept the communications, and
of the person authorizing the application; and
(e)the period of time during which such interception is authorized, including a
statement as to whether or not the interception shall automatically terminatewhen the described communication has been first obtained. An order authorizing
the interception of a wire, oral, or electronic communication under this chaptershall, upon request of the applicant, direct that a provider of wire or electroniccommunication service, landlord, custodian or other person shall furnish the ap-
plicant forthwith all information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to
accomplish the interception unobtrusively and with a minimum of interferencewith the services that such service provider, landlord, custodian, or person isaccording the person whose communications are to be intercepted. Any provider
of wire or electronic communication service, landlord, custodian or other personfurnishing such facilities or technical assistance shall be compensated therefor bythe applicant for reasonable expenses incurred in providing such facilities or as-
sistance.Pursuant to section 2522 of this chapter, an order may also be issued to enforce theassistance capability and capacity requirements under the Communications As-sistance for Law Enforcement Act.(5)No order entered under this section may authorize or approve the in-
terception of any wire, oral, or electronic communication for any period longer
than is necessary to achieve the objective of the authorization, nor in any eventlonger than thirty days. Such thirty-day period begins on the earlier of the day onwhich the investigative or law enforcement officer first begins to conduct an
interception under the order or ten days after the order is entered. Extensions ofan order may be granted, but only upon application for an extension made inaccordance with subsection (1) of this section and the court making the findings
required by subsection (3) of this section. The period of extension shall be nolonger than the authorizing judge deems necessary to achieve the purposes forCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.504APPENDIX Nwhich it was granted and in no event for longer than thirty days. Every order andextension thereof shall contain a provision that the authorization to intercept shallbe executed as soon as practicable, shall be conducted in such a way as to mini-
mize the interception of communications not otherwise subject to interceptionunder this chapter, and must terminate upon attainment of the authorized objec-tive, or in any event in thirty days. In the event the intercepted communication is
in a code or foreign language, and an expert in that foreign language or code is notreasonably available during the interception period, minimization may be accom-plished as soon as practicable after such interception. An interception under this
chapter may be conducted in whole or in part by Government personnel, or by anindividual operating under a contract with the Government, acting under thesupervision of an investigative or law enforcement officer authorized to conduct
the interception.(6)Whenever an order authorizing interception is entered pursuant to this
chapter, the order may require reports to be made to the judge who issued theorder showing what progress has been made toward achievement of the autho-rized objective and the need for continued interception. Such reports shall be
made at such intervals as the judge may require.(7)Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any investigative
or law enforcement officer, specially designated by the Attorney General, theDeputy Attorney General, the Associate Attorney General, or by the principalprosecuting attorney of any State or subdivision thereof acting pursuant to a
statute of that State, who reasonably determines thatÑ(a)an emergency situation exists that involves
Ñ(i)immediate danger of death or serious physical injury to any person,
(ii)conspiratorial activities threatening the national security interest, or
(iii)conspiratorial activities characteristic of organized crime, that requires a
wire, oral, or electronic communication to be intercepted before an order autho-rizing such interception can, with due diligence, be obtained, and(b)there are grounds upon which an order could be entered under this chapter

to authorize such interception,may intercept such wire, oral, or electronic communication if an application for anorder approving the interception is made in accordance with this section within
forty-eight hours after the interception has occurred, or begins to occur. In theabsence of an order, such interception shall immediately terminate when the com-munication sought is obtained or when the application for the order is denied,
whichever is earlier. In the event such application for approval is denied, or in anyother case where the interception is terminated without an order having beenissued, the contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication intercepted
shall be treated as having been obtained in violation of this chapter, and an inven-tory shall be served as provided for in subsection (d) of this section on the personnamed in the application.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS505(8)(a)The contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication inter-
cepted by any means authorized by this chapter shall, if possible, be recorded ontape or wire or other comparable device. The recording of the contents of any
wire, oral, or electronic communication under this subsection shall be done insuch a way as will protect the recording from editing or other alterations. Imme-diately upon the expiration of the period of the order, or extensions thereof, such
recordings shall be made available to the judge issuing such order and sealedunder his directions. Custody of the recordings shall be wherever the judge or-ders. They shall not be destroyed except upon an order of the issuing or denying
judge and in any event shall be kept for ten years. Duplicate recordings may bemade for use or disclosure pursuant to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) ofsection 2517 of this chapter for investigations. The presence of the seal provided
for by this subsection, or a satisfactory explanation for the absence thereof, shallbe a prerequisite for the use or disclosure of the contents of any wire, oral, orelectronic communication or evidence derived therefrom under subsection (3) of
section 2517.(b)Applications made and orders granted under this chapter shall be sealed by
the judge. Custody of the applications and orders shall be wherever the judge
directs. Such applications and orders shall be disclosed only upon a showing ofgood cause before a judge of competent jurisdiction and shall not be destroyedexcept on order of the issuing or denying judge, and in any event shall be kept for
ten years.(c)Any violation of the provisions of this subsection may be punished as con-
tempt of the issuing or denying judge.
(d)Within a reasonable time but not later than ninety days after the filing of an

application for an order of approval under section 2518(7)(b) which is denied orthe termination of the period of an order or extensions thereof, the issuing ordenying judge shall cause to be served, on the persons named in the order or the
application, and such other parties to intercepted communications as the judgemay determine in his discretion that is in the interest of justice, an inventorywhich shall include notice ofÑ(1)the fact of the entry of the order or the application;
(2)the date of the entry and the period of authorized, approved or disapproved
interception, or the denial of the application; and(3)the fact that during the period wire, oral, or electronic communications were

or were not intercepted.The judge, upon the filing of a motion, may in his discretion make available tosuch person or his counsel for inspection such portions of the intercepted commu-nications, applications and orders as the judge determines to be in the interest of
justice. On an ex parte showing of good cause to a judge of competent jurisdictionthe serving of the inventory required by this subsection may be postponed.(9)The contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication intercepted
pursuant to this chapter or evidence derived therefrom shall not be received inevidence or otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in a
Federal or State court unless each party, not less than ten days before the trial,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.506APPENDIX Nhearing, or proceeding, has been furnished with a copy of the court order, andaccompanying application, under which the interception was authorized or ap-proved. This ten-day period may be waived by the judge if he finds that it was not
possible to furnish the party with the above information ten days before the trial,hearing, or proceeding and that the party will not be prejudiced by the delay inreceiving such information.(10)(a)Any aggrieved person in any trial, hearing, or proceeding in or be-
fore any court, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, or other authority of
the United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof, may move to suppressthe contents of any wire or oral communication intercepted pursuant to this chap-ter, or evidence derived therefrom, on the grounds thatÑ(i)the communication was unlawfully intercepted;
(ii)the order of authorization or approval under which it was intercepted is
insufficient on its face; or(iii)the interception was not made in conformity with the order of authorization
or approval.Such motion shall be made before the trial, hearing, or proceeding unless therewas no opportunity to make such motion or the person was not aware of thegrounds of the motion. If the motion is granted, the contents of the intercepted
wire or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, shall be treated ashaving been obtained in violation of this chapter. The judge, upon the filing ofsuch motion by the aggrieved person, may in his discretion make available to the
aggrieved person or his counsel for inspection such portions of the intercepted
communication or evidence derived therefrom as the judge determines to be inthe interests of justice.(b)In addition to any other right to appeal, the United States shall have the

right to appeal from an order granting a motion to suppress made under para-graph (a) of this subsection, or the denial of an application for an order of ap-proval, if the United States attorney shall certify to the judge or other official
granting such motion or denying such application that the appeal is not taken forpurposes of delay. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty days after the date theorder was entered and shall be diligently prosecuted.
(c)The remedies and sanctions described in this chapter with respect to the
interception of electronic communications are the only judicial remedies and sanc-
tions for nonconstitutional violations of this chapter involving such communica-
tions.(11)The requirements of subsections (1)(b)(ii) and (3)(d) of this section relat-
ing to the specification of the facilities from which, or the place where, the com-munication is to be intercepted do not apply ifÑ(a)in the case of an application with respect to the interception of an oral

communicationÑ(i)the application is by a Federal investigative or law enforcement officer and
is approved by the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, the AssociateCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS507Attorney General, an Assistant Attorney General, or an acting Assistant AttorneyGeneral;(ii)the application contains a full and complete statement as to why such speci-

fication is not practical and identifies the person committing the offense andwhose communications are to be intercepted; and(iii)the judge finds that such specification is not practical; and
(b)in the case of an application with respect to a wire or electronic communica-
tionÑ(i)the application is by a Federal investigative or law enforcement officer and

is approved by the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, the AssociateAttorney General, an Assistant Attorney General, or an acting Assistant AttorneyGeneral;
(ii)the application identifies the person believed to be committing the offense
and whose communications are to be intercepted and the applicant makes a show-ing of a purpose, on the part of that person, to thwart interception by changing
facilities; and(iii)the judge finds that such purpose has been adequately shown.
(12)An interception of a communication under an order with respect to
which the requirements of subsections (1)(b)(ii) and (3)(d) of this section do not
apply by reason of subsection (11) shall not begin until the facilities from which,
or the place where, the communication is to be intercepted is ascertained by theperson implementing the interception order. A provider of wire or electroniccommunications service that has received an order as provided for in subsection
(11)(b) may move the court to modify or quash the order on the ground that its
assistance with respect to the interception cannot be performed in a timely orreasonable fashion. The court, upon notice to the government, shall decide such amotion expeditiously.Sec. 2519.Reports concerning intercepted wire, oral, or electronic communica-
tions.(1)Within thirty days after the expiration of an order (or each extension
thereof) entered under section 2518, or the denial of an order approving an inter-ception, the issuing or denying judge shall report to the Administrative Office ofthe United States CourtsÑ(a)the fact that an order or extension was applied for;
(b)the kind of order or extension applied for (including whether or not the
order was an order with respect to which the requirements of sections 2518(1)(b)(ii)

and 2518(3)(d) of this title did not apply by reason of section 2518(11) of this title);(c)the fact that the order or extension was granted as applied for, was modi-
fied, or was denied;
(d)the period of interceptions authorized by the order, and the number and
duration of any extensions of the order;(e)the offense specified in the order or application, or extension of an order;
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.508APPENDIX N(f)the identity of the applying investigative or law enforcement officer and
agency making the application and the person authorizing the application; and(g)the nature of the facilities from which or the place where communications

were to be intercepted.(2)In January of each year the Attorney General, an Assistant Attorney
General specially designated by the Attorney General, or the principal prosecut-ing attorney of a State, or the principal prosecuting attorney for any politicalsubdivision of a State, shall report to the Administrative Office of the United
States CourtsÑ(a)the information required by paragraphs (a) through (g) of subsection (1) of
this section with respect to each application for an order or extension made dur-
ing the preceding calendar year;(b)a general description of the interceptions made under such order or exten-
sion, including (i) the approximate nature and frequency of incriminating com-
munications intercepted, (ii) the approximate nature and frequency of other com-munications intercepted, (iii) the approximate number of persons whosecommunications were intercepted, and (iv) the approximate nature, amount, and
cost of the manpower and other resources used in the interceptions;(c)the number of arrests resulting from interceptions made under such order
or extension, and the offenses for which arrests were made;
(d)the number of trials resulting from such interceptions;
(e)the number of motions to suppress made with respect to such interceptions,
and the number granted or denied;
(f)the number of convictions resulting from such interceptions and the of-

fenses for which the convictions were obtained and a general assessment of theimportance of the interceptions; and(g)the information required by paragraphs (b) through (f) of this subsection

with respect to orders or extensions obtained in a preceding calendar year.(3)In April of each year the Director of the Administrative Office of the
United States Courts shall transmit to the Congress a full and complete reportconcerning the number of applications for orders authorizing or approving theinterception of wire, oral, or electronic communications pursuant to this chapter
and the number of orders and extensions granted or denied pursuant to thischapter during the preceding calendar year. Such report shall include a summaryand analysis of the data required to be filed with the Administrative Office by
subsections (1) and (2) of this section. The Director of the Administrative Office ofthe United States Courts is authorized to issue binding regulations dealing withthe content and form of the reports required to be filed by subsections (1) and (2)
of this section.Sec. 2520.Recovery of civil damages authorized.
(a)In General.
ÑExcept as provided in section 2511(2)(a)(ii), any personwhose wire, oral, or electronic communication is intercepted, disclosed, or inten-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS509tionally used in violation of this chapter may in a civil action recover from theperson or entity which engaged in that violation such relief as may be appropri-ate.(b)Relief.
ÑIn an action under this section, appropriate relief includesÑ(1)such preliminary and other equitable or declaratory relief as may be appro-

priate;(2)damages under subsection (c) and punitive damages in appropriate cases;
and
(3)a reasonable attorney
Õs fee and other litigation costs reasonably incurred.(c)Computation of Damages.
Ñ(1) In an action under this section, if theconduct in violation of this chapter is the private viewing of a private satellitevideo communication that is not scrambled or encrypted or if the communicationis a radio communication that is transmitted on frequencies allocated under sub-
part D of part 74 of the rules of the Federal Communications Commission that isnot scrambled or encrypted and the conduct is not for a tortious or illegal purposeor for purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage or private commercial
gain, then the court shall assess damages as follows:(A)If the person who engaged in that conduct has not previously been enjoined
under section 2511(5) and has not been found liable in a prior civil action under
this section, the court shall assess the greater of the sum of actual damages suf-fered by the plaintiff, or statutory damages of not less than $50 and not more than$500.
(B)If, on one prior occasion, the person who engaged in that conduct has been

enjoined under section 2511(5) or has been found liable in a civil action under thissection, the court shall assess the greater of the sum of actual damages suffered bythe plaintiff, or statutory damages of not less than $100 and not more than $1000.
(2)In any other action under this section, the court may assess as damages
whichever is the greater ofÑ(A)the sum of the actual damages suffered by the plaintiff and any profits made
by the violator as a result of the violation; or(B)statutory damages of whichever is the greater of $100 a day for each day of
violation or $10,000.(d)Defense.
ÑA good faith reliance onÑ(1)a court warrant or order, a grand jury subpoena, a legislative authorization,
or a statutory authorization;
(2)a request of an investigative or law enforcement officer under section 2518(7)
of this title; or(3)a good faith determination that section 2511(3) of this title permitted the

conduct complained of;is a complete defense against any civil or criminal action brought under thischapter or any other law.(e)Limitation.
ÑA civil action under this section may not be commencedCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.510APPENDIX Nlater than two years after the date upon which the claimant first has a reasonableopportunity to discover the violation.Sec. 2521.Injunction against illegal interception.
Whenever it shall appear that any person is engaged or is about to engage inany act which constitutes or will constitute a felony violation of this chapter, theAttorney General may initiate a civil action in a district court of the United States
to enjoin such violation. The court shall proceed as soon as practicable to thehearing and determination of such an action, and may, at any time before finaldetermination, enter such a restraining order or prohibition, or take such other
action, as is warranted to prevent a continuing and substantial injury to the UnitedStates or to any person or class of persons for whose protection the action isbrought. A proceeding under this section is governed by the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, except that, if an indictment has been returned against the respondent,discovery is governed by the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.Sec. 2522.Enforcement of the Communications Assistance for Law Enforce-
ment Act.(a)Enforcement by Court Issuing Surveillance Order.
ÑIf a court authoriz-ing an interception under this chapter, a State statute, or the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.) or authorizing use of a pen regis-
ter or a trap and trace device under chapter 206 or a State statute finds that atelecommunications carrier has failed to comply with the requirements of theCommunications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act, the court may, in accor-
dance with section 108 of such Act, direct that the carrier comply forthwith andmay direct that a provider of support services to the carrier or the manufacturer ofthe carrierÕs transmission or switching equipment furnish forthwith modifica-tions necessary for the carrier to comply.(b)Enforcement Upon Application by Attorney General.
ÑThe AttorneyGeneral may, in a civil action in the appropriate United States district court,obtain an order, in accordance with section 108 of the Communications Assistancefor Law Enforcement Act, directing that a telecommunications carrier, a manufac-
turer of telecommunications transmission or switching equipment, or a providerof telecommunications support services comply with such Act.(c)Civil Penalty.
Ñ(1)In General.
ÑA court issuing an order under this section against a tele-communications carrier, a manufacturer of telecommunications transmission or
switching equipment, or a provider of telecommunications support services mayCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS511impose a civil penalty of up to $10,000 per day for each day in violation after theissuance of the order or after such future date as the court may specify.(2)Considerations.
ÑIn determining whether to impose a civil penalty and indetermining its amount, the court shall take into accountÑ(A)the nature, circumstances, and extent of the violation;
(B)the violator
Õs ability to pay, the violatorÕs good faith efforts to comply in atimely manner, any effect on the violatorÕs ability to continue to do business, thedegree of culpability, and the length of any delay in undertaking efforts to com-ply; and(C)such other matters as justice may require.
(d)Definitions.
ÑAs used in this section, the terms defined in section 102 ofthe Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act have the meaningsprovided, respectively, in such section.N.1.2Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
(U.S. Code, Title 50, Chapter 36)Sec. 1801.Definitions.
As used in this chapter:(a)ÔForeign powerÕ means
Ñ(1)a foreign government or any component thereof, whether or not recognized

by the United States;(2)a faction of a foreign nation or nations, not substantially composed of United
States persons;
(3)an entity that is openly acknowledged by a foreign government or govern-
ments to be directed and controlled by such foreign government or governments;(4)a group engaged in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor;

(5)a foreign-based political organization, not substantially composed of United
States persons; or(6)an entity that is directed and controlled by a foreign government or govern-

ments.(b)ÔAgent of a foreign powerÕ means
Ñ(1)any person other than a United States person, who
Ñ(A)acts in the United States as an officer or employee of a foreign power, or as
a member of a foreign power as defined in subsection (a)(4) of this section;
(B)acts for or on behalf of a foreign power which engages in clandestine intelli-
gence activities in the United States contrary to the interests of the United States,when the circumstances of such personÕs presence in the United States indicatethat such person may engage in such activities in the United States, or when suchperson knowingly aids or abets any person in the conduct of such activities orknowingly conspires with any person to engage in such activities; or
(2)any person who
ÑCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.512APPENDIX N(A)knowingly engages in clandestine intelligence gathering activities for or on
behalf of a foreign power, which activities involve or may involve a violation ofthe criminal statutes of the United States;
(B)pursuant to the direction of an intelligence service or network of a foreign
power, knowingly engages in any other clandestine intelligence activities for oron behalf of such foreign power, which activities involve or are about to involve a
violation of the criminal statutes of the United States;(C)knowingly engages in sabotage or international terrorism, or activities that
are in preparation therefor, for or on behalf of a foreign power; or
(D)knowingly aids or abets any person in the conduct of activities described in
subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) or knowingly conspires with any person to engagein activities described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).(c)ÔInternational terrorismÕ means activities that
Ñ(1)involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that are a violation of

the criminal laws of the United States or of any State, or that would be a criminalviolation if committed within the jurisdiction of the United States or any State;(2)appear to be intended
Ñ(A)to intimidate or coerce a civilian population;
(B)to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or
(C)to affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping; and

(3)occur totally outside the United States, or transcend national boundaries in
terms of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appearintended to coerce or intimidate, or the locale in which their perpetrators operate
or seek asylum.(d)ÔSabotageÕ means activities that involve a violation of chapter 105 of
title 18, or that would involve such a violation if committed against the United
States.(e)ÔForeign intelligence informationÕ means
Ñ(1)information that relates to, and if concerning a United States person is nec-

essary to, the ability of the United States to protect againstÑ(A)actual or potential attack or other grave hostile acts of a foreign power or an
agent of a foreign power;
(B)sabotage or international terrorism by a foreign power or an agent of a
foreign power; or(C)clandestine intelligence activities by an intelligence service or network of a

foreign power or by an agent of a foreign power; or(2)information with respect to a foreign power or foreign territory that relates
to, and if concerning a United States person is necessary toÑ(A)the national defense or the security of the United States; or
(B)the conduct of the foreign affairs of the United States.
(f)ÔElectronic surveillanceÕ means
Ñ(1)the acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device of
the contents of any wire or radio communication sent by or intended to be re-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS513ceived by a particular, known United States person who is in the United States, ifthe contents are acquired by intentionally targeting that United States person,under circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy
and a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes;(2)the acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device of
the contents of any wire communication to or from a person in the United States,
without the consent of any party thereto, if such acquisition occurs in the UnitedStates;(3)the intentional acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveil-

lance device of the contents of any radio communication, under circumstances inwhich a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would berequired for law enforcement purposes, and if both the sender and all intended
recipients are located within the United States; or(4)the installation or use of an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance
device in the United States for monitoring to acquire information, other than from
a wire or radio communication, under circumstances in which a person has areasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required for law en-forcement purposes.(g)ÔAttorney GeneralÕ means the Attorney General of the United States (or
Acting Attorney General) or the Deputy Attorney General.(h)ÔMinimization proceduresÕ, with respect to electronic surveillance, meansÑ(1)specific procedures, which shall be adopted by the Attorney General, that

are reasonably designed in light of the purpose and technique of the particular
surveillance, to minimize the acquisition and retention, and prohibit the dissemi-nation, of nonpublicly available information concerning unconsenting UnitedStates persons consistent with the need of the United States to obtain, produce,
and disseminate foreign intelligence information;(2)procedures that require that nonpublicly available information, which is not
foreign intelligence information, as defined in subsection (e)(1) of this section,
shall not be disseminated in a manner that identifies any United States person,without such personÕs consent, unless such personÕs identity is necessary to un-derstand foreign intelligence information or assess its importance;
(3)notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), procedures that allow for the reten-
tion and dissemination of information that is evidence of a crime which has been,is being, or is about to be committed and that is to be retained or disseminated for
law enforcement purposes; and(4)notwithstanding paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), with respect to any electronic
surveillance approved pursuant to section 1802(a) of this title, procedures that
require that no contents of any communication to which a United States person isa party shall be disclosed, disseminated, or used for any purpose or retained forlonger than twenty-four hours unless a court order under section 1805 of this title
is obtained or unless the Attorney General determines that the information indi-cates a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person.(i)ÔUnited States personÕ means a citizen of the United States, an alien
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.514APPENDIX Nlawfully admitted for permanent residence (as defined in section 1101(a)(20) oftitle 8), an unincorporated association a substantial number of members of whichare citizens of the United States or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent resi-
dence, or a corporation which is incorporated in the United States, but does notinclude a corporation or an association which is a foreign power, as defined insubsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section.(j)ÔUnited StatesÕ, when used in a geographic sense, means all areas underthe territorial sovereignty of the United States and the Trust Territory of the
Pacific Islands.(k)ÔAggrieved personÕ means a person who is the target of an electronic
surveillance or any other person whose communications or activities were subjectto electronic surveillance.(l)ÔWire communicationÕ means any communication while it is being car-ried by a wire, cable, or other like connection furnished or operated by any personengaged as a common carrier in providing or operating such facilities for the
transmission of interstate or foreign communications.(m)ÔPersonÕ means any individual, including any officer or employee of the
Federal Government, or any group, entity, association, corporation, or foreignpower.(n)ÔContentsÕ, when used with respect to a communication, includes anyinformation concerning the identity of the parties to such communication or theexistence, substance, purport, or meaning of that communication.(o)ÔStateÕ means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, andany territory or possession of the United States.Sec. 1802.Electronic surveillance authorization without court order; certifica-
tion by Attorney General; reports to Congressional committees; transmittal un-
der seal; duties and compensation of communication common carrier; applica-tions; jurisdiction of court.(a)(1)Notwithstanding any other law, the President, through the Attorney
General, may authorize electronic surveillance without a court order under thischapter to acquire foreign intelligence information for periods of up to one year if
the Attorney General certifies in writing under oath thatÑ(A)the electronic surveillance is solely directed at
Ñ(i)the acquisition of the contents of communications transmitted by means of
communications used exclusively between or among foreign powers, as defined
in section 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title; or(ii)the acquisition of technical intelligence, other than the spoken communica-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS515tions of individuals, from property or premises under the open and exclusivecontrol of a foreign power, as defined in section 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title;(B)there is no substantial likelihood that the surveillance will acquire the con-

tents of any communication to which a United States person is a party; and(C)the proposed minimization procedures with respect to such surveillance
meet the definition of minimization procedures under section 1801(h) of this title;and if the Attorney General reports such minimization procedures and any changesthereto to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the SenateSelect Committee on Intelligence at least thirty days prior to their effective date,
unless the Attorney General determines immediate action is required and notifies
the committees immediately of such minimization procedures and the reason fortheir becoming effective immediately.(a)(2)An electronic surveillance authorized by this subsection may be conducted
only in accordance with the Attorney GeneralÕs certification and the minimizationprocedures adopted by him. The Attorney General shall assess compliance withsuch procedures and shall report such assessments to the House Permanent SelectCommittee on Intelligence and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence under
the provisions of section 1808(a) of this title.(a)(3)The Attorney General shall immediately transmit under seal to the court
established under section 1803(a) of this title a copy of his certification. Such
certification shall be maintained under security measures established by the ChiefJustice with the concurrence of the Attorney General, in consultation with theDirector of Central Intelligence, and shall remain sealed unlessÑ(A)an application for a court order with respect to the surveillance is made

under sections 1801(h)(4) and 1804 of this title; or(B)the certification is necessary to determine the legality of the surveillance
under section 1806(f) of this title.
(a)(4)With respect to electronic surveillance authorized by this subsection, the
Attorney General may direct a specified communication common carrier toÑ(A)furnish all information, facilities, or technical assistance necessary to accom-

plish the electronic surveillance in such a manner as will protect its secrecy andproduce a minimum of interference with the services that such carrier is provid-ing its customers; and
(B)maintain under security procedures approved by the Attorney General and
the Director of Central Intelligence any records concerning the surveillance or theaid furnished which such carrier wishes to retain. The Government shall compen-
sate, at the prevailing rate, such carrier for furnishing such aid.(b)Applications for a court order under this chapter are authorized if the
President has, by written authorization, empowered the Attorney General to ap-prove applications to the court having jurisdiction under section 1803 of this title,and a judge to whom an application is made may, notwithstanding any other law,
grant an order, in conformity with section 1805 of this title, approving electronicsurveillance of a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power for the purpose ofobtaining foreign intelligence information, except that the court shall not have
jurisdiction to grant any order approving electronic surveillance directed solely asCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.516APPENDIX Ndescribed in paragraph (1)(A) of subsection (a) of this section unless such surveil-lance may involve the acquisition of communications of any United States person.Sec. 1803.Designation of judges.
(a)Court to hear applications and grant orders; record of denial; transmit-
tal to court of review.ÑThe Chief Justice of the United States shall publicly desig-nate seven district court judges from seven of the United States judicial circuits
who shall constitute a court which shall have jurisdiction to hear applications forand grant orders approving electronic surveillance anywhere within the UnitedStates under the procedures set forth in this Act, except that no judge designated
under this subsection shall hear the same application for electronic surveillanceunder this Act which has been denied previously by another judge designatedunder this subsection. If any judge so designated denies an application for an
order authorizing electronic surveillance under this Act, such judge shall provideimmediately for the record a written statement of each reason of his decision and,on motion of the United States, the record shall be transmitted, under seal, to the
court of review established in subsection (b) of this section.(b)Court of review; record, transmittal to Supreme Court;
ÑThe Chief Jus-tice shall publicly designate three judges, one of whom shall be publicly desig-nated as the presiding judge, from the United States district courts or courts ofappeals who together shall comprise a court of review which shall have jurisdic-
tion to review the denial of any application made under this Act. If such court
determines that the application was properly denied, the court shall immediatelyprovide for the record a written statement of each reason for its decision and, onpetition of the United States for a writ of certiorari, the record shall be transmitted
under seal to the Supreme Court, which shall have jurisdiction to review suchdecision.(c)Expeditious conduct of proceedings; security measures for maintenance
of records.ÑProceedings under this Act shall be conducted as expeditiously aspossible. The record of proceedings under this Act, including applications madeand orders granted, shall be maintained under security measures established by
the Chief Justice in consultation with the Attorney General and the Director ofCentral Intelligence.(d)Tenure;
ÑEach judge designated under this section shall so serve for amaximum of seven years and shall not be eligible for redesignation, except thatthe judges first designated under subsection (a) of this section shall be designatedfor terms of from one to seven years so that one term expires each year, and that
judges first designated under subsection (b) of this section shall be designated forterms of three, five, and seven years.Sec. 1804.Applications for court orders.
(a)Submission by Federal officer; approval of Attorney General; con-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS517tents.ÑEach application for an order approving electronic surveillance under thischapter shall be made by a Federal officer in writing upon oath or affirmation to ajudge having jurisdiction under section 1803 of this title. Each application shall
require the approval of the Attorney General based upon his finding that it satis-fies the criteria and requirements of such application as set forth in this chapter. Itshall includeÑ(1)the identity of the Federal officer making the application;
(2)the authority conferred on the Attorney General by the President of the
United States and the approval of the Attorney General to make the application;
(3)the identity, if known, or a description of the target of the electronic surveil-
lance;(4)a statement of the facts and circumstances relied upon by the applicant to

justify his belief thatÑ(A)the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power or an agent of a
foreign power; and
(B)each of the facilities or places at which the electronic surveillance is directed
is being used, or is about to be used, by a foreign power or an agent of a foreignpower;
(5)a statement of the proposed minimization procedures;
(6)a detailed description of the nature of the information sought and the type
of communications or activities to be subjected to the surveillance;
(7)a certification or certifications by the Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs or an executive branch official or officials designated by the Presi-dent from among those executive officers employed in the area of national secu-
rity or defense and appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the
SenateÑ(A)that the certifying official deems the information sought to be foreign intel-
ligence information;
(B)that the purpose of the surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligence informa-
tion;(C)that such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal investiga-

tive techniques;(D)that designates the type of foreign intelligence information being sought
according to the categories described in section 1801(e) of this title; and
(E)including a statement of the basis for the certification that
Ñ(i)the information sought is the type of foreign intelligence information desig-
nated; and
(ii)such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal investigative
techniques;(8)a statement of the means by which the surveillance will be effected and a

statement whether physical entry is required to effect the surveillance;(9)a statement of the facts concerning all previous applications that have been
made to any judge under this chapter involving any of the persons, facilities, or places
specified in the application, and the action taken on each previous application;(10)a statement of the period of time for which the electronic surveillance is
required to be maintained, and if the nature of the intelligence gathering is such
that the approval of the use of electronic surveillance under this chapter shouldCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.518APPENDIX Nnot automatically terminate when the described type of information has first beenobtained, a description of facts supporting the belief that additional informationof the same type will be obtained thereafter; and(11)whenever more than one electronic, mechanical or other surveillance device
is to be used with respect to a particular proposed electronic surveillance, thecoverage of the devices involved and what minimization procedures apply to
information acquired by each device.(b)Exclusion of certain information respecting foreign power targets.
ÑWhenever the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power, as defined insection 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title, and each of the facilities or places at whichthe surveillance is directed is owned, leased, or exclusively used by that foreign
power, the application need not contain the information required by paragraphs(6), (7)(E), (8), and (11) of subsection (a) of this section, but shall state whetherphysical entry is required to effect the surveillance and shall contain such infor-
mation about the surveillance techniques and communications or other informa-tion concerning United States persons likely to be obtained as may be necessary toassess the proposed minimization procedures.(c)Additional affidavits or certifications.
ÑThe Attorney General may re-quire any other affidavit or certification from any other officer in connection with
the application.(d)Additional information.
ÑThe judge may require the applicant to fur-nish such other information as may be necessary to make the determinations
required by section 1805 of this title.Sec. 1805.Issuance of order.
(a)Necessary findings.
ÑUpon an application made pursuant to section1804 of this title, the judge shall enter an ex parte order as requested or as modi-fied approving the electronic surveillance if he finds thatÑ(1)the President has authorized the Attorney General to approve applications

for electronic surveillance for foreign intelligence information;(2)the application has been made by a Federal officer and approved by the
Attorney General;
(3)on the basis of the facts submitted by the applicant there is probable cause to
believe thatÑ(A)the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power or an agent of a

foreign power: Provided, That no United States person may be considered a for-eign power or an agent of a foreign power solely upon the basis of activitiesprotected by the first amendment to the Constitution of the United States; and
(B)each of the facilities or places at which the electronic surveillance is directed
is being used, or is about to be used, by a foreign power or an agent of a foreignpower;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS519(4)the proposed minimization procedures meet the definition of minimization
procedures under section 1804(h) of this title; and
(5)the application which has been filed contains all statements and certifica-

tions required by section 1804 of this title and, if the target is a United Statesperson, the certification or certifications are not clearly erroneous on the basis ofthe statement made under section 1804(a)(7)(E) of this title and any other informa-
tion furnished under section 1804(d) of this title.(b)Specifications and directions of orders.
ÑAn order approving an elec-tronic surveillance under this section shallÑ(1)specify
Ñ(A)the identity, if known, or a description of the target of the electronic surveil-

lance;(B)the nature and location of each of the facilities or places at which the elec-
tronic surveillance will be directed;
(C)the type of information sought to be acquired and the type of communica-
tions or activities to be subjected to the surveillance;(D)the means by which the electronic surveillance will be effected and whether

physical entry will be used to effect the surveillance;(E)the period of time during which the electronic surveillance is approved; and
(F)whenever more than one electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance de-

vice is to be used under the order, the authorized coverage of the devices involvedand what minimization procedures shall apply to information subject to acquisi-tion by each device; and
(2)direct
Ñ(A)that the minimization procedures be followed;
(B)that, upon the request of the applicant, a specified communication or other
common carrier, landlord, custodian, or other specified person furnish the appli-
cant forthwith all information, facilities, or technical assistance necessary to ac-complish the electronic surveillance in such a manner as will protect its secrecyand produce a minimum of interference with the services that such carrier, land-
lord, custodian, or other person is providing that target of electronic surveillance;(C)that such carrier, landlord, custodian, or other person maintain under secu-
rity procedures approved by the Attorney General and the Director of Central
Intelligence any records concerning the surveillance or the aid furnished that suchperson wishes to retain; and(D)that the applicant compensate, at the prevailing rate, such carrier, landlord,

custodian, or other person for furnishing such aid.(c)Exclusion of certain information respecting foreign power targets.
ÑWhenever the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power, as defined insection 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title, and each of the facilities or places at whichthe surveillance is directed is owned, leased, or exclusively used by that foreign
power, the order need not contain the information required by subparagraphs(C), (D), and (F) of subsection (b)(1) of this section, but shall generally describe theinformation sought, the communications or activities to be subjected to the sur-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.520APPENDIX Nveillance, and the type of electronic surveillance involved, including whetherphysical entry is required.(d)Duration of order; extensions; review of circumstances under which
information was acquired, retained or disseminated.(1)An order issued under this section may approve an electronic surveillance for

the period necessary to achieve its purpose, or for ninety days, whichever is less,except that an order under this section shall approve an electronic surveillancetargeted against a foreign power, as defined in section 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this
title, for the period specified in the application or for one year, whichever is less.(2)Extensions of an order issued under this chapter may be granted on the
same basis as an original order upon an application for an extension and new
findings made in the same manner as required for an original order, except that anextension of an order under this Act for a surveillance targeted against a foreignpower, as defined in section 1801(a)(5) or (6) of this title, or against a foreign
power as defined in section 1801(a)(4) of this title that is not a United Statesperson, may be for a period not to exceed one year if the judge finds probablecause to believe that no communication of any individual United States person
will be acquired during the period.(3)At or before the end of the period of time for which electronic surveillance is
approved by an order or an extension, the judge may assess compliance with the
minimization procedures by reviewing the circumstances under which informa-tion concerning United States persons was acquired, retained, or disseminated.(e)Emergency orders.
ÑNotwithstanding any other provision of this chap-ter, when the Attorney General reasonably determines thatÑ(1)an emergency situation exists with respect to the employment of electronic
surveillance to obtain foreign intelligence information before an order authoriz-
ing such surveillance can with due diligence be obtained; and(2)the factual basis for issuance of an order under this chapter to approve such
surveillance exists;he may authorize the emergency employment of electronic surveillance if a judgehaving jurisdiction under section 1803 of this title is informed by the AttorneyGeneral or his designee at the time of such authorization that the decision hasbeen made to employ emergency electronic surveillance and if an application in
accordance with this chapter is made to that judge as soon as practicable, but notmore than twenty-four hours after the Attorney General authorizes such surveil-lance. If the Attorney General authorizes such emergency employment of elec-
tronic surveillance, he shall require that the minimization procedures required bythis chapter for the issuance of a judicial order be followed. In the absence of ajudicial order approving such electronic surveillance, the surveillance shall termi-
nate when the information sought is obtained, when the application for the orderis denied, or after the expiration of twenty-four hours from the time of authoriza-tion by the Attorney General, whichever is earliest. In the event that such applica-
tion for approval is denied, or in any other case where the electronic surveillanceis terminated and no order is issued approving the surveillance, no informationCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS521obtained or evidence derived from such surveillance shall be received in evidenceor otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before anycourt, grand jury, department, office, agency, regulatory body, legislative com-
mittee, or other authority of the United States, a State, or political subdivisionthereof, and no information concerning any United States person acquired fromsuch surveillance shall subsequently be used or disclosed in any other manner by
Federal officers or employees without the consent of such person, except with theapproval of the Attorney General if the information indicates a threat of death orserious bodily harm to any person. A denial of the application made under this
subsection may be reviewed as provided in section 1803 of this title.(f)Testing of electronic equipment; discovering unauthorized electronic
surveillance; training of intelligence personnel.ÑNotwithstanding any other pro-vision of this chapter, officers, employees, or agents of the United States are au-thorized in the normal course of their official duties to conduct electronic surveil-lance not targeted against the communications of any particular person or persons,
under procedures approved by the Attorney General, solely toÑ(1)test the capability of electronic equipment, if
Ñ(A)it is not reasonable to obtain the consent of the persons incidentally sub-

jected to the surveillance;(B)the test is limited in extent and duration to that necessary to determine the
capability of the equipment;
(C)the contents of any communication acquired are retained and used only for

the purpose of determining the capability of the equipment, are disclosed only totest personnel, and are destroyed before or immediately upon completion of thetest; and:
(D)Provided, That the test may exceed ninety days only with the prior approval
of the Attorney General;(2)determine the existence and capability of electronic surveillance equipment

being used by persons not authorized to conduct electronic surveillance, ifÑ(A)it is not reasonable to obtain the consent of persons incidentally subjected to
the surveillance;
(B)such electronic surveillance is limited in extent and duration to that neces-
sary to determine the existence and capability of such equipment; and(C)any information acquired by such surveillance is used only to enforce chap-

ter 119 of title 18, or section 605 of title 47, or to protect information from unautho-rized surveillance; or(3)train intelligence personnel in the use of electronic surveillance equipment, if
Ñ(A)it is not reasonable to
Ñ(i)obtain the consent of the persons incidentally subjected to the surveillance;
(ii)train persons in the course of surveillances otherwise authorized by this

chapter; or(iii)train persons in the use of such equipment without engaging in electronic
surveillance;
(B)such electronic surveillance is limited in extent and duration to that neces-
sary to train the personnel in the use of the equipment; and(C)no contents of any communication acquired are retained or disseminated
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.522APPENDIX Nfor any purpose, but are destroyed as soon as reasonably possible.(g)Retention of certifications, applications and orders.
ÑCertifications madeby the Attorney General pursuant to section 1802(a) of this title and applicationsmade and orders granted under this chapter shall be retained for a period of at
least ten years from the date of the certification or application.Sec. 1806.Use of information.
(a)Compliance with minimization procedures; privileged communications;
lawful purposes.ÑInformation acquired from an electronic surveillance conductedpursuant to this chapter concerning any United States person may be used anddisclosed by Federal officers and employees without the consent of the UnitedStates person only in accordance with the minimization procedures required by
this chapter. No otherwise privileged communication obtained in accordance with,
or in violation of, the provisions of this chapter shall lose its privileged character.No information acquired from an electronic surveillance pursuant to this chapter
may be used or disclosed by Federal officers or employees except for lawfulpurposes.(b)Statement for disclosure.
ÑNo information acquired pursuant to thischapter shall be disclosed for law enforcement purposes unless such disclosure isaccompanied by a statement that such information, or any information derived
therefrom, may only be used in a criminal proceeding with the advance authori-
zation of the Attorney General.(c)Notification by United States.
ÑWhenever the Government intends toenter into evidence or otherwise use or disclose in any trial, hearing, or otherproceeding in or before any court, department, officer, agency, regulatory body,or other authority of the United States, against an aggrieved person, any informa-
tion obtained or derived from an electronic surveillance of that aggrieved personpursuant to the authority of this chapter, the Government shall, prior to the trial,hearing, or other proceeding or at a reasonable time prior to an effort to so dis-
close or so use that information or submit it in evidence, notify the aggrievedperson and the court or other authority in which the information is to be disclosedor used that the Government intends to so disclose or so use such information.(d)Notification by States or political subdivisions.
ÑWhenever any State orpolitical subdivision thereof intends to enter into evidence or otherwise use or
disclose in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before any court, depart-ment, officer, agency, regulatory body, or other authority of a State or a politicalsubdivision thereof, against an aggrieved person any information obtained or
derived from an electronic surveillance of that aggrieved person pursuant to theauthority of this chapter, the State or political subdivision thereof shall notify theaggrieved person, the court or other authority in which the information is to beCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS523disclosed or used, and the Attorney General that the State or political subdivisionthereof intends to so disclose or so use such information.(e)Motion to suppress.
ÑAny person against whom evidence obtained orderived from an electronic surveillance to which he is an aggrieved person is tobe, or has been, introduced or otherwise used or disclosed in any trial, hearing, or
other proceeding in or before any court, department, officer, agency, regulatorybody, or other authority of the United States, a State, or a political subdivisionthereof, may move to suppress the evidence obtained or derived from such elec-
tronic surveillance on the grounds thatÑ(1)the information was unlawfully acquired; or
(2)the surveillance was not made in conformity with an order of authorization
or approval.Such a motion shall be made before the trial, hearing, or other proceeding unlessthere was no opportunity to make such a motion or the person was not aware ofthe grounds of the motion.(f)In camera and ex parte review by district court.
ÑWhenever a court orother authority is notified pursuant to subsection (c) or (d) of this section, orwhenever a motion is made pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, or whenever
any motion or request is made by an aggrieved person pursuant to any otherstatute or rule of the United States or any State before any court or other authorityof the United States or any State to discover or obtain applications or orders or
other materials relating to electronic surveillance or to discover, obtain, or sup-
press evidence or information obtained or derived from electronic surveillanceunder this Act, the United States district court or, where the motion is madebefore another authority, the United States district court in the same district as the
authority, shall, notwithstanding any other law, if the Attorney General files anaffidavit under oath that disclosure or an adversary hearing would harm thenational security of the United States, review in camera and ex parte the applica-
tion, order, and such other materials relating to the surveillance as may be neces-sary to determine whether the surveillance of the aggrieved person was lawfullyauthorized and conducted. In making this determination, the court may disclose
to the aggrieved person, under appropriate security procedures and protectiveorders, portions of the application, order, or other materials relating to the surveil-lance only where such disclosure is necessary to make an accurate determination
of the legality of the surveillance.(g)Suppression of evidence; denial of motion.
ÑIf the United States districtcourt pursuant to subsection (f) of this section determines that the surveillancewas not lawfully authorized or conducted, it shall, in accordance with the require-ments of law, suppress the evidence which was unlawfully obtained or derived
from electronic surveillance of the aggrieved person or otherwise grant the mo-tion of the aggrieved person. If the court determines that the surveillance waslawfully authorized and conducted, it shall deny the motion of the aggrieved
person except to the extent that due process requires discovery or disclosure.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.524APPENDIX N(h)Finality of orders.
ÑOrders granting motions or requests under subsec-tion (g) of this section, decisions under this section that electronic surveillancewas not lawfully authorized or conducted, and orders of the United States district
court requiring review or granting disclosure of applications, orders, or othermaterials relating to a surveillance shall be final orders and binding upon allcourts of the United States and the several States except a United States court of
appeals and the Supreme Court.(i)Destruction of unintentionally acquired information.
ÑIn circumstancesinvolving the unintentional acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other sur-veillance device of the contents of any radio communication, under circumstancesin which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be
required for law enforcement purposes, and if both the sender and all intendedrecipients are located within the United States, such contents shall be destroyedupon recognition, unless the Attorney General determines that the contents indi-
cate a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person.(j)Notification of emergency employment of electronic surveillance; con-
tents; postponement, suspension or elimination.ÑIf an emergency employmentof electronic surveillance is authorized under section 1805(e) of this title and asubsequent order approving the surveillance is not obtained, the judge shall cause
to be served on any United States person named in the application and on suchother United States persons subject to electronic surveillance as the judge maydetermine in his discretion it is in the interest of justice to serve, notice ofÑ(1)the fact of the application;
(2)the period of the surveillance; and

(3)the fact that during the period information was or was not obtained.
On an ex parte showing of good cause to the judge the serving of the notice requiredby this subsection may be postponed or suspended for a period not to exceed ninetydays. Thereafter, on a further ex parte showing of good cause, the court shall forego
ordering the serving of the notice required under this subsection.Sec. 1807.Report to Administrative Office of the United States Court and to
Congress.In April of each year, the Attorney General shall transmit to the Administra-tive Office of the United States Court and to Congress a report setting forth withrespect to the preceding calendar yearÑ(a)the total number of applications made for orders and extensions of
orders approving electronic surveillance under this chapter; and(b)the total number of such orders and extensions either granted, modi-
fied, or denied.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS525Sec. 1808.Report of Attorney General to Congressional committees; limita-
tion on authority or responsibility of information gathering activities of Con-gressional committees; report of Congressional committees to Congress.(a)On a semiannual basis the Attorney General shall fully inform the
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Select Com-
mittee on Intelligence concerning all electronic surveillance under this chapter.Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the authority and responsibilityof the appropriate committees of each House of Congress to obtain such informa-
tion as they may need to carry out their respective functions and duties.(b)On or before one year after October 25, 1978, and on the same day each
year for four years thereafter, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligenceand the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence shall report respectively to theHouse of Representatives and the Senate, concerning the implementation of this
Act.  Said reports shall include but not be limited to an analysis and recommenda-
tions concerning whether this Act should be(1)amended,

(2)repealed, or
(3)permitted to continue in effect without amendment.
Sec. 1809.Criminal sanctions.
(a)Prohibited activitiesA person is guilty of an offense if he intention-allyÑ(1)engages in electronic surveillance under color of law except as authorized
by statute; or
(2)discloses or uses information obtained under color of law by electronic sur-
veillance, knowing or having reason to know that the information was obtainedthrough electronic surveillance not authorized by statute.(b)DefenseIt is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of thissection that the defendant was a law enforcement or investigative officer engaged
in the course of his official duties and the electronic surveillance was authorizedby and conducted pursuant to a search warrant or court order of a court of compe-tent jurisdiction.(c)PenaltiesAn offense described in this section is punishable by a fine ofnot more than $10,000 or imprisonment for not more than five years, or both.(d)Federal jurisdictionThere is Federal jurisdiction over an offense underthis section if the person committing the offense was an officer or employee of the
United States at the time the offense was committed.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.526APPENDIX NSec. 1810. Civil liability.
An aggrieved person, other than a foreign power or an agent of a foreignpower, as defined in section 1801(a) or (b)(1)(A) of this title, respectively, who hasbeen subjected to an electronic surveillance or about whom information obtainedby electronic surveillance of such person has been disclosed or used in violation of
section 1809 of this title shall have a cause of action against any person whocommitted such violation and shall be entitled to recoverÑ(a)actual damages, but not less than liquidated damages of $1,000 or $100 per

day for each day of violation, whichever is greater;(b)punitive damages; and
(c)reasonable attorney
Õs fees and other investigation and litigation costs rea-sonably incurred.Sec. 1811.Authorization during time of war.
Notwithstanding any other law, the President, through the Attorney Gen-eral, may authorize electronic surveillance without a court order under this chap-ter to acquire foreign intelligence information for a period not to exceed fifteencalendar days following a declaration of war by the Congress.N.1.3Pen Register and Traffic Analysis (U.S. Code, Title 18,
Chapters 121 and 206)Chapter 121Sec. 2701.Unlawful access to stored communications.
(a)Offense.
ÑExcept as provided in subsection (c) of this section whoeverÑ(1)intentionally accesses without authorization a facility through which an
electronic communication service is provided; or
(2)intentionally exceeds an authorization to access that facility;
and thereby obtains, alters, or prevents authorized access to a wire or electroniccommunication while it is in electronic storage in such system shall be punishedas provided in subsection (b) of this section.(b)Punishment.
Ñ The punishment for an offense under subsection (a) of
this section isÑ(1)if the offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious
destruction or damage, or private commercial gainÑ(A)a fine of not more than $250,000 or imprisonment for not more than one

year, or both, in the case of a first offense under this subparagraph; andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS527(B)a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than two years, or both,
for any subsequent offense under this subparagraph; and(2)a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than six months,

or both, in any other case.(c)Exceptions.
Ñ Subsection (a) of this section does not apply with respect
to conduct authorizedÑ(1)by the person or entity providing a wire or electronic communications ser-
vice;
(2)by a user of that service with respect to a communication of or intended for
that user; or(3)in section 2703, 2704 or 2518 of this title.
Sec. 2702.Disclosure of contents.
(a)Prohibitions.
ÑExcept as provided in subsection (b)Ñ(1)a person or entity providing an electronic communication service to the

public shall not knowingly divulge to any person or entity the contents of acommunication while in electronic storage by that service; and(2)a person or entity providing remote computing service to the public shall

not knowingly divulge to any person or entity the contents of any communicationwhich is carried or maintained on that serviceÑ(A)on behalf of, and received by means of electronic transmission from (or

created by means of computer processing of communications received by means
of electronic transmission from), a subscriber or customer of such service; and(B)solely for the purpose of providing storage or computer processing services
to such subscriber or customer, if the provider is not authorized to access the
contents of any such communications for purposes of providing any servicesother than storage or computer processing.(b)Exceptions.
ÑA person or entity may divulge the contents of a commu-nicationÑ(1)to an addressee or intended recipient of such communication or an agent of

such addressee or intended recipient;(2)as otherwise authorized in section 2517, 2511(2)(a), or 2703 of this title;
(3)with the lawful consent of the originator or an addressee or intended recipi-

ent of such communication, or the subscriber in the case of remote computingservice;(4)to a person employed or authorized or whose facilities are used to forward

such communication to its destination;(5)as may be necessarily incident to the rendition of the service or to the protec-
tion of the rights or property of the provider of that service; or
(6)to a law enforcement agency, if such contents
Ñ(A)were inadvertently obtained by the service provider; and
(B)appear to pertain to the commission of a crime.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.528APPENDIX NSec. 2703.Requirements for governmental access.
(a)Contents of Electronic Communications in Electronic Storage.
ÑA gov-ernmental entity may require the disclosure by a provider of electronic communi-cation service of the contents of an electronic communication, that is in electronicstorage in an electronic communications system for one hundred and eighty days
or less, only pursuant to a warrant issued under the Federal Rules of CriminalProcedure or equivalent State warrant. A governmental entity may require thedisclosure by a provider of electronic communications services of the contents of
an electronic communication that has been in electronic storage in an electroniccommunications system for more than one hundred and eighty days by the meansavailable under subsection (b) of this section.(b)Contents of Electronic Communications in a Remote Computing Service.
Ñ(1)A governmental entity may require a provider of remote computing service

to disclose the contents of any electronic communication to which this paragraphis made applicable by paragraph (2) of this subsectionÑ(A)without required notice to the subscriber or customer, if the governmental

entity obtains a warrant issued under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure orequivalent State warrant; or (B) with prior notice from the governmental entity tothe subscriber or customer if the governmental entityÑ(i)uses an administrative subpoena authorized by a Federal or State statute or
a Federal or State grand jury or trial subpoena; or(ii)obtains a court order for such disclosure under subsection (d) of this section;

except that delayed notice may be given pursuant to section 2705 of this title.
(2)Paragraph one is applicable with respect to any electronic communication
that is held or maintained on that serviceÑ(A)on behalf of, and received by means of electronic transmission from (or

created by means of computer processing of communications received by meansof electronic transmission from), a subscriber or customer of such remote comput-ing service; and
(B)solely for the purpose of providing storage or computer processing services
to such subscriber or customer, if the provider is not authorized to access thecontents of any such communications for purposes of providing any services
other than storage or computer processing.(c)Records Concerning Electronic Communication Service or Remote
Computing Service.Ñ(1)(A)Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a provider of electronic commu-
nication service or remote service may disclose a record or other information
pertaining to a subscriber to or customer of such service (not including the con-tents of communications covered by subsection (a) or (b) of this section) to anyperson other than a governmental entity.
(B)A provider of electronic communication service or remote computing ser-
vice shall disclose a record or other information pertaining to a subscriber to orcustomer of such service (not including the contents of communications coveredCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS529by subsection (a) or (b) of this section) to a governmental entity only when thegovernmental entityÑ(i)obtains a warrant issued under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure or

equivalent State warrant;(ii)obtains a court order for such disclosure under subsection (d) of this section; or(iii)has the consent of the subscriber or customer to such disclosure.
(C)A provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service
shall disclose to a governmental entity the name, address, telephone toll billingrecords, telephone number or other subscriber number or identity, and length of
service of a subscriber to or customer of such service and the types of services thesubscriber or customer utilized, when the governmental entity uses an administra-tive subpoena authorized by a Federal or State statute or a Federal or State grand
jury or trial subpoena or any means available under subparagraph (B).(2)A governmental entity receiving records or information under this subsec-
tion is not required to provide notice to a subscriber or customer.(d)Requirements for Court Order.
ÑA court order for disclosure undersubsection (b) or (c) may be issued by any court that is a court of competent
jurisdiction described in section 3126(2)(A) and shall issue only if the governmen-tal entity offers specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonablegrounds to believe that the contents of a wire or electronic communication, or the
records or other information sought, are relevant and material to an ongoingcriminal investigation. In the case of a State governmental authority, such a courtorder shall not issue if prohibited by the law of such State. A court issuing an
order pursuant to this section, on a motion made promptly by the service pro-
vider, may quash or modify such order, if the information or records requestedare unusually voluminous in nature or compliance with such order otherwisewould cause an undue burden on such provider.(e)No Cause of Action Against a Provider Disclosing Information Under
This Chapter.ÑNo cause of action shall lie in any court against any provider ofwire or electronic communication service, its officers, employees, agents, or otherspecified persons for providing information, facilities, or assistance in accordancewith the terms of a court order, warrant, subpoena, or certification under this
chapter.Sec. 2704.Backup preservation.
(a)Backup Preservation.
Ñ(1)A governmental entity acting under section 2703(b)(2) may include in its
subpoena or court order a requirement that the service provider to whom therequest is directed create a backup copy of the contents of the electronic commu-
nications sought in order to preserve those communications.Without notifying the subscriber or customer of such subpoena or courtorder, such service provider shall create such backup copy as soon as practicableCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.530APPENDIX Nconsistent with its regular business practices and shall confirm to the governmen-tal entity that such backup copy has been made. Such backup copy shall be cre-ated within two business days after receipt by the service provider of the sub-
poena or court order.(2)Notice to the subscriber or customer shall be made by the governmental
entity within three days after receipt of such confirmation, unless such notice is
delayed pursuant to section 2705(a).(3)The service provider shall not destroy such backup copy until the later of
Ñ(A)the delivery of the information; or

(B)the resolution of any proceedings (including appeals of any proceeding)
concerning the governmentÕs subpoena or court order.(4)The service provider shall release such backup copy to the requesting gov-

ernmental entity no sooner than fourteen days after the governmental entityÕsnotice to the subscriber or customer if such service providerÑ(A)has not received notice from the subscriber or customer that the subscriber

or customer has challenged the governmental entityÕs request; and(B)has not initiated proceedings to challenge the request of the governmental
entity.
(5)A governmental entity may seek to require the creation of a backup copy
under subsection (a)(1) of this section if in its sole discretion such entity deter-mines that there is reason to believe that notification under section 2703 of this
title of the existence of the subpoena or court order may result in destruction of ortampering with evidence. This determination is not subject to challenge by thesubscriber or customer or service provider.(b)Customer Challenges.
Ñ(1)Within fourteen days after notice by the governmental entity to the sub-
scriber or customer under subsection (a)(2) of this section, such subscriber or
customer may file a motion to quash such subpoena or vacate such court order,with copies served upon the governmental entity and with written notice of suchchallenge to the service provider. A motion to vacate a court order shall be filed in
the court which issued such order. A motion to quash a subpoena shall be filed inthe appropriate United States district court or State court. Such motion or applica-tion shall contain an affidavit or sworn statementÑ(A)stating that the applicant is a customer or subscriber to the service from
which the contents of electronic communications maintained for him have beensought; and
(B)stating the applicant
Õs reasons for believing that the records sought are notrelevant to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry or that there has not been sub-stantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter in some other respect.
(2)Service shall be made under this section upon a governmental entity by
delivering or mailing by registered or certified mail a copy of the papers to theperson, office, or department specified in the notice which the customer has re-
ceived pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes of this section, the term Ôdeliv-eryÕ has the meaning given that term in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
(3)If the court finds that the customer has complied with paragraphs (1) and (2)

of this subsection, the court shall order the governmental entity to file a swornCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS531response, which may be filed in camera if the governmental entity includes in itsresponse the reasons which make in camera review appropriate. If the court isunable to determine the motion or application on the basis of the partiesÕ initial
allegations and response, the court may conduct such additional proceedings as itdeems appropriate. All such proceedings shall be completed and the motion orapplication decided as soon as practicable after the filing of the governmental
entityÕs response.(4)If the court finds that the applicant is not the subscriber or customer for
whom the communications sought by the governmental entity are maintained, or
that there is a reason to believe that the law enforcement inquiry is legitimate andthat the communications sought are relevant to that inquiry, it shall deny themotion or application and order such process enforced. If the court finds that the
applicant is the subscriber or customer for whom the communications sought bythe governmental entity are maintained, and that there is not a reason to believethat the communications sought are relevant to a legitimate law enforcement
inquiry, or that there has not been substantial compliance with the provisions ofthis chapter, it shall order the process quashed.(5)A court order denying a motion or application under this section shall not

be deemed a final order and no interlocutory appeal may be taken therefrom bythe customer.Sec. 2705.Delayed notice.
(a)Delay of Notification.
Ñ(1)A governmental entity acting under section 2703(b) of this title may
Ñ(A)where a court order is sought, include in the application a request, which
the court shall grant, for an order delaying the notification required under section
2703(b) of this title for a period not to exceed ninety days, if the court determinesthat there is reason to believe that notification of the existence of the court ordermay have an adverse result described in paragraph (2) of this subsection; or
(B)where an administrative subpoena authorized by a Federal or State statute
or a Federal or State grand jury subpoena is obtained, delay the notification re-quired under section 2703(b) of this title for a period not to exceed ninety days
upon the execution of a written certification of a supervisory official that there isreason to believe that notification of the existence of the subpoena may have anadverse result described in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
(2)An adverse result for the purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection is
Ñ(A)endangering the life or physical safety of an individual;
(B)flight from prosecution;

(C)destruction of or tampering with evidence;
(D)intimidation of potential witnesses; or
(E)otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or unduly delaying a trial.

(3)The governmental entity shall maintain a true copy of certification under
paragraph (1)(B).(4)Extensions of the delay of notification provided in section 2703 of up to ninety
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.532APPENDIX Ndays each may be granted by the court upon application, or by certification by agovernmental entity, but only in accordance with subsection (b) of this section.(5)Upon expiration of the period of delay of notification under paragraph (1)

or (4) of this subsection, the governmental entity shall serve upon, or deliver byregistered or first-class mail to, the customer or subscriber a copy of the process orrequest together with notice thatÑ(A)states with reasonable specificity the nature of the law enforcement inquiry;
and(B)informs such customer or subscriber
Ñ(i)that information maintained for such customer or subscriber by the service
provider named in such process or request was supplied to or requested by thatgovernmental authority and the date on which the supplying or request took
place;(ii)that notification of such customer or subscriber was delayed;
(iii)what governmental entity or court made the certification or determination

pursuant to which that delay was made; and(iv)which provision of this chapter allowed such delay.
(6)As used in this subsection, the term 
Ôsupervisory officialÕ means the investi-
gative agent in charge or assistant investigative agent in charge or an equivalentof an investigating agencyÕs headquarters or regional office, or the chief prosecut-ing attorney or the first assistant prosecuting attorney or an equivalent of a pros-
ecuting attorneyÕs headquarters or regional office.(b)Preclusion of Notice to Subject of Governmental Access.
ÑA govern-mental entity acting under section 2703, when it is not required to notify the
subscriber or customer under section 2703(b)(1), or to the extent that it may delaysuch notice pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, may apply to a court for anorder commanding a provider of electronic communications service or remote
computing service to whom a warrant, subpoena, or court order is directed, forsuch period as the court deems appropriate, not to notify any other person of theexistence of the warrant, subpoena, or court order. The court shall enter such an
order if it determines that there is reason to believe that notification of the exist-ence of the warrant, subpoena, or court order will result inÑ(1)endangering the life or physical safety of an individual;

(2)flight from prosecution;
(3)destruction of or tampering with evidence;
(4)intimidation of potential witnesses; or

(5)otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or unduly delaying a trial.
Sec. 2706.Cost reimbursement.
(a)Payment.
ÑExcept as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a govern-mental entity obtaining the contents of communications, records, or other infor-mation under section 2702, 2703, or 2704 of this title shall pay to the person orentity assembling or providing such information a fee for reimbursement for such
costs as are reasonably necessary and which have been directly incurred in search-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS533ing for, assembling, reproducing, or otherwise providing such information. Suchreimbursable costs shall include any costs due to necessary disruption of normaloperations of any electronic communication service or remote computing service
in which such information may be stored.(b)Amount.
ÑThe amount of the fee provided by subsection (a) shall be asmutually agreed by the governmental entity and the person or entity providingthe information, or, in the absence of agreement, shall be as determined by thecourt which issued the order for production of such information (or the court
before which a criminal prosecution relating to such information would bebrought, if no court order was issued for production of the information).(c)Exception.
ÑThe requirement of subsection (a) of this section does notapply with respect to records or other information maintained by a communica-tions common carrier that relate to telephone toll records and telephone listings
obtained under section 2703 of this title. The court may, however, order a pay-ment as described in subsection (a) if the court determines the information re-quired is unusually voluminous in nature or otherwise caused an undue burden
on the provider.Sec. 2707.Civil action.
(a)Cause of Action.
ÑExcept as provided in section 2703(e), any providerof electronic communication service, subscriber, or customer aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter in which the conduct constituting the violation is en-gaged in with a knowing or intentional state of mind may, in a civil action, recoverfrom the person or entity which engaged in that violation such relief as may be
appropriate.(b)Relief.
ÑIn a civil action under this section, appropriate relief includesÑ(1)such preliminary and other equitable or declaratory relief as may be appro-
priate;(2)damages under subsection (c); and

(3)a reasonable attorney
Õs fee and other litigation costs reasonably incurred.(c)Damages.
ÑThe court may assess as damages in a civil action under thissection the sum of the actual damages suffered by the plaintiff and any profitsmade by the violator as a result of the violation, but in no case shall a personentitled to recover receive less than the sum of $1,000.(d)Defense.
ÑA good faith reliance onÑ(1)a court warrant or order, a grand jury subpoena, a legislative authorization,

or a statutory authorization;(2)a request of an investigative or law enforcement officer under section 2518(7)
of this title; or
(3)a good faith determination that section 2511(3) of this title permitted the
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.534APPENDIX Nconduct complained of; is a complete defense to any civil or criminal actionbrought under this chapter or any other law.(e)Limitation.
ÑA civil action under this section may not be commencedlater than two years after the date upon which the claimant first discovered or hada reasonable opportunity to discover the violation.Sec. 2708.Exclusivity of remedies.
The remedies and sanctions described in this chapter are the only judicialremedies and sanctions for nonconstitutional violations of this chapter.Sec. 2709.Counterintelligence access to telephone toll and transactional
records.(a)Duty to Provide.
ÑA wire or electronic communication service pro-vider shall comply with a request for subscriber information and toll billingrecords information, or electronic communication transactional records in its cus-tody or possession made by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
under subsection (b) of this section.(b)Required Certification.
ÑThe Director of the Federal Bureau of Investi-gation (or an individual within the Federal Bureau of Investigation designated for
this purpose by the Director) may request any such information and records if theDirector (or the DirectorÕs designee) certifies in writing to the wire or electroniccommunication service provider to which the request is made thatÑ(1)the information sought is relevant to an authorized foreign counterintelli-
gence investigation; and(2)there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the per-

son or entity to whom the information sought pertains is a foreign power or anagent of a foreign power as defined in section 101 of the Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801).(c)Prohibition of Certain Disclosure.
ÑNo wire or electronic communica-tion service provider, or officer, employee, or agent thereof, shall disclose to any
person that the Federal Bureau of Investigation has sought or obtained access toinformation or records under this section.(d)Dissemination by Bureau.
ÑThe Federal Bureau of Investigation maydisseminate information and records obtained under this section only as pro-vided in guidelines approved by the Attorney General for foreign intelligence
collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the Fed-eral Bureau of Investigation, and, with respect to dissemination to an agency ofthe United States, only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized
responsibilities of such agency.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS535(e)Requirement That Certain Congressional Bodies Be Informed.
ÑOn asemiannual basis the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall fullyinform the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Represen-
tatives and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate concerning all re-quests made under subsection (b) of this section.Sec. 2710.Wrongful disclosure of video tape rental or sale records. . . .
Sec. 2711.Definitions for chapter.
As used in this chapterÑ(1)the terms defined in section 2510 of this title have, respectively, the
definitions given such terms in that section; and(2)the term 
Ôremote computing serviceÕ means the provision to the public
of computer storage or processing services by means of an electronic communica-tions system.Chapter 206Sec. 3121.General prohibition on pen register and trap and trace device use;
exception.(a)In General.
ÑExcept as provided in this section, no person may installor use a pen register or a trap and trace device without first obtaining a courtorder under section 3123 of this title or under the Foreign Intelligence SurveillanceAct of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).(b)Exception.
ÑThe prohibition of subsection (a) does not apply with re-spect to the use of a pen register or a trap and trace device by a provider of
electronic or wire communication serviceÑ(1)relating to the operation, maintenance, and testing of a wire or electronic
communication service or to the protection of the rights or property of such pro-
vider, or to the protection of users of that service from abuse of service or unlaw-ful use of service; or(2)to record the fact that a wire or electronic communication was initiated or

completed in order to protect such provider, another provider furnishing servicetoward the completion of the wire communication, or a user of that service, from
fraudulent, unlawful or abusive use of service; or

(3)where the consent of the user of that service has been obtained.
(c)Limitation.
ÑA government agency authorized to install and use a penregister under this chapter or under State law shall use technology reasonably
available to it that restricts the recording or decoding of electronic or other im-pulses to the dialing and signaling information utilized in call processing.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.536APPENDIX N(d)Penalty.
ÑWhoever knowingly violates subsection (a) shall be fined
under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Sec. 3122.Application for an order for a pen register or a trap and trace device.
(a)Application.
Ñ(1) An attorney for the Government may make applica-
tion for an order or an extension of an order under section 3123 of this title

authorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen register or a trap and
trace device under this chapter, in writing under oath or equivalent affirmation, to
a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2)Unless prohibited by State law, a State investigative or law enforcement
officer may make application for an order or an extension of an order under
section 3123 of this title authorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen

register or a trap and trace device under this chapter, in writing under oath or
equivalent affirmation, to a court of competent jurisdiction of such State.
(b)Contents of Application.
ÑAn application under subsection (a) of this
section shall includeÑ(1)the identity of the attorney for the Government or the State law enforcement

or investigative officer making the application and the identity of the law enforce-
ment agency conducting the investigation; and
(2)a certification by the applicant that the information likely to be obtained is

relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation being conducted by that agency.
Sec. 3123.Issuance of an order for a pen register or a trap and trace device.
(a)In General.
ÑUpon an application made under section 3122 of this title,
the court shall enter an ex parte order authorizing the installation and use of a pen

register or a trap and trace device within the jurisdiction of the court if the court
finds that the attorney for the Government or the State law enforcement or inves-
tigative officer has certified to the court that the information likely to be obtained

by such installation and use is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation.
(b)Contents of Order.
ÑAn order issued under this sectionÑ(1)shall specify
Ñ(A)the identity, if known, of the person to whom is leased or in whose name is
listed the telephone line to which the pen register or trap and trace device is to be

attached;(B)the identity, if known, of the person who is the subject of the criminal
investigation;
(C)the number and, if known, physical location of the telephone line to which
the pen register or trap and trace device is to be attached and, in the case of a trap
and trace device, the geographic limits of the trap and trace order; and
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS537(D)a statement of the offense to which the information likely to be obtained by
the pen register or trap and trace device relates; and
(2)shall direct, upon the request of the applicant, the furnishing of information,

facilities, and technical assistance necessary to accomplish the installation of the
pen register or trap and trace device under section 3124 of this title.
(c)Time Period and Extensions.
Ñ(1)An order issued under this section shall authorize the installation and use of
a pen register or a trap and trace device for a period not to exceed sixty days.
(2)Extensions of such an order may be granted, but only upon an application

for an order under section 3122 of this title and upon the judicial finding required
by subsection (a) of this section. The period of extension shall be for a period not
to exceed sixty days.
(d)Nondisclosure of Existence of Pen Register or a Trap and Trace De-
vice.ÑAn order authorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen regis-
ter or a trap and trace device shall direct that
Ñ(1)the order be sealed until otherwise ordered by the court; and
(2)the person owning or leasing the line to which the pen register or a trap and

trace device is attached, or who has been ordered by the court to provide assis-
tance to the applicant, not disclose the existence of the pen register or trap and
trace device or the existence of the investigation to the listed subscriber, or to any

other person, unless or until otherwise ordered by the court.
Sec. 3124.Assistance in installation and use of a pen register or a trap and
trace device.(a)Pen Registers.
ÑUpon the request of an attorney for the Government or
an officer of a law enforcement agency authorized to install and use a pen register
under this chapter, a provider of wire or electronic communication service, land-
lord, custodian, or other person shall furnish such investigative or law enforce-

ment officer forthwith all information, facilities, and technical assistance neces-
sary to accomplish the installation of the pen register unobtrusively and with a
minimum of interference with the services that the person so ordered by the court

accords the party with respect to whom the installation and use is to take place, if
such assistance is directed by a court order as provided in section 3123(b)(2) of
this title.(b)Trap and Trace Device.
ÑUpon the request of an attorney for the Gov-
ernment or an officer of a law enforcement agency authorized to receive the

results of a trap and trace device under this chapter, a provider of a wire or
electronic communication service, landlord, custodian, or other person shall in-
stall such device forthwith on the appropriate line and shall furnish such investi-

gative or law enforcement officer all additional information, facilities and techni-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.538APPENDIX Ncal assistance including installation and operation of the device unobtrusively
and with a minimum of interference with the services that the person so ordered
by the court accords the party with respect to whom the installation and use is to

take place, if such installation and assistance is directed by a court order as pro-
vided in section 3123(b)(2) of this title. Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the
results of the trap and trace device shall be furnished, pursuant to section 3123(b)

or section 3125 of this title, to the officer of a law enforcement agency, designatedin the court order, at reasonable intervals during regular business hours for the
duration of the order.(c)Compensation.
ÑA provider of a wire or electronic communication ser-
vice, landlord, custodian, or other person who furnishes facilities or technical
assistance pursuant to this section shall be reasonably compensated for such rea-

sonable expenses incurred in providing such facilities and assistance.
(d)No Cause of Action Against a Provider Disclosing Information Under
This Chapter.ÑNo cause of action shall lie in any court against any provider of a
wire or electronic communication service, its officers, employees, agents, or other
specified persons for providing information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order under this chapter or request pursuant to section

3125 of this title.(e)Defense.
ÑA good faith reliance on a court order under this chapter, a
request pursuant to section 3125 of this title, a legislative authorization, or a statu-

tory authorization is a complete defense against any civil or criminal action brought
under this chapter or any other law.
Sec. 3125.Emergency pen register and trap and trace device installation.
(a)Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any investigative
or law enforcement officer, specially designated by the Attorney General, the
Deputy Attorney General, the Associate Attorney General, any Assistant Attor-
ney General, any acting Assistant Attorney General, or any Deputy Assistant

Attorney General, or by the principal prosecuting attorney of any State or subdi-
vision thereof acting pursuant to a statute of that State, who reasonably deter-
mines thatÑ(1)an emergency situation exists that involves
Ñ(A)immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury to any person; or
(B)conspiratorial activities characteristic of organized crime,
that requires the installation and use of a pen register or a trap and trace device
before an order authorizing such installation and use can, with due diligence, be
obtained, and
(2)there are grounds upon which an order could be entered under this chapter
to authorize such installation and use ÔÕ1 may have installed and use a pen register
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS539or trap and trace device if, within forty-eight hours after the installation has
occurred, or begins to occur, an order approving the installation or use is issued in
accordance with section 3123 of this title.
ÕÕ4(b)In the absence of an authorizing order, such use shall immediately
terminate when the information sought is obtained, when the application for the

order is denied or when forty-eight hours have lapsed since the installation of the
pen register or trap and trace device, whichever is earlier.
(c)The knowing installation or use by any investigative or law enforce-
ment officer of a pen register or trap and trace device pursuant to subsection (a)
without application for the authorizing order within forty-eight hours of the in-

stallation shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(d)A provider for a wire or electronic service, landlord, custodian, or other
person who furnished facilities or technical assistance pursuant to this section
shall be reasonably compensated for such reasonable expenses incurred in pro-
viding such facilities and assistance.
Sec. 3126.Reports concerning pen registers and trap and trace devices.
The Attorney General shall annually report to Congress on the number of
pen register orders and orders for trap and trace devices applied for by law

enforcement agencies of the Department of Justice.
Sec. 3127.Definitions for chapter.
As used in this chapterÑ(1)the terms 
ÔÕwire communicationÕÕ, ÔÕelectronic communication
ÕÕ, andÔÕelectronic communication serviceÕÕ have the meanings set forth for such terms in
section 2510 of this title;
(2)the term 
ÔÕcourt of competent jurisdictionÕÕ means
Ñ(A)a district court of the United States (including a magistrate of such a court)
or a United States Court of Appeals; or
(B)a court of general criminal jurisdiction of a State authorized by the law of

that State to enter orders authorizing the use of a pen register or a trap and trace
device;4So in original. A comma probably should appear after the word 
ÔÕuseÕÕ, the quotationmarks probably should not appear, and the words beginning with 
ÔÕmayÕÕ probably should
appear flush left.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.540APPENDIX N(3)the term 
ÔÕpen registerÕÕ means a device which records or decodes elec-
tronic or other impulses which identify the numbers dialed or otherwise transmit-
ted on the telephone line to which such device is attached, but such term does not

include any device used by a provider or customer of a wire or electronic commu-
nication service for billing, or recording as an incident to billing, for communica-
tions services provided by such provider or any device used by a provider or

customer of a wire communication service for cost accounting or other like pur-
poses in the ordinary course of its business;
(4)the term 
ÔÕtrap and trace deviceÕÕ means a device which captures the
incoming electronic or other impulses which identify the originating number of
an instrument or device from which a wire or electronic communication was

transmitted;(5)the term 
ÔÕattorney for the GovernmentÕÕ has the meaning given such
term for the purposes of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure; and
(6)the term 
ÔÕStateÕÕ means a State, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
and any other possession or territory of the United States.
N.1.4Communications Assistance for
Law Enforcement Act of 1995Title IÑInterception of Digital and Other CommunicationsSec. 101.Short title.
This title may be cited as the ÒCommunications Assistance for Law Enforce-
ment ActÓ.Sec. 102.Definitions.
For purposes of this titleÑ(1)The terms defined in section 2510 of title 18, United States Code, have,
respectively, the meanings stated in that section.(2)The term 
Òcall-identifying informationÓ means dialing or signaling in-
formation that identifies the origin, direction, destination, or termination of eachcommunication generated or received by a subscriber by means of any equip-

ment, facility, or service of a telecommunications carrier.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS541(3)The term 
ÒCommissionÓ means the Federal Communications Commis-
sion.(4)The term 
Òelectronic messaging servicesÓ means software-based ser-
vices that enable the sharing of data, images, sound, writing, or other information
among computing devices controlled by the senders or recipients of the messages.
(5)The term 
ÒgovernmentÓ means the government of the United States
and any agency or instrumentality thereof, the District of Columbia, any com-

monwealth, territory, or possession of the United States, and any State or politicalsubdivision thereof authorized by law to conduct electronic surveillance.
(6)The term 
Òinformation servicesÓÑ(A)means the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, trans-
forming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via

telecommunications; and(B)includes
Ñ(i)a service that permits a customer to retrieve stored information from, or file

information for storage in, information storage facilities;(ii)electronic publishing; and
(iii)electronic messaging services; but

(C)does not include any capability for a telecommunications carrier
Õs internalmanagement, control, or operation of its telecommunications network.
(7)The term 
Òtelecommunications support servicesÓ means a product, soft-
ware, or service used by a telecommunications carrier for the internal signaling or
switching functions of its telecommunications network.
(8)The term 
Òtelecommunications carrierÓÑ(A)means a person or entity engaged in the transmission or switching of wire
or electronic communications as a common carrier for hire; and(B)includes
Ñ(i)a person or entity engaged in providing commercial mobile service (as de-
fined in section 332(d) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 332(d))); or(ii)a person or entity engaged in providing wire or electronic communication

switching or transmission service to the extent that the Commission finds thatsuch service is a replacement for a substantial portion of the local telephone ex-
change service and that it is in the public interest to deem such a person or entity

to be a telecommunications carrier for purposes of this title; but
(C)does not include
Ñ(i)persons or entities insofar as they are engaged in providing information

services; and(ii)any class or category of telecommunications carriers that the Commission
exempts by rule after consultation with the Attorney General.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.542APPENDIX NSec. 103.Assistance capability requirements.
(a)Capability Requirements.
ÑExcept as provided in subsections (b), (c),and (d) of this section and sections 108(a) and 109(b) and (d), a telecommunica-tions carrier shall ensure that its equipment, facilities, or services that provide acustomer or subscriber with the ability to originate, terminate, or direct communi-
cations are capable ofÑ(1)expeditiously isolating and enabling the government, pursuant to a court
order or other lawful authorization, to intercept, to the exclusion of any other
communications, all wire and electronic communications carried by the carrierwithin a service area to or from equipment, facilities, or services of a subscriber of
such carrier concurrently with their transmission to or from the subscriber
Õs equip-ment, facility, or service, or at such later time as may be acceptable to the govern-
ment;(2)expeditiously isolating and enabling the government, pursuant to a court

order or other lawful authorization, to access call-identifying information that is
reasonably available to the carrierÑ(A)before, during, or immediately after the transmission of a wire or electronic

communication (or at such later time as may be acceptable to the government);and(B)in a manner that allows it to be associated with the communication to which

it pertains, except that, with regard to information acquired solely pursuant to the
authority for pen registers and trap and trace devices (as defined in section 3127 of
title 18, United States Code), such call-identifying information shall not include

any information that may disclose the physical location of the subscriber (except

to the extent that the location may be determined from the telephone number);(3)delivering intercepted communications and call-identifying information to
the government, pursuant to a court order or other lawful authorization, in a
format such that they may be transmitted by means of equipment, facilities, or
services procured by the government to a location other than the premises of thecarrier; and
(4)facilitating authorized communications interceptions and access to call-iden-
tifying information unobtrusively and with a minimum of interference with anysubscriberÕs telecommunications service and in a manner that protectsÑ(A)the privacy and security of communications and call-identifying informa-
tion not authorized to be intercepted; and(B)information regarding the government
Õs interception of communications
and access to call-identifying information.(b)Limitations.
Ñ(1)Design of features and systems configurations.
ÑThis title does not autho-rize any law enforcement agency or officerÑ(A)to require any specific design of equipment, facilities, services, features, or

system configurations to be adopted by any provider of a wire or electronic com-munication service, any manufacturer of telecommunications equipment, or any
provider of telecommunications support services; orCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS543(B)to prohibit the adoption of any equipment, facility, service, or feature by any
provider of a wire or electronic communication service, any manufacturer of tele-
communications equipment, or any provider of telecommunications support ser-

vices.(2)Information services; private networks and interconnection services and
facilities.ÑThe requirements of subsection (a) do not apply toÑ(A)information services; or
(B)equipment, facilities, or services that support the transport or switching of
communications for private networks or for the sole purpose of interconnecting
telecommunications carriers.(3)Encryption.
ÑA telecommunications carrier shall not be responsible for de-
crypting, or ensuring the governmentÕs ability to decrypt, any communicationencrypted by a subscriber or customer, unless the encryption was provided by the
carrier and the carrier possesses the information necessary to decrypt the commu-nication.(c)Emergency or Exigent Circumstances.
ÑIn emergency or exigent cir-cumstances (including those described in sections 2518 (7) or (11)(b) and 3125 of
title 18, United States Code, and section 1805(e) of title 50 of such Code), a carrierat its discretion may comply with subsection (a)(3) by allowing monitoring at itspremises if that is the only means of accomplishing the interception or access.
(d)Mobile Service Assistance Requirements.
ÑA telecommunications car-rier that is a provider of commercial mobile service (as defined in section 332(d) of
the Communications Act of 1934) offering a feature or service that allows sub-

scribers to redirect, hand off, or assign their wire or electronic communications to
another service area or another service provider or to utilize facilities in anotherservice area or of another service provider shall ensure that, when the carrier that

had been providing assistance for the interception of wire or electronic communi-
cations or access to call-identifying information pursuant to a court order or law-
ful authorization no longer has access to the content of such communications or
call-identifying information within the service area in which interception has been
occurring as a result of the subscriberÕs use of such a feature or service, informa-tion is made available to the government (before, during, or immediately after the

transfer of such communications) identifying the provider of wire or electroniccommunication service that has acquired access to the communications.Sec. 104.Notices of capacity requirements.
(a)Notices of Maximum and Actual Capacity Requirements.
Ñ(1)In general.
ÑNot later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this title,after consulting with State and local law enforcement agencies, telecommunica-
tions carriers, providers of telecommunications support services, and manufac-
turers of telecommunications equipment, and after notice and comment, the At-torney General shall publish in the Federal Register and provide to appropriate
telecommunications industry associations and standard-setting organizations
ÑCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.544APPENDIX N(A)notice of the actual number of communication interceptions, pen registers,
and trap and trace devices, representing a portion of the maximum capacity set
forth under subparagraph (B), that the Attorney General estimates that govern-

ment agencies authorized to conduct electronic surveillance may conduct and usesimultaneously by the date that is 4 years after the date of enactment of this title;and
(B)notice of the maximum capacity required to accommodate all of the commu-
nication interceptions, pen registers, and trap and trace devices that the Attorney
General estimates that government agencies authorized to conduct electronic sur-

veillance may conduct and use simultaneously after the date that is 4 years after
the date of enactment of this title.(2)Basis of notices.
ÑThe notices issued under paragraph (1)Ñ(A)may be based upon the type of equipment, type of service, number of sub-
scribers, type or size or carrier, nature of service area, or any other measure; and(B)shall identify, to the maximum extent practicable, the capacity required at

specific geographic locations.(b)Compliance With Capacity Notices.
Ñ(1)Initial capacity.
ÑWithin 3 years after the publication by the Attorney Gen-
eral of a notice of capacity requirements or within 4 years after the date of enact-ment of this title, whichever is longer, a telecommunications carrier shall, subject

to subsection (e), ensure that its systems are capable ofÑ(A)accommodating simultaneously the number of interceptions, pen registers,
and trap and trace devices set forth in the notice under subsection (a)(1)(A); and
(B)expanding to the maximum capacity set forth in the notice under subsection

(a)(1)(B).(2)Expansion to maximum capacity.
ÑAfter the date described in paragraph(1), a telecommunications carrier shall, subject to subsection (e), ensure that it can
accommodate expeditiously any increase in the actual number of communication
interceptions, pen registers, and trap and trace devices that authorized agencies
may seek to conduct and use, up to the maximum capacity requirement set forth
in the notice under subsection (a)(1)(B).(c)Notices of Increased Maximum Capacity Requirements.
Ñ(1)Notice.
ÑThe Attorney General shall periodically publish in the Federal Reg-ister, after notice and comment, notice of any necessary increases in the maximumcapacity requirement set forth in the notice under subsection (a)(1)(B).
(2)Compliance.
ÑWithin 3 years after notice of increased maximum capacity
requirements is published under paragraph (1), or within such longer time period
as the Attorney General may specify, a telecommunications carrier shall, subject

to subsection (e), ensure that its systems are capable of expanding to the increasedmaximum capacity set forth in the notice.(d)Carrier Statement.
ÑWithin 180 days after the publication by the Attor-ney General of a notice of capacity requirements pursuant to subsection (a) or (c),a telecommunications carrier shall submit to the Attorney General a statement

identifying any of its systems or services that do not have the capacity to accom-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS545modate simultaneously the number of interceptions, pen registers, and trap andtrace devices set forth in the notice under such subsection.
(e)Reimbursement Required for Compliance.
ÑThe Attorney General shall
review the statements submitted under subsection (d) and may, subject to theavailability of appropriations, agree to reimburse a telecommunications carrier
for costs directly associated with modifications to attain such capacity require-
ment that are determined to be reasonable in accordance with section 109(e). Untilthe Attorney General agrees to reimburse such carrier for such modification, such

carrier shall be considered to be in compliance with the capacity notices undersubsection (a) or (c).Sec. 105.Systems security and integrity.
A telecommunications carrier shall ensure that any interception of commu-nications or access to call-identifying information effected within its switchingpremises can be activated only in accordance with a court order or other lawful
authorization and with the affirmative intervention of an individual officer or
employee of the carrier acting in accordance with regulations prescribed by theCommission.Sec. 106.Cooperation of equipment manufacturers and providers of telecom-
munications support services.(a)Consultation.
ÑA telecommunications carrier shall consult, as neces-
sary, in a timely fashion with manufacturers of its telecommunications transmis-

sion and switching equipment and its providers of telecommunications support
services for the purpose of ensuring that current and planned equipment, facili-
ties, and services comply with the capability requirements of section 103 and the
capacity requirements identified by the Attorney General under section 104.
(b)Cooperation.
ÑSubject to sections 104(e), 108(a), and 109(b) and (d), a
manufacturer of telecommunications transmission or switching equipment and a
provider of telecommunications support services shall, on a reasonably timely
basis and at a reasonable charge, make available to the telecommunications carri-
ers using its equipment, facilities, or services such features or modifications as arenecessary to permit such carriers to comply with the capability requirements ofsection 103 and the capacity requirements identified by the Attorney General
under section 104.Sec. 107.Technical requirements and standards; extension of compliance date.
(a)Safe Harbor.
Ñ(1)Consultation.
ÑTo ensure the efficient and industry-wide implementation
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.546APPENDIX Nof the assistance capability requirements under section 103, the Attorney General,in coordination with other Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies,shall consult with appropriate associations and standard-setting organizations of

the telecommunications industry, with representatives of users of telecommuni-cations equipment, facilities, and services, and with State utility commissions.(2)Compliance under accepted standards.
ÑA telecommunications carrier shallbe found to be in compliance with the assistance capability requirements undersection 103, and a manufacturer of telecommunications transmission or switching
equipment or a provider of telecommunications support services shall be found to
be in compliance with section 106, if the carrier, manufacturer, or support serviceprovider is in compliance with publicly available technical requirements or stan-dards adopted by an industry association or standard-setting organization, or by
the Commission under subsection (b), to meet the requirements of section 103.(3)Absence of standards.
ÑThe absence of technical requirements or standardsfor implementing the assistance capability requirements of section 103 shall not
Ñ(A)preclude a telecommunications carrier, manufacturer, or telecommunica-
tions support services provider from deploying a technology or service; or(B)relieve a carrier, manufacturer, or telecommunications support services pro-

vider of the obligations imposed by section 103 or 106, as applicable.(b)Commission Authority.
ÑIf industry associations or standard-settingorganizations fail to issue technical requirements or standards or if a governmentagency or any other person believes that such requirements or standards aredeficient, the agency or person may petition the Commission to establish, by rule,

technical requirements or standards thatÑ(1)meet the assistance capability requirements of section 103 by cost-effective
methods;(2)protect the privacy and security of communications not authorized to be

intercepted;(3)minimize the cost of such compliance on residential ratepayers;
(4)serve the policy of the United States to encourage the provision of new

technologies and services to the public; and(5)provide a reasonable time and conditions for compliance with and the tran-
sition to any new standard, including defining the obligations of telecommunica-
tions carriers under section 103 during any transition period.(c)Extension of Compliance Date for Equipment, Facilities, and Services.
Ñ(1)Petition.
ÑA telecommunications carrier proposing to install or deploy, orhaving installed or deployed, any equipment, facility, or service prior to the effec-tive date of section 103 may petition the Commission for 1 or more extensions of

the deadline for complying with the assistance capability requirements under
section 103.(2)Grounds for extension.
ÑThe Commission may, after consultation with theAttorney General, grant an extension under this subsection, if the Commissiondetermines that compliance with the assistance capability requirements under
section 103 is not reasonably achievable through application of technology avail-

able within the compliance period.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS547(3)Length of extension.
ÑAn extension under this subsection shall extend for
no longer than the earlier ofÑ(A)the date determined by the Commission as necessary for the carrier to com-

ply with the assistance capability requirements under section 103; or(B)the date that is 2 years after the date on which the extension is granted.
(4)Applicability of extension.
ÑAn extension under this subsection shall apply
to only that part of the carrierÕs business on which the new equipment, facility, orservice is used.Sec. 108.Enforcement orders.
(a)Grounds for Issuance.
ÑA court shall issue an order enforcing this title
under section 2522 of title 18, United States Code, only if the court finds that
Ñ(1)alternative technologies or capabilities or the facilities of another carrier are

not reasonably available to law enforcement for implementing the interception ofcommunications or access to call-identifying information; and(2)compliance with the requirements of this title is reasonably achievable through

the application of available technology to the equipment, facility, or service at issueor would have been reasonably achievable if timely action had been taken.(b)Time for Compliance.
ÑUpon issuing an order enforcing this title, thecourt shall specify a reasonable time and conditions for complying with its order,
considering the good faith efforts to comply in a timely manner, any effect on thecarrierÕs, manufacturerÕs, or service providerÕs ability to continue to do business,
the degree of culpability or delay in undertaking efforts to comply, and such other

matters as justice may require.(c)Limitations.
ÑAn order enforcing this title may notÑ(1)require a telecommunications carrier to meet the government
Õs demand forinterception of communications and acquisition of call-identifying information toany extent in excess of the capacity for which the Attorney General has agreed to
reimburse such carrier;
(2)require any telecommunications carrier to comply with assistance capability
requirement of section 103 if the Commission has determined (pursuant to section109(b)(1)) that compliance is not reasonably achievable, unless the Attorney Gen-

eral has agreed (pursuant to section 109(b)(2)) to pay the costs described in section
109(b)(2)(A); or(3)require a telecommunications carrier to modify, for the purpose of comply-

ing with the assistance capability requirements of section 103, any equipment,
facility, or service deployed on or before January 1, 1995, unlessÑ(A)the Attorney General has agreed to pay the telecommunications carrier for

all reasonable costs directly associated with modifications necessary to bring theequipment, facility, or service into compliance with those requirements; or
(B)the equipment, facility, or service has been replaced or significantly up-

graded or otherwise undergoes major modification.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.548APPENDIX NSec. 109.Payment of costs of telecommunications carriers to comply with ca-
pability requirements.(a)Equipment, Facilities, and Services Deployed on or Before January 1,
1995.ÑThe Attorney General may, subject to the availability of appropriations,agree to pay telecommunications carriers for all reasonable costs directly associ-

ated with the modifications performed by carriers in connection with equipment,facilities, and services installed or deployed on or before January 1, 1995, to estab-lish the capabilities necessary to comply with section 103.(b)Equipment, Facilities, and Services Deployed After January 1, 1995.
Ñ(1)Determinations of reasonably achievable.
ÑThe Commission, on petitionfrom a telecommunications carrier or any other interested person, and after noticeto the Attorney General, shall determine whether compliance with the assistance
capability requirements of section 103 is reasonably achievable with respect to

any equipment, facility, or service installed or deployed after January 1, 1995. The
Commission shall make such determination within 1 year after the date such
petition is filed. In making such determination, the Commission shall determine
whether compliance would impose significant difficulty or expense on the carrier
or on the users of the carrierÕs systems and shall consider the following factors:(A)The effect on public safety and national security.

(B)The effect on rates for basic residential telephone service.
(C)The need to protect the privacy and security of communications not autho-
rized to be intercepted.
(D)The need to achieve the capability assistance requirements of section 103 by

cost-effective methods.(E)The effect on the nature and cost of the equipment, facility, or service at
issue.
(F)The effect on the operation of the equipment, facility, or service at issue.
(G)The policy of the United States to encourage the provision of new technolo-
gies and services to the public.
(H)The financial resources of the telecommunications carrier.
(I)The effect on competition in the provision of telecommunications services.
(J)The extent to which the design and development of the equipment, facility,

or service was initiated before January 1, 1995.
(K)Such other factors as the Commission determines are appropriate.
(2)Compensation.
ÑIf compliance with the assistance capability requirementsof section 103 is not reasonably achievable with respect to equipment, facilities, orservices deployed after January 1, 1995Ñ(A)the Attorney General, on application of a telecommunications carrier, may

agree, subject to the availability of appropriations, to pay the telecommunicationscarrier for the additional reasonable costs of making compliance with such assis-tance capability requirements reasonably achievable; and
(B)if the Attorney General does not agree to pay such costs, the telecommuni-
cations carrier shall be deemed to be in compliance with such capability require-
ments.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS549(c)Allocation of Funds for Payment.
ÑThe Attorney General shall allocatefunds appropriated to carry out this title in accordance with law enforcementpriorities determined by the Attorney General.(d)Failure To Make Payment With Respect To Equipment, Facilities, and
Services Deployed on or Before January 1, 1995.
ÑIf a carrier has requested pay-ment in accordance with procedures promulgated pursuant to subsection (e), and

the Attorney General has not agreed to pay the telecommunications carrier for all
reasonable costs directly associated with modifications necessary to bring anyequipment, facility, or service deployed on or before January 1, 1995, into compli-
ance with the assistance capability requirements of section 103, such equipment,facility, or service shall be considered to be in compliance with the assistance
capability requirements of section 103 until the equipment, facility, or service is

replaced or significantly upgraded or otherwise undergoes major modification.
(e)Cost Control Regulations.
Ñ(1)In general.
ÑThe Attorney General shall, after notice and comment, estab-lish regulations necessary to effectuate timely and cost-efficient payment to tele-
communications carriers under this title, under chapters 119 and 121 of title 18,

United States Code, and under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978(50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).(2)Contents of regulations.
ÑThe Attorney General, after consultation with theCommission, shall prescribe regulations for purposes of determining reasonable
costs under this title. Such regulations shall seek to minimize the cost to theFederal Government and shallÑ(A)permit recovery from the Federal Government of
Ñ(i)the direct costs of developing the modifications described in subsection (a),
of providing the capabilities requested under subsection (b)(2), or of providingthe capacities requested under section 104(e), but only to the extent that such costs

have not been recovered from any other governmental or nongovernmental en-tity;(ii)the costs of training personnel in the use of such capabilities or capacities;

and(iii)the direct costs of deploying or installing such capabilities or capacities;
(B)in the case of any modification that may be used for any purpose other than

lawfully authorized electronic surveillance by a law enforcement agency of agovernment, permit recovery of only the incremental cost of making the modifica-
tion suitable for such law enforcement purposes; and
(C)maintain the confidentiality of trade secrets.
(3)Submission of claims.
ÑSuch regulations shall require any telecommunica-
tions carrier that the Attorney General has agreed to pay for modifications pursu-

ant to this section and that has installed or deployed such modification to submitto the Attorney General a claim for payment that contains or is accompanied by
such information as the Attorney General may require.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.550APPENDIX NSec. 110.Authorization of appropriations.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title a total of$500,000,000 for fiscal years 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998. Such sums are authorizedto remain available until expended.Sec. 111.Effective date.
(a)In General.
ÑExcept as provided in subsection (b), this title shall takeeffect on the date of enactment of this Act.(b)Assistance Capability and Systems Security and Integrity Require-
ments.ÑSections 103 and 105 of this title shall take effect on the date that is 4 years
after the date of enactment of this Act.Sec. 112.Reports.
(a)Reports by the Attorney General.
Ñ(1)In general.
ÑOn or before November 30, 1995, and on or before November
30 of each year thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit to Congress and
make available to the public a report on the amounts paid during the precedingfiscal year to telecommunications carriers under sections 104(e) and 109.
(2)Contents.
ÑA report under paragraph (1) shall includeÑ(A)a detailed accounting of the amounts paid to each carrier and the equip-
ment, facility, or service for which the amounts were paid; and(B)projections of the amounts expected to be paid in the current fiscal year, the

carriers to which payment is expected to be made, and the equipment, facilities, or
services for which payment is expected to be made.(b)Reports by the Comptroller General.
Ñ(1)Payments for modifications.
ÑOn or before April 1, 1996, and every 2 yearsthereafter, the Comptroller General of the United States, after consultation with
the Attorney General and the telecommunications industry, shall submit to the

Congress a reportÑ(A)describing the type of equipment, facilities, and services that have been
brought into compliance under this title; and

(B)reflecting its analysis of the reasonableness and cost-effectiveness of the
payments made by the Attorney General to telecommunications carriers for modi-fications necessary to ensure compliance with this title.
(2)Compliance cost estimates.
ÑA report under paragraph (1) shall include the
findings and conclusions of the Comptroller General on the costs to be incurredby telecommunications carriers to comply with the assistance capability require-
ments of section 103 after the effective date of such section 103, including projec-tions of the amounts expected to be incurred and a description of the equipment,
facilities, or services for which they are expected to be incurred.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS551N.1.5Computer Security Act of 1987
Sec. 1.Short Title.
The Act may be cited as the ÒComputer Security Act of 1987Ó.Sec. 2.Purpose.
(a)IN GENERAL.
ÑThe Congress declares that improving the security andprivacy of sensitive information in Federal computer systems is in the public
interest, and hereby creates a means for establishing minimum acceptable secu-
rity practices for such systems, without limiting the scope of security measures
already planned or in use.(b)SPECIFIC PURPOSES.
ÑThe purposes of this Act areÑ(1)by amending the Act of March 3, 1901, to assign to theNational Bureau of
Standards responsibility for developing standards and guidelines for Federal com-

puter systems, including responsibility for developing standards and guidelinesneeded to assure the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive information in
Federal computer systems, drawing on the technical advice and assistance (in-

cluding work products) of the National Security Agency, where appropriate;(2)to provide for promulgation of such standards and guidelines by amending
section 111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949;
(3)to require establishment of security plans by all operators of Federal com-

puter systems that contain sensitive information; and(4)to require mandatory periodic training for all persons involved in manage-
ment, use, or operation of Federal computer systems that contain sensitive infor-

mation.Sec. 3.Establishment of computer standards program.
The Act of March 3, 1901, (15 U.S.C. 271-278h), is amendedÑ(1)in section 2(f), by striking out 
ÒandÓ at the end of paragraph (18), by
striking out the period at the end of paragraph (19) and inserting in lieu thereof:

 Ò; andÓ, and by inserting after such paragraph the following:Ò(20) the study of computer systems (as that term is defined in section 20(d) of
this Act) and their use to control machinery and processes.
Ó;(2)by redesignating section 20 as section 22, and by inserting after section
19 the following new sections:ÒSEC. 20. (a) The National Bureau of Standards shallÑÒ(1) have the mission of developing standards, guidelines, and associated meth-
ods and techniques for computer systems;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.552APPENDIX NÒ(2) except as described in paragraph (3) of this subsection (relating to security
standards), develop uniform standards and guidelines for Federal computer sys-tems, except those systems excluded by section 2315 of title 10, United States
Code, or section 3502(2) of title 44, United States Code.Ò(3) have responsibility within the Federal Government for developing technical,
management, physical, and administrative standards and guidelines for the cost-
effective security and privacy of sensitive information in Federal computer sys-tems exceptÑÒ(A) those systems excluded by section 2315 of title 10, United States Code, or
section 3502(2) of title 44, United States Code; and
Ò(B) those systems which are protected at all times by procedures established for
information which has been specifically authorized under criteria established by

an Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept secret in the interest of
national defense or foreign policy, the primary purpose of which standards and
guidelines shall be to control loss and unauthorized modification or disclosure of
sensitive information in such systems and to prevent computer-related fraud and
misuse;Ò(4) submit standards and guidelines developed pursuant to paragraphs (2) and
(3) of this subsection, along with recommendations as to the extent to which theseshould be made compulsory and binding, to the Secretary of Commerce for pro-
mulgation under section 111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative Ser-

vices Act of 1949;Ò(5) develop guidelines for use by operators of Federal computer systems thatcontain sensitive information in training their employees in security awareness
and accepted security practice, as required by section 5 of the Computer Security
Act of 1987; and
Ò(6) develop validation procedures for, and evaluate the effectiveness of, stan-
dards and guidelines developed pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this

subsection through research and liaison with other government and private agen-cies.Ò(b) In fulfilling subsection (a) of this section, the National Bureau of Standards isauthorizedÑÒ(1) to assist the private sector, upon request, in using and applying the results ofthe programs and activities under this section;Ò(2) to make recommendations, as appropriate, to the Administrator of GeneralServices on policies and regulations proposed pursuant to section 111(d) of theFederal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949;Ò(3) as requested, to provide to operators of Federal computer systems technical
assistance in implementing the standards and guidelines promulgated pursuant
to section 111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949;Ò(4) to assist, as appropriate, the Office of Personnel Management in developing
regulations pertaining to training, as required by section 5 of the Computer Secu-rity Act of 1987;Ò(5) to perform research and to conduct studies, as needed, to determine thenature and extent of the vulnerabilities of, and to devise techniques for the cost
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS553effective security and privacy of sensitive information in Federal computer sys-
tems; andÒ(6) to coordinate closely with other agencies and offices (including, but not lim-
ited to, the Departments of Defense and Energy, the National Security Agency,the General Accounting Office, the Office of Technology Assessment, and theOffice of Management and Budget)
ÑÒ(A) to assure maximum use of all existing and planned programs, materials,
studies, and reports relating to computer systems security and privacy, in order to
avoid unnecessary and costly duplication of effort; and

Ò(B) to assure, to the maximum extent feasible, that standards developed pursu-
ant to subsection (a) (3) and (5) are consistent and compatible with standards and
procedures developed for the protection of information in Federal computer sys-

tems which is authorized under criteria established by Executive order or an Act
of Congress to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy.
Ò(c) For the purposes ofÑÒ(1) developing standards and guidelines for the protection of sensitive informa-
tion in Federal computer systems under subsections (a)(1) and (a)(3), and
Ò(2) performing research and conducting studies under subsection (b)(5), the Na-
tional Bureau of Standards shall draw upon computer system technical security

guidelines developed by the National Security Agency to the extent that the Na-tional Bureau of Standards determines that such guidelines are consistent withthe requirements for protecting sensitive information in Federal computer sys-

tems.Ò(d) As used in this sectionÑÒ(1) the term Ôcomputer systemÕÑÒ(A) means any equipment or interconnected system or subsystems of equipment
that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management,

movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception, of
data or information; andÒ(B) includesÑÒ(i) computers;
Ò(ii) ancillary equipment;Ò(iii) software, firmware, and similar procedures;Ò(iv) services, including support services; andÒ(v) related resources as defined by regulations issued by the Administrator for
General Services pursuant to section 111 of the Federal Property and Administra-

tive Services Act of 1949;Ò(2) the term ÔFederal computer systemÕÑÒ(A) means a computer system operated by a Federal agency or by a contractor of
a Federal agency or other organization that processes information (using a com-
puter system) on behalf of the Federal Government to accomplish a Federal func-tion; and

Ò(B) includes automatic data processing equipment as that term is defined in
section 111(a)(2) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949;
Ò(3) the term Ôoperator of a Federal computer systemÕ means a Federal agency,
contractor of a Federal agency, or other organization that processes information
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.554APPENDIX Nusing a computer system on behalf of the Federal Government to accomplish a
Federal function;Ò(4) the term Ôsensitive informationÕ means any information, the loss, misuse, or
unauthorized access to or modification of which could adversely affect the na-
tional interest or the conduct of Federal programs, or the privacy to which indi-
viduals are entitled under section 552a of title 5, United States Code (the Privacy

Act), but which has not been specifically authorized under criteria established byan Executive order or an Act of Congress to be kept secret in the interest of
national defense or foreign policy; and
Ò(5) the term ÔFederal agencyÕ has the meaning given such term by section 3(b) of
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949.
ÒSEC. 21. (a) There is hereby established a Computer System Security and Pri-vacy Advisory Board within the Department of Commerce. The Secretary of Com-merce shall appoint the chairman of the Board. The Board shall be composed oftwelve additional members appointed by the Secretary of Commerce as follows:
Ò(1) four members from outside the Federal Government who are eminent in the
computer or telecommunications industry, at least one of whom is representative
of small or medium sized companies in such industries;

Ò(2) four members from outside the Federal Government who are eminent in the
fields of computer or telecommunications technology, or related disciplines, but
who are not employed by or representative of a producer of computer or telecom-
munications equipment; and
Ò(3) four members from the Federal Government who have computer systems
management experience, including experience in computer systems security and
privacy, at least one of whom shall be from the National Security Agency.
Ò(b) The duties of the Board shall beÑÒ(1) to identify emerging managerial, technical, administrative, and physical safe-
guard issues relative to computer systems security and privacy;
Ò(2) to advise the Bureau of Standards and the Secretary of Commerce on security
and privacy issues pertaining to Federal computer systems; and
Ò(3) to report its findings to the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the Office
of Management and Budget, the Director of the National Security Agency, and the

appropriate Committees of the Congress.
Ò(c) The term of office of each member of the Board shall be four years, exceptthatÑÒ(1) of the initial members, three shall be appointed for terms of one year, three
shall be appointed for terms of two years, three shall be appointed for terms of
three years, and three shall be appointed for terms of four years; and
Ò(2) any member appointed to fill a vacancy in the Board shall serve for the
remainder of the term for which his predecessor was appointed.
Ò(d) The Board shall not act in the absence of a quorum, which shall consist of
seven members.Ò(e) Members of the Board, other than full-time employees of the Federal Govern-
ment while attending meetings of such committees or while otherwise perform-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS555ing duties at the request of the Board Chairman while away from their homes ora regular place of business, may be allowed travel expenses in accordance withsubchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.Ò(f) To provide the staff services necessary to assist the Board in carrying out its
functions, the Board may utilize personnel from the National Bureau of Standards
or any other agency of the Federal Government with the consent of the head of theagency.Ò(g) As used in this section, the terms Ôcomputer systemÕ and 
ÔFederal computersystemÕ have the meanings given in section 20(d) of this Act.
Ó; and(3) by adding at the end thereof the following new section:ÒSEC. 23.This Act may be cited as the National Bureau of Standards Act.
ÓSec. 4.Amendment to Brooks Act.
Section 111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of
1949 (40 U.S.C. 759(d)) is amended to read as follows:
Ò(d)(1) The Secretary of Commerce shall, on the basis of standards and guidelines
developed by the National Bureau of Standards pursuant to section 20(a) (2) and
(3) of the National Bureau of Standards Act, promulgate standards and guidelines

pertaining to Federal computer systems, making such standards compulsory and
binding to the extent to which the Secretary determines necessary to improve the
efficiency of operation or security and privacy of Federal computer systems. The

President may disapprove or modify such standards and guidelines if he deter-
mines such action to be in the public interest. The President
Õs authority to disap-prove or modify such standards and guidelines may not be delegated. Notice of
such disapproval or modification shall be submitted promptly to the Committee
on  Government Operations of the House of Representatives and the Committee
on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and shall be published promptly in the

Federal Register. Upon receiving notice of such disapproval or modification, theSecretary of Commerce shall immediately rescind or modify such standards orguidelines as directed by the President.Ò(2) The head of a Federal agency may employ standards for the cost effective
security and privacy of sensitive information in a Federal computer system within
or under the supervision of that agency that are more stringent than the standards
promulgated by the Secretary of Commerce, if such standards contain, at a mini-
mum, the provisions of those applicable standards made compulsory and binding
by the Secretary of Commerce.Ò(3) The standards determined to be compulsory and binding may be waived bythe Secretary of Commerce in writing upon a determination that compliance

would adversely affect the accomplishment of the mission of an operator of aFederal computer system, or cause a major adverse financial impact on the opera-tor which is not offset by government-wide savings. The Secretary may delegate
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.556APPENDIX Nto the head of one or more Federal agencies authority to waive such standards tothe extent to which the Secretary determines such action to be necessary anddesirable to allow for timely and effective implementation of Federal computer
systems standards. The head of such agency may redelegate such authority only
to a senior official designated pursuant to section 3506(b) of title 44, United States
Code. Notice of each such waiver and delegation shall be transmitted promptly to
the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives andthe Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and shall be published
promptly in the Federal Register.Ò(4) The Administrator shall revise the Federal information resources manage-
ment regulations (41 CFR ch. 201) to be consistent with the standards and guide-lines promulgated by the Secretary of Commerce under this subsection.Ò(5) As used in this subsection, the terms ÔFederal computer systemÕ and 
Ôoperatorof a Federal computer systemÕ have the meanings given in section 20(d) of the
National Bureau of Standards Act.Ó.Sec. 5.Federal computer system security training.
(a)In General.
ÑEach Federal agency shall provide for the mandatory peri-odic training in computer security awareness and accepted computer security
practice of all employees who are involved with the management, use, or opera-tion of each Federal computer system within or under the supervision of that
agency. Such training shall beÑ(1)provided in accordance with the guidelines developed pursuant to section
20(a)(5) of the National Bureau of Standards Act (as added by section 3 of this
Act), and in accordance with the regulations issued under subsection (c) of this

section for Federal civilian employees; or(2)provided by an alternative training program approved by the head of that
agency on the basis of a determination that the alternative training program is at

least as effective in accomplishing the objectives of such guidelines and regula-
tions.(b)Training Objectives.
ÑTraining under this section shall be started within60 days after the issuance of the regulations described in subsection (c). Such
training shall be designedÑ(1)to enhance employees
Õ awareness of the threats to and vulnerability of com-
puter systems; and(2)to encourage the use of improved computer security practices.
(c)Regulations.
ÑWithin six months after the date of the enactment of thisAct, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall issue regulations

prescribing the procedures and scope of the training to be provided Federal civil-ian employees under subsection (a) and the manner in which such training is to be
carried out.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS557Sec. 6.Additional responsibilities for computer systems security and privacy.
(a)Identification of systems that contain sensitive information
ÑWithin 6months after the date of enactment of this Act, each Federal agency shall identify
each Federal computer system, and system under development, which is withinor under the supervision of that agency and which contains sensitive information.(b)Security Plan.
ÑWithin one year after the date of enactment of this Act,
each such agency shall, consistent with the standards, guidelines, policies, and
regulations prescribed pursuant to section 111(d) of the Federal Property andAdministrative Services Act of 1949, establish a plan for the security and privacyof each Federal computer system identified by that agency pursuant to subsection

(a) that is commensurate with the risk and magnitude or the harm resulting from
the loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of the information
contained in such system.  Copies of each such plan shall be transmitted to the

National Bureau of Standards and the National Security Agency for advice andcomment. A summary of such plan shall be included in the agencyÕs five-yearplan required by section 3505 of title 44, United States Code. Such plan shall be

subject to disapproval by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Such plan shall be revised annually as necessary.Sec. 7.Definitions.
As used in this Act, the terms Òcomputer systemÓ, ÒFederal computer sys-
temÓ, Òoperator of a Federal computer system
Ó, Òsensitive informationÓ, and ÒFed-eral agencyÓ have the meanings given in section 20(d) of the National Bureau of
Standards Act (as added by section 3 of this Act).Sec. 8.Rules of construction of act.
Nothing in this Act, or in any amendment made by this Act, shallbe con-
struedÑ(1) to constitute authority to withhold information sought pursuant to
section 552 of title 5, United States Code; or(2)to authorize any Federal agency to limit, restrict, regulate, or control the
collection, maintenance, disclosure, use, transfer, or sale of any information (re-

gardless of the medium in which the information may be maintained) that isÑ(A)privately-owned information;
(B)disclosable under section 552 of title 5, United  States Code, orother law

requiring or authorizing the public disclosure of information; or
(C)public domain information.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.558APPENDIX NN.1.6Arms Export Control Act (U.S. Code, Title 22, Chapter 39)
Sec. 2751.Need for international defense cooperation and military export con-
trols; Presidential waiver; report to Congress; arms sales policy.
As declared by the Congress in the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22
U.S.C. 2551 et seq.), an ultimate goal of the United States continues to be a world
which is free from the scourge of war and the dangers and burdens of armaments;

in which the use of force has been subordinated to the rule of law; and in whichinternational adjustments to a changing world are achieved peacefully. In further-
ance of that goal, it remains the policy of the United States to encourage regional

arms control and disarmament agreements and to discourage arms races.The Congress recognizes, however, that the United States and other free and
independent countries continue to have valid requirements for effective and mu-
tually beneficial defense relationships in order to maintain and foster the environ-ment of international peace and security essential to social, economic, and politi-
cal progress. Because of the growing cost and complexity of defense equipment, it

is increasingly difficult and uneconomic for  any country, particularly a develop-
ing country, to fill all of its legitimate defense requirements from its own designand production base. The need for international defense cooperation among the

United States and those friendly countries to which it is allied by mutual defensetreaties is especially important, since the effectiveness of their armed forces to actin concert to deter or defeat aggression is directly related to the operational com-

patibility of their defense equipment.Accordingly, it remains the policy of the United States to facilitate the com-
mon defense by entering into international arrangements with friendly countrieswhich further the objective of applying agreed resources of each country to pro-
grams and projects of cooperative exchange of data, research, development, pro-duction, procurement, and logistics support to achieve specific national defense
requirements and objectives of mutual concern. To this end, this chapter autho-

rizes sales by the United States Government to friendly countries having suffi-cient wealth to maintain and equip their own military forces at adequate strength,or to assume progressively larger shares of the costs thereof, without undue bur-

den to their economies, in accordance with the restraints and control measures
specified herein and in furtherance of the security objectives of the United Statesand of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.It is the sense of the Congress that all such sales be approved only when they
are consistent with the foreign policy interests of the United States, the purposesof the foreign assistance program of the United States as embodied in the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.), the extent and charac-ter of the military requirement, and the economic and financial capability of the
recipient country, with particular regard being given, where appropriate, to

proper balance among such sales, grant military assistance, and economic assis-tance as well as to the impact of the sales on programs of social and economicdevelopment and on existing or incipient arms races.It shall be the policy of the United States to exert leadership in the worldCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS559community to bring about arrangements for reducing the international trade inimplements of war and to lessen the danger of outbreak of regional conflict and
the burdens of armaments. United States programs for or procedures governing
the export, sale, and grant of defense articles and defense services to foreigncountries and international organizations shall be administered in a manner which
will carry out this policy.It is the sense of the Congress that the President should seek to initiate
multilateral discussions for the purpose of reaching agreements among the princi-
pal arms suppliers and arms purchasers and other countries with respect to the

control of the international trade in armaments. It is further the sense of Congress
that the President should work actively with all nations to check and control the
international sale and distribution of conventional weapons of death and destruc-
tion and to encourage regional arms control arrangements. In furtherance of this
policy, the President should undertake a concerted effort to convene an interna-
tional conference of major arms-supplying and arms-purchasing nations which

shall consider measures to limit conventional arms transfers in the interest ofinternational peace and stability.It is the sense of the Congress that the aggregate value of defense articles
and defense servicesÑ(1)which are sold under section 2761 or section 2762 of this title; or
(2)which are licensed or approved for export under section 2778 of this title to,
for the use, or for benefit of the armed forces, police, intelligence, or other internal

security forces of a foreign country or international organization under a commer-

cial sales contract;in any fiscal year should not exceed current levels.It is the sense of the Congress that the President maintain adherence to a
policy of restraint in conventional arms transfers and that, in implementing thispolicy worldwide, a balanced approach should be taken and full regard given tothe security interests of the United States in all regions of the world and that
particular attention should be paid to controlling the flow of conventional arms to
the nations of the developing world. To this end, the President is encouraged tocontinue discussions with other arms suppliers in order to restrain the flow of

conventional arms to less developed countries.Sec. 2752.Coordination with foreign policy.
(a)Noninfringement of powers or functions of Secretary of State. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed to infringe upon the powers or func-
tions of the Secretary of State.(b)Responsibility for supervision and direction of sales, leases, financing,
cooperative projects, and exports. Under the direction of the President, the Secre-
tary of State (taking into account other United States activities abroad, such asmilitary assistance, economic assistance, and the food for peace program) shall beCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.560APPENDIX Nresponsible for the continuous supervision and general direction of sales, leases,financing, cooperative projects, and exports under this chapter, including, but notlimited to, determiningÑ(1)whether there will be a sale to or financing for a country and the amount
thereof;(2)whether there will be a lease to a country;
(3)whether there will be a cooperative project and the scope thereof; and

(4)whether there will be delivery or other performance under such sale, lease,
cooperative project, or export,to the end that sales, financing, leases, cooperative projects, and exports will be
integrated with other United States activities and to the end that the foreign policy

of the United States would be best served thereby.(c)Coordination among representatives of the United States. The Presi-
dent shall prescribe appropriate procedures to assure coordination among repre-
sentatives of the United States Government in each country, under the leadershipof the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission. The Chief of the diplomatic
mission shall make sure that recommendations of such representatives pertainingto sales are coordinated with political and economic considerations, and his com-ments shall accompany such recommendations if he so desires.Sec. 2753.Eligibility for defense services or defense articles.
(a)Prerequisites for consent by President; report to Congress.
No defense article or defense service shall be sold or leased by the United StatesGovernment under this chapter to any country or international organization, and

no agreement shall be entered into for a cooperative project (as defined in section2767 of this title), unlessÑ(1)the President finds that the furnishing of defense articles and defense ser-

vices to such country or international organization will strengthen the security of
the United States and promote world peace;
(2)the country or international organization shall have agreed not to transfer

title to, or possession of, any defense article or related training or other defense
service so furnished to it, or produced in a cooperative project (as defined in
section 2767 of this title), to anyone not an officer, employee, or agent of that

country or international organization (or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
or the specified member countries (other than the United States) in the case of a
cooperative project) and not to use or permit the use of such article or related

training or other defense service for purposes other than those for which fur-
nished unless the consent of the President has first been obtained:
(3)the country or international organization shall have agreed that it will main-

tain the security of such article or service and will provide substantially the samedegree of security protection afforded to such article or service by the United
States Government; and
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS561(4)the country or international organization is otherwise eligible to purchase or
lease defense articles or defense services.
In considering a request for approval of any transfer of any weapon, weapons
system, munitions, aircraft, military boat, military vessel, or other implement of

war to another country, the President shall not give his consent under paragraph(2) to the transfer unless the United States itself would transfer the defense article
under consideration to that country. In addition, the President shall not give his

consent under paragraph (2) to the transfer of any significant defense articles on
the United States Munitions List unless the foreign country requesting consent totransfer agrees to demilitarize such defense articles prior to transfer, or the pro-

posed recipient foreign country provides a commitment in writing to the United
States Government that it will not transfer such defense articles, if not demilita-rized, to any other foreign country or person without first obtaining the consent of

the President. The President shall promptly submit a report to the Speaker of theHouse of Representatives and to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Sen-
ate on the implementation of each agreement entered into pursuant to clause (2)
of this subsection. . . .Sec. 2754.Purposes for which military sales or leases by the United States are
authorized; report to Congress.Defense articles and defense services shall be sold or leased by the United
States Government under this chapter to friendly countries solely for internal
security, for legitimate self-defense, to permit the recipient country to participate
in regional or collective arrangements or measures consistent with the Charter of

the United Nations, or otherwise to permit the recipient country to participate in
collective measures requested by the United Nations for the purpose of maintain-
ing or restoring international peace and security, or for the purpose of enabling
foreign military forces in less developed friendly countries to construct public
works and to engage in other activities helpful to the economic and social devel-opment of such friendly countries. It is the sense of the Congress that such foreign

military forces should not be maintained or established solely for civic actionactivities and that such civic action activities not significantly detract from the
capability of the military forces to perform their military missions and be coordi-

nated with and form part of the total economic and social development effort:Provided, That none of the funds contained in this authorization shall be used toguarantee, or extend credit, or participate in an extension of credit in connection

with any sale of sophisticated weapons systems, such as missile systems and jet
aircraft for military purposes, to any underdeveloped country other than Greece,
Turkey, Iran, Israel, the Republic of China, the Philippines and Korea unless the

President determines that such financing is important to the national security of
the United States and reports within thirty days each such determination to theCongress. . . .Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.562APPENDIX NSec. 2770.General authority.
(a)Sale of defense articles and services by the President to United States
companies; restriction on performance of services; reimbursement credited to sell-
ing agency.  Subject to the conditions specified in subsection (b) of this section, the
President may, on a negotiated contract basis, under cash terms (1) sell defense
articles at not less than their estimated replacement cost (or actual cost in the caseof services), or (2) procure or manufacture and sell defense articles at not less than
their contract or manufacturing cost to the United States Government, to any
United States company for incorporation into end items (and for concurrent orfollow-on support) to be sold by such a company either (i) on a direct commercialbasis to a friendly foreign country or international organization pursuant to an

export license or approval under section 2778 of this title or (ii) in the case of
ammunition parts subject to subsection (b) of this section, using commercial prac-tices which restrict actual delivery directly to a friendly foreign country or inter-
national organization pursuant to approval under section 2778 of this title. The
President may also sell defense services in support of such sales of defense ar-
ticles, subject to the requirements of this chapter: Provided, however, That such
services may be performed only in the United States. The amount of reimburse-ment received from such sales shall be credited to the current applicable appro-
priation, fund, or account of the selling agency of the United States Government.
(b)Conditions of sale. Defense articles and defense services may be sold,
procured and sold, or manufactured and sold, pursuant to subsection (a) of this
section only if (1) the end item to which the articles apply is to be procured for the
armed forces of a friendly country or international organization, (2) the articleswould be supplied to the prime contractor as government-furnished equipmentor materials if the end item were being procured for the use of the United States

Armed Forces, and (3) the articles and services are available only from United
States Government sources or are not available to the prime contractor directlyfrom United States commercial sources at such times as may be required to meet
the prime contractorÕs delivery schedule.(c)ÔDefense articlesÕ and 
Ôdefense servicesÕ defined. For the purpose of this
section, the terms Ôdefense articlesÕ and 
Ôdefense servicesÕ mean defense articles
and defense services as defined in section 2794(3) and (4) of this title. . . .Sec. 2778.Control of arms exports and imports.
(a)Presidential control of exports and imports of defense articles and ser-
vices, guidance of policy, etc.; designation of United States Munitions List; issu-
ance of export licenses; condition for export; negotiations information.

(1)In furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of the
United States, the President is authorized to control the import and the export of
defense articles and defense services and to provide foreign policy guidance to
persons of the United States involved in the export and import of such articles andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS563services. The President is authorized to designate those items which shall be
considered as defense articles and defense services for the purposes of this section
and to promulgate regulations for the import and export of such articles and

services. The items so designated shall constitute the United States MunitionsList.(2)Decisions on issuing export licenses under this section shall be made in

coordination with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarma-
ment Agency and shall take into account the DirectorÕs opinion as to whether theexport of an article will contribute to an arms race, support international terror-
ism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the
development of bilateral or multilateral arms control arrangements.
(3)In exercising the authorities conferred by this section, the President may

require that any defense article or defense service be sold under this chapter as a
condition of its eligibility for export, and may require that persons engaged in the
negotiation for the export of defense articles and services keep the President fully

and currently informed of the progress and future prospects of such negotiations.
(b)Registration and licensing requirements for manufacturers, exporters,
or importers of designated defense articles and defense services.
(1)(A)As prescribed in regulations issued under this section, every person (other
than an officer or employee of the United States Government acting in an official

capacity) who engages in the business of manufacturing, exporting, or importing
any defense articles or defense services designated by the President under subsec-
tion (a)(1) of this section shall register with the United States Government agency

charged with the administration of this section, and shall pay a registration fee
which shall be prescribed by such regulations. Such regulations shall prohibit the
return to the United States for sale in the United States (other than for the Armed
Forces of the United States and its allies or for any State or local law enforcement

agency) of any military firearms or ammunition of United States manufacturefurnished to foreign governments by the United States under this chapter or any
other foreign assistance or sales program of the United States, whether or not

enhanced in value or improved in condition in a foreign country. This prohibition
shall not extend to similar firearms that have been so substantially transformed as
to become, in effect, articles of foreign manufacture.
(B)The prohibition under such regulations required by the second sentence of
subparagraph (A) shall not extend to any military firearms (or ammunition, com-ponents, parts, accessories, and attachments for such firearms) of United States
manufacture furnished to any foreign government by the United States under thischapter or any other foreign assistance or sales program of the United States if
Ñ(i)such firearms are among those firearms that the Secretary of the Treasury is,

or was at any time, required to authorize the importation of by reason of the
provisions of section 925(e) of title 18 (including the requirement for the listing of
such firearms as curios or relics under section 921(a)(13) of that title); and

(ii)such foreign government certifies to the United States Government that
such firearms are owned by such foreign government.
(C)A copy of each registration made under this paragraph shall be transmitted
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.564APPENDIX Nto the Secretary of the Treasury for review regarding law enforcement concerns.The Secretary shall report to the President regarding such concerns as necessary.
(2)Except as otherwise specifically provided in regulations issued under sub-

section (a)(1) of this section, no defense articles or defense services designated bythe President under subsection (a)(1) of this section may be exported or importedwithout a license for such export or import, issued in accordance with this chapter
and regulations issued under this chapter, except that no license shall be required
for exports or imports made by or for an agency of the United States Government
(A)for official use by a department or agency of the United States Government,

or(B)for carrying out any foreign assistance or sales program authorized by law
and subject to the control of the President by other means.
(3)(A)For each of the fiscal years 1988 and 1989, $250,000 of registration fees
collected pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be credited to a Department of Stateaccount, to be available without fiscal year limitation. Fees credited to that ac-

count shall be available only for the payment of expenses incurred forÑ(i)contract personnel to assist in the evaluation of munitions control license
applications, reduce processing time for license applications, and improve moni-

toring of compliance with the terms of licenses; and
(ii)the automation of munitions control functions and the processing of muni-
tions control license applications, including the development, procurement, and

utilization of computer equipment and related software.
(B)The authority of this paragraph may be exercised only to such extent or in
such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation Acts.(c)Criminal violations; punishment. Any person who willfully violates
any provision of this section or section 2779 of this title, or any rule or regulationissued under either section, or who willfully, in a registration or license applica-

tion or required report, makes any untrue statement of a material fact or omits to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the state-ments therein not misleading, shall upon conviction be fined for each violation
not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both.
(d)Repealed. Pub. L. 96-70, title III, Sec. 3303(a)(4), Sept. 27, 1979, 93 Stat. 499.
(e)Enforcement powers of President. In carrying out functions under this
section with respect to the export of defense articles and defense services, the
President is authorized to exercise the same powers concerning violations andenforcement which are conferred upon departments, agencies and officials by
subsections (c), (d), (e), and (g) of section 11 of the Export Administration Act of
1979 (50 App. U.S.C. 2410(c), (d), (e), and (g)), and by subsections (a) and (c) ofsection 12 of such Act (50 App. U.S.C. 2411(a) and (c)), subject to the same termsand conditions as are applicable to such powers under such Act (50 App. U.S.C.

2401 et seq.). Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing thewithholding of information from the Congress. Notwithstanding section 11(c) ofthe Export Administration Act of 1979, the civil penalty for each violation involv-
ing controls imposed on the export of defense articles and defense services under
this section may not exceed $500,000.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS565(f)Periodic review of items on Munitions List. The President shall periodi-
cally review the items on the United States Munitions List to determine what
items, if any, no longer warrant export controls under this section. The results of
such reviews shall be reported to the Speaker of the House of Representatives andto the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs of the Senate. Such a report shall be submitted at least 30 days
before any item is removed from the Munitions List and shall describe the nature
of any controls to be imposed on that item under the Export Administration Act of1979 (50 App. U.S.C. 2401 et seq.).(g)Identification of persons convicted or subject to indictment for viola-
tions of certain provisions.
(1)The President shall develop appropriate mechanisms to identify, in connec-
tion with the export licensing process under this section
Ñ(A)persons who are the subject of an indictment for, or have been convicted of,

a violation underÑ(i)this section,
(ii)section 11 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. App. 2410),

(iii)section 793, 794, or 798 of title 18 (relating to espionage involving defense or
classified information),(iv)section 16 of the Trading with the Enemy Act (50 U.S.C. App. 16),

(v)section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (relating
to foreign assets controls; 50 U.S.C. App. 1705) (50 U.S.C. 1705),
(vi)section 30A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78dd-1) or

section 104 of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 78dd-2),

(vii)chapter 105 of title 18 (relating to sabotage),
(viii)section 4(b) of the Internal Security Act of 1950 (relating to communication
of classified information; 50 U.S.C. 783(b)),

(ix)section 57, 92, 101, 104, 222, 224, 225, or 226 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954
(42 U.S.C. 2077, 2122, 2131, 2134, 2272, 2274, 2275, and 2276),
(x)section 601 of the National Security Act of 1947 (relating to intelligence

identities protection; 50 U.S.C. 421), or
(xi)section 603(b) or (c) of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986 (22
U.S.C. 5113(b) and (c));
(B)persons who are the subject of an indictment or have been convicted under
section 371 of title 18 for conspiracy to violate any of the statutes cited in subpara-
graph (A); and
(C)persons who are ineligible
Ñ(i)to contract with,
(ii)to receive a license or other form of authorization to export from, or

(iii)to receive a license or other form of authorization to import defense articles
or defense services from,any agency of the United States Government.
(2)The President shall require that each applicant for a license to export an item
on the United States Munitions List identify in the application all consignees and
freight forwarders involved in the proposed export.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.566APPENDIX N(3)If the President determines
Ñ(A)that an applicant for a license to export under this section is the subject of an
indictment for a violation of any of the statutes cited in paragraph (1),

(B)that there is reasonable cause to believe that an applicant for a license to
export under this section has violated any of the statutes cited in paragraph (1), or
(C)that an applicant for a license to export under this section is ineligible to

contract with, or to receive a license or other form of authorization to import
defense articles or defense services from, any agency of the United States Govern-
ment,
the President may disapprove the application. The President shall consider re-
quests by the Secretary of the Treasury to disapprove any export license applica-tion based on these criteria.
(4)A license to export an item on the United States Munitions List may not be
issued to a personÑ(A)if that person, or any party to the export, has been convicted of violating a

statute cited in paragraph (1), or(B)if that person, or any party to the export, is at the time of the license review
ineligible to receive export licenses (or other forms of authorization to export)

from any agency of the United States Government,
except as may be determined on a case-by-case basis by the President, after con-
sultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, after a thorough review of the cir-
cumstances surrounding the conviction or ineligibility to export and a finding bythe President that appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate any law enforce-
ment concerns.
(5)A license to export an item on the United States Munitions List may not be

issued to a foreign person (other than a foreign government).(6)The President may require a license (or other form of authorization) before
any item on the United States Munitions List is sold or otherwise transferred to

the control or possession of a foreign person or a person acting on behalf of aforeign person.(7)The President shall, in coordination with law enforcement and national

security agencies, develop standards for identifying high-risk exports for regularend-use verification. These standards shall be published in the Federal Register
and the initial standards shall be published not later than October 1, 1988.

(8)Upon request of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense and the
Secretary of the Treasury shall detail to the office primarily responsible for exportlicensing functions under this section, on a nonreimbursable basis, personnel with

appropriate expertise to assist in the initial screening of applications for exportlicenses under this section in order to determine the need for further review ofthose applications for foreign policy, national security, and law enforcement con-
cerns.(9)For purposes of this subsection
Ñ(A)the term 
Ôforeign corporationÕ means a corporation that is not incorporated
in the United States;(B)the term 
Ôforeign governmentÕ includes any agency or subdivision of a for-
eign government, including an official mission of a foreign government;

(C)the term 
Ôforeign personÕ means any person who is not a citizen or national
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS567of the United States or lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent
residence under the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.), and
includes foreign corporations, international organizations, and foreign govern-

ments;(D)the term 
Ôparty to the exportÕ means
Ñ(i)the president, the chief executive officer, and other senior officers of the

license applicant;(ii)the freight forwarders or designated exporting agent of the license applica-
tion; and
(iii)any consignee or end user of any item to be exported; and
(E)the term 
ÔpersonÕ means a natural person as well as a corporation, business
association, partnership, society, trust, or any other entity, organization, or group,

including governmental entities.(h)Judicial review of designation of items as defense articles or services.
The designation by the President (or by an official to whom the President
Õs func-tions under subsection (a) of this section have been duly delegated), in regulationsissued under this section, of items as defense articles or defense services for pur-

poses of this section shall not be subject to judicial review. . . .Sec. 2780.Transactions with countries supporting acts of international terror-
ism.(a)Prohibited transactions by United States Government. The following
transactions by the United States Government are prohibited:
(1)Exporting or otherwise providing (by sale, lease or loan, grant, or other
means), directly or indirectly, any munitions item to a country described in sub-

section (d) of this section under the authority of this chapter, the Foreign Assis-
tance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.), or any other law (except as provided in
subsection (h) of this section). In implementing this paragraph, the United States

GovernmentÑ(A)shall suspend delivery to such country of any such item pursuant to any
such transaction which has not been completed at the time the Secretary of State

makes the determination described in subsection (d) of this section, and
(B)shall terminate any lease or loan to such country of any such item which is
in effect at the time the Secretary of State makes that determination.

(2)Providing credits, guarantees, or other financial assistance under the au-
thority of this chapter, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.),
or any other law (except as provided in subsection (h) of this section), with respect

to the acquisition of any munitions item by a country described in subsection (d)
of this section. In implementing this paragraph, the United States Government
shall suspend expenditures pursuant to any such assistance obligated before the

Secretary of State makes the determination described in subsection (d) of this
section. The President may authorize expenditures otherwise required to be sus-
pended pursuant to the preceding sentence if the President has determined, and
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.568APPENDIX Nreported to the Congress, that suspension of those expenditures causes undue
financial hardship to a supplier, shipper, or similar person and allowing the ex-
penditure will not result in any munitions item being made available for use by

such country.(3)Consenting under section 2753(a) of this title, under section 505(a) of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2314(a)), under the regulations issued to

carry out section 2778 of this title, or under any other law (except as provided in
subsection (h) of this section), to any transfer of any munitions item to a country
described in subsection (d) of this section. In implementing this paragraph, the

United States Government shall withdraw any such consent which is in effect at
the time the Secretary of State makes the determination described in subsection
(d) of this section, except that this sentence does not apply with respect to any

item that has already been transferred to such country.
(4)Providing any license or other approval under section 2778 of this title for
any export or other transfer (including by means of a technical assistance agree-

ment, manufacturing licensing agreement, or coproduction agreement) of any
munitions item to a country described in subsection (d) of this section. In imple-
menting this paragraph, the United States Government shall suspend any such

license or other approval which is in effect at the time the Secretary of State makes
the determination described in subsection (d) of this section, except that this sen-
tence does not apply with respect to any item that has already been exported or

otherwise transferred to such country.(5)Otherwise facilitating the acquisition of any munitions item by a country
described in subsection (d) of this section. This paragraph applies with respect to

activities undertakenÑ(A)by any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Government,
(B)by any officer or employee of the Government (including members of the
United States Armed Forces), or
(C)by any other person at the request or on behalf of the Government.
The Secretary of State may waive the requirements of the second sentence of
paragraph (1), the second sentence of paragraph (3), and the second sentence of

paragraph (4) to the extent that the Secretary determines, after consultation withthe Congress, that unusual and compelling circumstances require that the UnitedStates Government not take the actions specified in that sentence.(b)Prohibited transactions by United States persons.
(1)In general. A United States person may not take any of the following ac-

tions:(A)Exporting any munitions item to any country described in subsection (d) of
this section.
(B)Selling, leasing, loaning, granting, or otherwise providing any munitions
item to any country described in subsection (d) of this section.
(C)Selling, leasing, loaning, granting, or otherwise providing any munitions

item to any recipient which is not the government of or a person in a country
described in subsection (d) of this section if the United States person has reason to
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS569know that the munitions item will be made available to any country described in
subsection (d) of this section.(D)Taking any other action which would facilitate the acquisition, directly or

indirectly, of any munitions item by the government of any country described in
subsection (d) of this section, or any person acting on behalf of that government, if
the United States person has reason to know that that action will facilitate the

acquisition of that item by such a government or person.
(2)Liability for actions of foreign subsidiaries, etc. A United States person vio-
lates this subsection if a corporation or other person that is controlled in fact by
that United States person (as determined under regulations, which the President
shall issue) takes an action described in paragraph (1) outside the United States.
(3)Applicability to actions outside the United States. Paragraph (1) applies

with respect to actions described in that paragraph which are taken either within
or outside the United States by a United States person described in subsection
(l)(3)(A) or (B) of this section. To the extent provided in regulations issued under

subsection (l)(3)(D) of this section, paragraph (1) applies with respect to actions
described in that paragraph which are taken outside the United States by a person
designated as a United States person in those regulations.(c)Transfers to governments and persons covered. This section applies
with respect toÑ(1)the acquisition of munitions items by the government of a country described
in subsection (d) of this section; and(2)the acquisition of munitions items by any individual, group, or other person

within a country described in subsection (d) of this section, except to the extent
that subparagraph (D) of subsection (b)(1) of this section provides otherwise.
(d)Countries covered by prohibition. The prohibitions contained in this
section apply with respect to a country if the Secretary of State determines that the
government of that country has repeatedly provided support for acts of interna-
tional terrorism.(e)Publication of determinations. Each determination of the Secretary of
State under subsection (d) of this section shall be published in the Federal Regis-
ter.(f)Rescission.
(1)A determination made by the Secretary of State under subsection (d) of this
section may not be rescinded unless the President submits to the Speaker of theHouse of Representatives and the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Rela-
tions of the SenateÑ(A)before the proposed rescission would take effect, a report certifying that
Ñ(i)there has been a fundamental change in the leadership and policies of the

government of the country concerned;(ii)that government is not supporting acts of international terrorism; and
(iii)that government has provided assurances that it will not support acts of

international terrorism in the future; orCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.570APPENDIX N(B)at least 45 days before the proposed rescission would take effect, a report
justifying the rescission and certifying thatÑ(i)the government concerned has not provided any support for international

terrorism during the preceding 6-month period; and
(ii)the government concerned has provided assurances that it will not support
acts of international terrorism in the future.
(2)(A) No rescission under paragraph (1)(B) of a determination under subsection
(d) of this section may be made if the Congress, within 45 days after receipt of a
report under paragraph (1)(B), enacts a joint resolution the matter after the resolv-
ing clause of which is as follows: ÔThat the proposed rescission of the determina-
tion under section 40(d) of the Arms Export Control Act pursuant to the report
submitted to the Congress on XXXXXXXXX is hereby prohibited.Õ, the blank to becompleted with the appropriate date.(B)A joint resolution described in subparagraph (A) and introduced within the
appropriate 45-day period shall be considered in the Senate and the House of

Representatives in accordance with paragraphs (3) through (7) of section 8066(c)of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act (as contained in Public Law 98-473), except that references in such paragraphs to the Committees on Appropria-
tions of the House of Representatives and the Senate shall be deemed to be refer-ences to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives andthe Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, respectively.(g)Waiver. The President may waive the prohibitions contained in this
section with respect to a specific transaction ifÑ(1)the President determines that the transaction is essential to the national
security interests of the United States; and(2)not less than 15 days prior to the proposed transaction, the President
Ñ(A)consults with the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representa-

tives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate; and
(B)submits to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the chairman of
the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report containing
Ñ(i)the name of any country involved in the proposed transaction, the identity
of any recipient of the items to be provided pursuant to the proposed transaction,
and the anticipated use of those items;

(ii)a description of the munitions items involved in the proposed transaction
(including their market value) and the actual sale price at each step in the transac-
tion (or if the items are transferred by other than sale, the manner in which they

will be provided);(iii)the reasons why the proposed transaction is essential to the national secu-
rity interests of the United States and the justification for such proposed transac-

tion;(iv)the date on which the proposed transaction is expected to occur; and
(v)the name of every United States Government department, agency, or other

entity involved in the proposed transaction, every foreign government involved
in the proposed transaction, and every private party with significant participation
in the proposed transaction.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS571To the extent possible, the information specified in subparagraph (B) of paragraph(2) shall be provided in unclassified form, with any classified information pro-vided in an addendum to the report.(h)Exemption for transactions subject to National Security Act reporting
requirements. The prohibitions contained in this section do not apply with respect

to any transaction subject to reporting requirements under title V of the National
Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 413 et seq.; relating to congressional oversight ofintelligence activities).(i)Relation to other laws.
(1)In general. With regard to munitions items controlled pursuant to this chap-

ter, the provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding any other provision
of law, other than section 614(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C.
2364(a)).
(2)Section 614(a) waiver authority. If the authority of section 614(a) of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2364(a)) is used to permit a transaction
under that Act (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.) or this chapter which is otherwise prohib-

ited by this section, the written policy justification required by that section shall
include the information specified in subsection (g)(2)(B) of this section.
(j)Criminal penalty. Any person who willfully violates this section shall
be fined for each violation not more than $1,000,000, imprisoned not more than 10years, or both.(k)Civil penalties; enforcement. In the enforcement of this section, the
President is authorized to exercise the same powers concerning violations andenforcement which are conferred upon departments, agencies, and officials by
sections 11(c), 11(e), 11(g), and 12(a) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50App. U.S.C. 2410(c), (e), (g), 2411(a)) (subject to the same terms and conditions asare applicable to such powers under that Act (50 App. U.S.C. 2401 et seq.)), except

that, notwithstanding section 11(c) of that Act, the civil penalty for each violation
of this section may not exceed $500,000.
(l)Definitions. As used in this section
Ñ(1)the term 
Ômunitions itemÕ means any item enumerated on the United States
Munitions List (without regard to whether the item is imported into or exported

from the United States);
(2)the term 
ÔUnited StatesÕ, when used geographically, means the several States,
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth

of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory or possession of the United
States; and(3)the term 
ÔUnited States personÕ means
Ñ(A)any citizen or permanent resident alien of the United States;
(B)any sole proprietorship, partnership, company, association, or corporation
having its principal place of business within the United States or organized under

the laws of the United States, any State, the District of Columbia, the Common-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.572APPENDIX Nwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or
any territory or possession of the United States;
(C)any other person with respect to that person
Õs actions while in the UnitedStates; and(D)to the extent provided in regulations issued by the Secretary of State, any
person that is not described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) but
Ñ(i)is a foreign subsidiary or affiliate of a United States person described in
subparagraph (B) and is controlled in fact by that United States person (as deter-
mined in accordance with those regulations), or

(ii)is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, with respect to
that personÕs actions while outside the United States. . . .
Sec. 2794.Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the termÑ(1)ÔÕexcess defense articleÕÕ has the meaning provided by section 2403(g) of
this title;(2)ÔÕvalueÕÕ means, in the case of an excess defense article, except as other-
wise provided in section 2761(a) of this title, not less than the greater of
Ñ(A)the gross cost incurred by the United States Government in repairing, reha-
bilitating, or modifying such article, plus the scrap value; or

(B)the market value, if ascertainable;
(3)ÔÕdefense articleÕÕ, except as provided in paragraph (7) of this section,
includesÑ(A)any weapon, weapons system, munition, aircraft, vessel, boat, or other
implement of war,(B)any property, installation, commodity, material, equipment, supply, or
goods used for the purposes of making military sales,

(C)any machinery, facility, tool, material, supply, or other item necessary for
the manufacture, production, processing, repair, servicing, storage, construction,
transportation, operation, or use of any article listed in this paragraph, and

(D)any component or part of any article listed in this paragraph,
but does not include merchant vessels or (as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of
1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)) source material (except uranium depleted in the
isotope 235 which is incorporated in defense articles solely to take advantage of

high density or pyrophoric characteristics unrelated to radioactivity), byproduct
material, special nuclear material, production facilities, utilization facilities, or
atomic weapons or articles involving Restricted Data;
(4)ÔÕdefense serviceÕÕ, except as provided in paragraph (7) of this section,
includes any service, test, inspection, repair, training, publication, technical or

other assistance, or defense information (as defined in section 2403(e) of this title),
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS573used for the purposes of making military sales, but does not include design and
construction services under section 2769 of this title;
(5)ÔÕtrainingÕÕ includes formal or informal instruction of foreign students
in the United States or overseas by officers or employees of the United States,
contract technicians, or contractors (including instruction at civilian institutions),

or by correspondence courses, technical, educational, or information publications
and media of all kinds, training aid, orientation, training exercise, and military
advice to foreign military units and forces;
(6)ÔÕmajor defense equipmentÕÕ means any item of significant military
equipment on the United States Munitions List having a nonrecurring research
and development cost of more than $50,000,000 or a total production cost of more
than $200,000,000;(7)ÔÕdefense articles and defense servicesÕÕ means, with respect to commer-
cial exports subject to the provisions of section 2778 of this title, those items
designated by the President pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of such section; and
(8)ÔÕdesign and construction servicesÕÕ means, with respect to sales under
section 2769 of this title, the design and construction of real property facilities,

including necessary construction equipment and materials, engineering services,
construction contract management services relating thereto, and technical advi-
sory assistance in the operation and maintenance of real property facilities pro-

vided or performed by any department or agency of the Department of Defense or

by a contractor pursuant to a contract with such department or agency.
N.2EXECUTIVE ORDERS
N.2.1Executive Order 12333 (U.S. Intelligence Activities)
Timely and accurate information about the activities, capabilities, plans, andintentions of foreign powers, organizations, and persons and their agents, is es-sential to the national security of the United States. All reasonable and lawfulmeans must be used to ensure that the United States will receive the best intelli-
gence available. For that purpose, by virtue of the authority vested in me by theConstitution and statutes of the United States of America, including the NationalSecurity Act of 1947, as amended, and as President of the United States of America,
in order to provide for the effective conduct of United States intelligence activitiesand the protection of constitutional rights, it is hereby ordered as follows:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.574APPENDIX NPart 1Goals, Direction, Duties and Responsibilities With Respect to theNational Intelligence Effort1.1Goals.The United States intelligence effort shall provide the President
and the National Security Council with the necessary information on which to
base decisions concerning the conduct and development of foreign, defense andeconomic policy, and the protection of United States national interests from for-eign security threats. All departments and agencies shall cooperate fully to fulfill
this goal.(a)Maximum emphasis should be given to fostering analytical competi-
tion among appropriate elements of the Intelligence Community.(b)All means, consistent with applicable United States law and this Or-
der, and with full consideration of the rights of United States persons, shall beused to develop intelligence information for the President and the National Secu-
rity Council. A balanced approach between technical collection efforts and othermeans should be maintained and encouraged.(c)Special emphasis should be given to detecting and countering espio-
nage and other threats and activities directed by foreign intelligence servicesagainst the United States Government, or United States corporations, establish-ments, or persons.(d)To the greatest extent possible consistent with applicable United States
law and this Order, and with full consideration of the rights of United Statespersons, all agencies and departments should seek to ensure full and free ex-change of information in order to derive maximum benefit from the United States
intelligence effort.1.2The National Security Council.
(a)Purpose. The National Security Council (NSC) was established by the
National Security Act of 1947 to advise the President with respect to the integra-tion of domestic, foreign and military policies relating to the national security. The
NSC shall act as the highest Executive Branch entity that provides review of,guidance for and direction to the conduct of all national foreign intelligence,counterintelligence, and special activities, and attendant policies and programs.(b)Committees. The NSC shall establish such committees as may be nec-
essary to carry out its functions and responsibilities under this Order. The NSC, ora committee established by it, shall consider and submit to the President a policy
recommendation, including all dissents, on each special activity and shall reviewproposals for other sensitive intelligence operations.1.3National Foreign Intelligence Advisory Groups.
(a)Establishment and Duties. The Director of Central Intelligence shall
establish such boards, councils, or groups as required for the purpose of obtaining
advice from within the Intelligence Community concerning:(1)Production, review and coordination of national foreign intelli-
gence;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS575(2)Priorities for the National Foreign Intelligence Program budget;
(3)Interagency exchanges of foreign intelligence information;
(4)Arrangements with foreign governments on intelligence mat-
ters;(5)Protection of intelligence sources and methods;
(6)Activities of common concern; and

(7)Such other matters as may be referred by the Director of Central
Intelligence.(b)Membership. Advisory groups established pursuant to this section
shall be chaired by the Director of Central Intelligence or his designated represen-tative and shall consist of senior representatives from organizations within theIntelligence Community and from departments or agencies containing such orga-
nizations, as designated by the Director of Central Intelligence. Groups for consid-
eration of substantive intelligence matters will include representatives of organi-zations involved in the collection, processing and analysis of intelligence. A senior
representative of the Secretary of Commerce, the Attorney General, the Assistantto the President for National Security Affairs, and the Office of the Secretary ofDefense shall be invited to participate in any group which deals with other than
substantive intelligence matters.1.4The Intelligence Community. The agencies within the Intelligence Commu-
nity shall, in accordance with applicable United States law and with the otherprovisions of this Order, conduct intelligence activities necessary for the conductof foreign relations and the protection of the national security of the United States,
including:(a)Collection of information needed by the President, the National Secu-
rity Council, the Secretaries of State and Defense, and other Executive Branchofficials for the performance of their duties and responsibilities;(b)Production and dissemination of intelligence;
(c)Collection of information concerning, and the conduct of activities to
protect against, intelligence activities directed against the United States, interna-
tional terrorist and international narcotics activities, and other hostile activitiesdirected against the United States by foreign powers, organizations, persons, andtheir agents;(d)Special activities;
(e)Administrative and support activities within the United States and
abroad necessary for the performance of authorized activities; and(f)Such other intelligence activities as the President may direct from time
to time.1.5Director of Central Intelligence. In order to discharge the duties and re-
sponsibilities prescribed by law, the Director of Central Intelligence shall be re-sponsible directly to the President and the NSC and shall:(a)Act as the primary adviser to the President and the NSC on national
foreign intelligence and provide the President and other officials in the ExecutiveBranch with national foreign intelligence;(b)Develop such objectives and guidance for the Intelligence Community
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.576APPENDIX Nas will enhance capabilities for responding to expected future needs for nationalforeign intelligence;(c)Promote the development and maintenance of services of common
concern by designated intelligence organizations on behalf of the IntelligenceCommunity;(d)Ensure implementation of special activities;

(e)Formulate policies concerning foreign intelligence and counterintelli-
gence arrangements with foreign governments, coordinate foreign intelligenceand counterintelligence relationships between agencies of the Intelligence Com-
munity and the intelligence or internal security services of foreign governments,and establish procedures governing the conduct of liaison by any department oragency with such services on narcotics activities;(f)Participate in the development of procedures approved by the Attor-
ney General governing criminal narcotics intelligence activities abroad to ensurethat these activities are consistent with foreign intelligence programs;(g)Ensure the establishment by the Intelligence Community of common
security and access standards for managing and handling foreign intelligencesystems, information, and products;(h)Ensure that programs are developed which protect intelligence
sources, methods, and analytical procedures;(i)Establish uniform criteria for the determination of relative priorities
for the transmission of critical national foreign intelligence, and advise the Secre-tary of Defense concerning the communications requirements of the IntelligenceCommunity for the transmission of such intelligence;(j)Establish appropriate staffs, committees, or other advisory groups to
assist in the execution of the DirectorÕs responsibilities;(k)Have full responsibility for production and dissemination of national
foreign intelligence, and authority to levy analytic tasks on departmental intelli-
gence production organizations, in consultation with those organizations, ensur-ing that appropriate mechanisms for competitive analysis are developed so thatdiverse points of view are considered fully and differences of judgment within the
Intelligence Community are brought to the attention of national policymakers;(l)Ensure the timely exploitation and dissemination of data gathered by
national foreign intelligence collection means, and ensure that the resulting intel-
ligence is disseminated immediately to appropriate government entities and mili-tary commands;(m)Establish mechanisms which translate national foreign intelligence
objectives and priorities approved by the NSC into specific guidance for the Intel-ligence Community, resolve conflicts in tasking priority, provide to departmentsand agencies having information collection capabilities that are not part of the
National Foreign Intelligence Program advisory tasking concerning collection ofnational foreign intelligence, and provide for the development of plans and ar-rangements for transfer of required collection tasking authority to the Secretary of
Defense when directed by the President;(n)Develop, with the advice of the program managers and departments
and agencies concerned, the consolidated National Foreign Intelligence Program
budget, and present it to the President and the Congress;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS577(o)Review and approve all requests for reprogramming National Foreign
Intelligence Program funds, in accordance with guidelines established by the Of-fice of Management and Budget;(p)Monitor National Foreign Intelligence Program implementation, and,
as necessary, conduct program and performance audits and evaluations;(q)Together with the Secretary of Defense, ensure that there is no unnec-
essary overlap between national foreign intelligence programs and Department ofDefense intelligence programs consistent with the requirement to develop com-petitive analysis, and provide to and obtain from the Secretary of Defense all
information necessary for this purpose;(r)In accordance with law and relevant procedures approved by the At-
torney General under this Order, give the heads of the departments and agencies
access to all intelligence, developed by the CIA or the staff elements of the Direc-tor of Central Intelligence, relevant to the national intelligence needs of the de-partments and agencies; and(s)Facilitate the use of national foreign intelligence products by Congress
in a secure manner.1.6Duties and Responsibilities of the Heads of Executive Branch Departments
and Agencies.(a)The heads of all Executive Branch departments and agencies shall, in
accordance with law and relevant procedures approved by the Attorney Generalunder this Order, give the Director of Central Intelligence access to all informationrelevant to the national intelligence needs of the United States, and shall give due
consideration to the requests from the Director of Central Intelligence for appro-
priate support for Intelligence Community activities.(b)The heads of departments and agencies involved in the National For-
eign Intelligence Program shall ensure timely development and submission to the
Director of Central Intelligence by the program managers and heads of compo-nent activities of proposed national programs and budgets in the format desig-nated by the Director of Central Intelligence, and shall also ensure that the Direc-
tor of Central Intelligence is provided, in a timely and responsive manner, allinformation necessary to perform the DirectorÕs program and budget responsibili-ties.(c)The heads of departments and agencies involved in the National For-
eign Intelligence Program may appeal to the President decisions by the Director ofCentral Intelligence on budget or reprogramming matters of the National Foreign
Intelligence Program.1.7Senior Officials of the Intelligence Community. The heads of departments
and agencies with organizations in the Intelligence Community or the heads ofsuch organizations, as appropriate, shall:(a)Report to the Attorney General possible violations of federal criminal
laws by employees and of specified federal criminal laws by any other person asprovided in procedures agreed upon by the Attorney General and the head of thedepartment or agency concerned, in a manner consistent with the protection of
intelligence sources and methods, as specified in those procedures;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.578APPENDIX N(b)In any case involving serious or continuing breaches of security, rec-
ommend to the Attorney General that the case be referred to the FBI for furtherinvestigation;(c)Furnish the Director of Central Intelligence and the NSC, in accor-
dance with applicable law and procedures approved by the Attorney Generalunder this Order, the information required for the performance of their respective
duties;(d)Report to the Intelligence Oversight Board, and keep the Director of
Central Intelligence appropriately informed, concerning any intelligence activi-
ties of their organizations that they have reason to believe may be unlawful orcontrary to Executive order or Presidential directive;(e)Protect intelligence and intelligence sources and methods from unau-
thorized disclosure consistent with guidance from the Director of Central Intelli-gence;(f)Disseminate intelligence to cooperating foreign governments under
arrangements established or agreed to by the Director of Central Intelligence;(g)Participate in the development of procedures approved by the Attor-
ney General governing production and dissemination of intelligence resulting
from criminal narcotics intelligence activities abroad if their departments, agen-cies, or organizations have intelligence responsibilities for foreign or domesticnarcotics production and trafficking;(h)Instruct their employees to cooperate fully with the Intelligence Over-
sight Board; and(i)Ensure that the Inspectors General and General Counsels for their
organizations have access to any information necessary to perform their duties
assigned by this Order.1.8The Central Intelligence Agency. All duties and responsibilities of the CIA
shall be related to the intelligence functions set out below. As authorized by thisOrder; the National Security Act of 1947, as amended; the CIA Act of 1949, asamended; appropriate directives or other applicable law, the CIA shall:(a)Collect, produce and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterin-
telligence, including information not otherwise obtainable. The collection of for-eign intelligence or counterintelligence within the United States shall be coordi-
nated with the FBI as required by procedures agreed upon by the Director ofCentral Intelligence and the Attorney General;(b)Collect, produce and disseminate intelligence on foreign aspects of
narcotics production and trafficking;(c)Conduct counterintelligence activities outside the United States and,
without assuming or performing any internal security functions, conduct coun-
terintelligence activities within the United States in coordination with the FBI asrequired by procedures agreed upon by the Director of Central Intelligence andthe Attorney General;(d)Coordinate counterintelligence activities and the collection of infor-
mation not otherwise obtainable when conducted outside the United States byother departments and agencies;(e)Conduct special activities approved by the President. No agency ex-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS579cept the CIA (or the Armed Forces of the United States in time of war declared byCongress or during any period covered by a report from the President to theCongress under the War Powers Resolution (87 Stat. 855))* may conduct any
special activity unless the President determines that another agency is more likelyto achieve a particular objective;(f)Conduct services of common concern for the Intelligence Community
as directed by the NSC;(g)Carry out or contract for research, development and procurement of
technical systems and devices relating to authorized functions;(h)Protect the security of its installations, activities, information, prop-
erty, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigations of ap-plicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similar associations with
the CIA as are necessary; and(i)Conduct such administrative and technical support activities within
and outside the United States as are necessary to perform the functions described
in sections (a) through (h) above, including procurement and essential cover andproprietary arrangements.1.9The Department of State. The Secretary of State shall:
(a)Overtly collect information relevant to United States foreign policy
concerns;(b)Produce and disseminate foreign intelligence relating to United States
foreign policy as required for the execution of the SecretaryÕs responsibilities;(c)Disseminate, as appropriate, reports received from United States dip-
lomatic and consular posts;(d)Transmit reporting requirements of the Intelligence Community to the
Chiefs of United States Missions abroad; and(e)Support Chiefs of Missions in discharging their statutory responsibili-
ties for direction and coordination of mission activities.1.10The Department of the Treasury. The Secretary of the Treasury shall:
(a)Overtly collect foreign financial and monetary information;
(b)Participate with the Department of State in the overt collection of
general foreign economic information;(c)Produce and disseminate foreign intelligence relating to United States
economic policy as required for the execution of the SecretaryÕs responsibilities;and(d)Conduct, through the United States Secret Service, activities to deter-
mine the existence and capability of surveillance equipment being used againstthe President of the United States, the Executive Office of the President, and, as
authorized by the Secretary of the Treasury or the President, other Secret Serviceprotectees and United States officials.No information shall be acquired intentionally through such activities except to
protect against such surveillance, and those activities shall be conducted pursuantto procedures agreed upon by the Secretary of the Treasury and the AttorneyGeneral.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.580APPENDIX N1.11The Department of Defense. The Secretary of Defense shall:
(a)Collect national foreign intelligence and be responsive to collection
tasking by the Director of Central Intelligence;(b)Collect, produce and disseminate military and military-related for-
eign intelligence and counterintelligence as required for execution of theSecretaryÕs responsibilities;(c)Conduct programs and missions necessary to fulfill national, depart-
mental and tactical foreign intelligence requirements;(d)Conduct counterintelligence activities in support of Department of
Defense components outside the United States in coordination with the CIA, andwithin the United States in coordination with the FBI pursuant to proceduresagreed upon by the Secretary of Defense and the Attorney General;(e)Conduct, as the executive agent of the United States Government,
signals intelligence and communications security activities, except as otherwisedirected by the NSC;(f)for the timely transmission of critical intelligence, as defined by the
Director of Central Intelligence, within the United States Government;(g)Carry out or contract for research, development and procurement of
technical systems and devices relating to authorized intelligence functions;(h)Protect the security of Department of Defense installations, activities,
property, information, and employees by appropriate means, including such in-
vestigations of applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similarassociations with the Department of Defense as are necessary;(i)Establish and maintain military intelligence relationships and military
intelligence exchange programs with selected cooperative foreign defense estab-
lishments and international organizations, and ensure that such relationships andprograms are in accordance with policies formulated by the Director of CentralIntelligence;(j)Direct, operate, control and provide fiscal management for the Na-
tional Security Agency and for defense and military intelligence and nationalreconnaissance entities; and(k)Conduct such administrative and technical support activities within
and outside the United States as are necessary to perform the functions describedin sections (a) through (j) above.1.12Intelligence Components Utilized by the Secretary of Defense. In carrying
out the responsibilities assigned in section 1.11, the Secretary of Defense is autho-
rized to utilize the following:(a)Defense Intelligence Agency, whose responsibilities shall include;
(1)Collection, production, or, through tasking and coordination,
provision of military and military-related intelligence for the Secretary of De-fense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, other Defense components, and, as appropriate,non-Defense agencies;(2)Collection and provision of military intelligence for national for-
eign intelligence and counterintelligence products;(3)Coordination of all Department of Defense intelligence collec-
tion requirements;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS581(4)Management of the Defense Attache system; and
(5)Provision of foreign intelligence and counterintelligence staff
support as directed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.(b)National Security Agency, whose responsibilities shall include:
(1)Establishment and operation of an effective unified organization
for signals intelligence activities, except for the delegation of operational control
over certain operations that are conducted through other elements of the Intelli-gence Community. No other department or agency may engage in signals intelli-gence activities except pursuant to a delegation by the Secretary of Defense;(2)Control of signals intelligence collection and processing activi-
ties, including assignment of resources to an appropriate agent for such periodsand tasks as required for the direct support of military commanders;(3)Collection of signals intelligence information for national for-
eign intelligence purposes in accordance with guidance from the Director of Cen-tral Intelligence;(4)Processing of signals intelligence data for national foreign intel-
ligence purposes in accordance with guidance from the Director of Central Intel-ligence;(5)Dissemination of signals intelligence information for national
foreign intelligence purposes to authorized elements of the Government, includ-ing the military services, in accordance with guidance from the Director of Central
Intelligence;(6)Collection, processing and dissemination of signals intelligence
information for counterintelligence purposes;(7)Provision of signals intelligence support for the conduct of mili-
tary operations in accordance with tasking, priorities, and standards of timelinessassigned by the Secretary of Defense. If provision of such support requires use ofnational collection systems, these systems will be tasked within existing guidance
from the Director of Central Intelligence;(8)Executing the responsibilities of the Secretary of Defense as ex-
ecutive agent for the communications security of the United States Government;(9)Conduct of research and development to meet the needs of the
United States for signals intelligence and communications security;(10)Protection of the security of its installations, activities, property,
information, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigationsof applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similar associationswith the NSA as are necessary;(11)Prescribing, within its field of authorized operations, security
regulations covering operating practices, including the transmission, handlingand distribution of signals intelligence and communications security material
within and among the elements under control of the Director of the NSA, andexercising the necessary supervisory control to ensure compliance with the regu-lations;(12)Conduct of foreign cryptologic liaison relationships, with liaison
for intelligence purposes conducted in accordance with policies formulated by theDirector of Central Intelligence; and(13)Conduct of such administrative and technical support activities
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.582APPENDIX Nwithin and outside the United States as are necessary to perform the functionsdescribed in sections (1) through (12) above, including procurement.(c)Offices for the collection of specialized intelligence through reconnais-
sance programs, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)Carrying out consolidated reconnaissance programs for special-
ized intelligence;(2)Responding to tasking in accordance with procedures estab-
lished by the Director of Central Intelligence; and(3)Delegating authority to the various departments and agencies
for research, development, procurement, and operation of designated means ofcollection.(d)The foreign intelligence and counterintelligence elements of the Army,
Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)Collection, production and dissemination of military and mili-
tary-related foreign intelligence and counterintelligence, and information on the
foreign aspects of narcotics production and trafficking. When collection is con-ducted in response to national foreign intelligence requirements, it will be con-ducted in accordance with guidance from the Director of Central Intelligence.
Collection of national foreign intelligence, not otherwise obtainable, outside theUnited States shall be coordinated with the CIA, and such collection within theUnited States shall be coordinated with the FBI;(2)Conduct of counterintelligence activities outside the United
States in coordination with the CIA, and within the United States in coordinationwith the FBI; and(3)Monitoring of the development, procurement and management
of tactical intelligence systems and equipment and conducting related research,development, and test and evaluation activities.(e)Other offices within the Department of Defense appropriate for con-
duct of the intelligence missions and responsibilities assigned to the Secretary ofDefense. If such other offices are used for intelligence purposes, the provisions ofPart 2 of this Order shall apply to those offices when used for those purposes.1.13The Department of Energy. The Secretary of Energy shall:
(a)Participate with the Department of State in overtly collecting informa-
tion with respect to foreign energy matters;(b)Produce and disseminate foreign intelligence necessary for the
SecretaryÕs responsibilities;(c)Participate in formulating intelligence collection and analysis require-
ments where the special expert capability of the Department can contribute; and(d)Provide expert technical, analytical and research capability to other
agencies within the Intelligence Community.1.14The Federal Bureau of Investigation. Under the supervision of the Attorney
General and pursuant to such regulations as the Attorney General may establish,the Director of the FBI shall:(a)Within the United States conduct counterintelligence and coordinate
counterintelligence activities of other agencies within the Intelligence Commu-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS583nity. When a counterintelligence activity of the FBI involves military or civilianpersonnel of the Department of Defense, the FBI shall coordinate with the Depart-ment of Defense;(b)Conduct counterintelligence activities outside the United States in co-
ordination with the CIA as required by procedures agreed upon by the Director ofCentral Intelligence and the Attorney General;(c)Conduct within the United States, when requested by officials of the
Intelligence Community designated by the President, activities undertaken tocollect foreign intelligence or support foreign intelligence collection requirements
of other agencies within the Intelligence Community, or, when requested by theDirector of the National Security Agency, to support the communications securityactivities of the United States Government;(d)Produce and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence;
and(e)Carry out or contract for research, development and procurement of
technical systems and devices relating to the functions authorized above.Part 2Conduct of Intelligence Activities2.1Need.Accurate and timely information about the capabilities, intentions
and activities of foreign powers, organizations, or persons and their agents is
essential to informed decisionmaking in the areas of national defense and foreign
relations. Collection of such information is a priority objective and will be pur-sued in a vigorous, innovative and responsible manner that is consistent with theConstitution and applicable law and respectful of the principles upon which the
United States was founded.2.2Purpose.This Order is intended to enhance human and technical collec-
tion techniques, especially those undertaken abroad, and the acquisition of sig-nificant foreign intelligence, as well as the detection and countering of interna-tional terrorist activities and espionage conducted by foreign powers. Set forth
below are certain general principles that, in addition to and consistent with appli-cable laws, are intended to achieve the proper balance between the acquisition ofessential information and protection of individual interests. Nothing in this Order
shall be construed to apply to or interfere with any authorized civil or criminallaw enforcement responsibility of any department or agency.2.3Collection of Information.Agencies within the Intelligence Community
are authorized to collect, retain or disseminate information concerning UnitedStates persons only in accordance with procedures established by the head of the
agency concerned and approved by the Attorney General, consistent with theauthorities provided by Part 1 of this Order. Those procedures shall permit collec-tion, retention and dissemination of the following types of information:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.584APPENDIX N(a)Information that is publicly available or collected with the consent of
the person concerned;(b)Information constituting foreign intelligence or counterintelligence,
including such information concerning corporations or other commercial organi-zations. Collection within the United States of foreign intelligence not otherwiseobtainable shall be undertaken by the FBI or, when significant foreign intelligence
is sought, by other authorized agencies of the Intelligence Community, providedthat no foreign intelligence collection by such agencies may be undertaken for thepurpose of acquiring information concerning the domestic activities of United
States persons;(c)Information obtained in the course of a lawful foreign intelligence,
counterintelligence, international narcotics or international terrorism investiga-
tion;(d)Information needed to protect the safety of any persons or organiza-
tions, including those who are targets, victims or hostages of international terror-
ist organizations;(e)Information needed to protect foreign intelligence or counterintelli-
gence sources or methods from unauthorized disclosure. Collection within the
United States shall be undertaken by the FBI except that other agencies of theIntelligence Community may also collect such information concerning present orformer employees, present or former intelligence agency contractors or their
present or former employees, or applicants for any such employment or contract-ing;(f)Information concerning persons who are reasonably believed to be
potential sources or contacts for the purpose of determining their suitability or
credibility;(g)Information arising out of a lawful personnel, physical or communica-
tions security investigation;(h)Information acquired by overhead reconnaissance not directed at spe-
cific United States persons;(i)Incidentally obtained information that may indicate involvement in
activities that may violate federal, state, local or foreign laws; and(j)Information necessary for administrative purposes. In addition, agen-
cies within the Intelligence Community may disseminate information, other than
information derived from signals intelligence, to each appropriate agency withinthe Intelligence Community for purposes of allowing the recipient agency to de-termine whether the information is relevant to its responsibilities and can be
retained by it.2.4Collection Techniques.Agencies within the Intelligence Community shall
use the least intrusive collection techniques feasible within the United States ordirected against United States persons abroad. Agencies are not authorized to usesuch techniques as electronic surveillance, unconsented physical search, mail sur-
veillance, physical surveillance, or monitoring devices unless they are in accor-dance with procedures established by the head of the agency concerned andapproved by the Attorney General. Such procedures shall protect constitutionalCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS585and other legal rights and limit use of such information to lawful governmentalpurposes. These procedures shall not authorize:(a)The CIA to engage in electronic surveillance within the United States
except for the purpose of training, testing, or conducting countermeasures tohostile electronic surveillance;(b)Unconsented physical searches in the United States by agencies other
than the FBI, except for:(1)Searches by counterintelligence elements of the military services
directed against military personnel within the United States or abroad for intelli-
gence purposes, when authorized by a military commander empowered to ap-prove physical searches for law enforcement purposes, based upon a finding ofprobable cause to believe that such persons are acting as agents of foreign powers;
and(2)Searches by CIA of personal property of non-United States per-
sons lawfully in its possession.(c)Physical surveillance of a United States person in the United States by
agencies other than the FBI, except for:(1)Physical surveillance of present or former employees, present or
former intelligence agency contractors or their present of former employees, orapplicants for any such employment or contracting; and(2)Physical surveillance of a military person employed by a
nonintelligence element of a military service.(d)Physical surveillance of a United States person abroad to collect for-
eign intelligence, except to obtain significant information that cannot reasonably
be acquired by other means.2.5Attorney General Approval.The Attorney General hereby is delegated
the power to approve the use for intelligence purposes, within the United States
or against a United States person abroad, of any technique for which a warrantwould be required if undertaken for law enforcement purposes, provided thatsuch techniques shall not be undertaken unless the Attorney General has deter-
mined in each case that there is probable cause to believe that the technique isdirected against a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power. Electronic sur-veillance, as defined in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, shall be
conducted in accordance with that Act, as well as this Order.2.6Assistance to Law Enforcement Authorities.Agencies within the Intelli-
gence Community are authorized to:(a)Cooperate with appropriate law enforcement agencies for the purpose
of protecting the employees, information, property and facilities of any agency
within the Intelligence Community;(b)Unless otherwise precluded by law or this Order, participate in law
enforcement activities to investigate or prevent clandestine intelligence activities
by foreign powers, or international terrorist or narcotics activities;(c)Provide specialized equipment, technical knowledge, or assistance of
expert personnel for use by any department or agency, or, when lives are endan-
gered, to support local law enforcement agencies. Provision of assistance by ex-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.586APPENDIX Npert personnel shall be approved in each case by the General Counsel of theproviding agency; and(d)Render any other assistance and cooperation to law enforcement au-
thorities not precluded by applicable law.2.7Contracting.Agencies within the Intelligence Community are authorized
to enter into contracts or arrangements for the provision of goods or services withprivate companies or institutions in the United States and need not reveal thesponsorship of such contracts or arrangements for authorized intelligence pur-
poses. Contracts or arrangements with academic institutions may be undertakenonly with the contract of appropriate officials of the institution.2.8Consistency With Other Laws.Nothing in this Order shall be construed to
authorize any activity in violation of the Constitution or statutes of the UnitedStates.2.9Undisclosed Participation in Organizations Within the United States.No
one acting on behalf of agencies within the Intelligence Community may join or
otherwise participate in any organization in the United States on behalf of anyagency within the Intelligence Community without disclosing his intelligenceaffiliation to appropriate officials of the organization, except in accordance with
procedures established by the head of the agency concerned and approved by theAttorney General. Such participation shall be authorized only if it is essential toachieving lawful purposes as determined by the agency head or designee. No
such participation may be undertaken for the purpose of influencing the activity
of the organization or its members except in cases where:(a)The participation is undertaken on behalf of the FBI in the course of a
lawful investigation; or(b)The organization concerned is composed primarily of individuals who
are not United States persons and is reasonably believed to be acting on behalf ofa foreign power.2.10Human Experimentation.No agency within the Intelligence Community
shall sponsor, contract for or conduct research on human subjects except in accor-
dance with guidelines issued by the Department of Health and Human Services.The subjectÕs informed consent shall be documented as required by those guide-lines.2.11Prohibition on Assassination.No person employed by or acting on behalf
of the United States Government shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, assas-
sination.2.12Indirect Participation.No agency of the Intelligence Community shall par-
ticipate in or request any person to undertake activities forbidden by this Order.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS587Part 3General Provisions3.1Congressional Oversight.The duties and responsibilities of the Director
of Central Intelligence and the heads of other departments, agencies, and entitiesengaged in intelligence activities to cooperate with the Congress in the conduct of
its responsibilities for oversight of intelligence activities shall be as provided intitle 50, United States Code, section 413. The requirements of section 662 of theForeign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2422), and section 501 of
the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 413), shall apply to allspecial activities as defined in this Order.3.2Implementation.The NSC, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney Gen-
eral, and the Director of Central Intelligence shall issue such appropriate direc-tives and procedures as are necessary to implement this Order. Heads of agencies
within the Intelligence Community shall issue appropriate supplementary direc-tives and procedures consistent with this Order. The Attorney General shall pro-vide a statement of reasons for not approving any procedures established by the
head of an agency in the Intelligence Community other than the FBI. The NationalSecurity Council may establish procedures in instances where the agency headand the Attorney General are unable to reach agreement on other than constitu-
tional or other legal grounds.3.3Procedures.Until the procedures required by this Order have been estab-
lished, the activities herein authorized which require procedures shall be con-
ducted in accordance with existing procedures or requirements established underExecutive Order No. 12036. Procedures required by this Order shall be estab-lished as expeditiously as possible. All procedures promulgated pursuant to this
Order shall be made available to the congressional intelligence committees.3.4Definitions.For the purposes of this Order, the following terms shall have
these meanings:(a)Counterintelligence means information gathered and activities con-
ducted to protect against espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or as-
sassinations conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations or per-sons, or international terrorist activities, but not including personnel, physical,document or communications security programs.(b)Electronic surveillance means acquisitions of a nonpublic communica-
tion by electronic means without the consent of a person who is a party to anelectronic communication or, in the case of a nonelectronic communication, with-
out the consent of a person who is visably present at the place of communication,but not including the use of radio direction-finding equipment solely to deter-mine the location of a transmitter.(c)Employee means a person employed by, assigned to or acting for an
agency within the Intelligence Community.(d)Foreign intelligence means information relating to the capabilities, in-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.588APPENDIX Ntentions and activities of foreign powers, organizations or persons, but not includ-ing counterintelligence except for information on international terrorist activities.(e)Intelligence activities means all activities that agencies within the In-
telligence Community are authorized to conduct pursuant to this Order.(f)Intelligence Community and agencies within the Intelligence Com-
munity refer to the following agencies or organizations:(1)The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA);
(2)The National Security Agency (NSA);
(3)The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA);

(4)The offices within the Department of Defense for the collection
of specialized national foreign intelligence through reconnaissance programs;(5)The Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the Department of
State;(6)The intelligence elements of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Marine Corps, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Department of the
Treasury, and the Department of Energy; and(7)The staff elements of the Director of Central Intelligence.
(g)The National Foreign Intelligence Program includes the programs
listed below, but its composition shall be subject to review by the National Secu-rity Council and modification by the President:(1)The programs of the CIA;

(2)The Consolidated Cryptologic Program, the General Defense In-
telligence Program, and the programs of the offices within the Department ofDefense for the collection of specialized national foreign intelligence through re-
connaissance, except such elements as the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Secretary of Defense agree should be excluded;(3)Other programs of agencies within the Intelligence Community
designated jointly by the Director of Central Intelligence and the head of the
department or by the President as national foreign intelligence or counterintelli-gence activities;(4)Activities of the staff elements of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence;(5)Activities to acquire the intelligence required for the planning
and conduct of tactical operations by the United States military forces are not
included in the National Foreign Intelligence Program.(h)Special activities means activities conducted in support of national
foreign policy objectives abroad which are planned and executed so that the role
of the United States Government is not apparent or acknowledged publicly, andfunctions in support of such activities, but which are not intended to influenceUnited States political processes, public opinion, policies, or media and do not
include diplomatic activities or the collection and production of intelligence orrelated support functions.(i)United States person means a United States citizen, an alien known by
the intelligence agency concerned to be a permanent resident alien, an unincorpo-rated association substantially composed of United States citizens or permanentresident aliens, or a corporation incorporated in the United States, except for a
corporation directed and controlled by a foreign government or governments.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS5893.5Purpose and Effect.This Order is intended to control and provide direc-
tion and guidance to the Intelligence Community. Nothing contained herein or in
any procedures promulgated hereunder is intended to confer any substantive orprocedural right or privilege on any person or organization.3.6Revocation.Executive Order No. 12036 of January 24, 1978, as amended,
entitled ÔUnited States Intelligence Activities,Õ is revoked.
RONALD REAGAN, THE WHITE HOUSE, December 4, 1981.N.2.2Executive Order 12958 (Classified National
Security Information)This order prescribes a uniform system for classifying, safeguarding, and
declassifying national security information.  Our democratic principles require
that the American people be informed of the activities of their Government. Also,
our NationÕs progress depends on the free flow of information.  Nevertheless,
throughout our history, the national interest has required that certain information
be maintained in confidence in order to protect our citizens, our democratic insti-

tutions, and our participation within the community of nations. Protecting infor-

mation critical to our NationÕs security remains a priority. In recent years, how-ever, dramatic changes have altered, although not eliminated, the national security
threats that we confront. These changes provide a greater opportunity to empha-
size our commitment to open Government.NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by theConstitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as

follows:Part 1Original ClassificationSection 1.1. Definitions. For purposes of this order:(a)ÒNational securityÓ means the national defense or foreign relations of
the United States.(b)ÒInformationÓ means any knowledge that can be communicated or
documentary material, regardless of its physical form or characteristics, that is
owned by, produced by or for, or is under the control of the United States Govern-
ment.  ÒControlÓ means the authority of the agency that originates information, or
its successor in function, to regulate access to the information.(c)ÒClassified national security informationÓ (hereafter 
Òclassified infor-mationÓ) means information that has been determined pursuant to this order or
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.590APPENDIX Nany predecessor order to require protection against unauthorized disclosure and
is marked to indicate its classified status when in documentary form.(d)ÒForeign Government InformationÓ means:
(1)information provided to the United States Government by a for-
eign government or governments, an international organization of governments,
or any element thereof, with the expectation that the information, the source of the

information, or both, are to be held in confidence;
(2)information produced by the United States pursuant to or as a
result of a joint arrangement with a foreign government or governments, or an

international organization of governments, or any element thereof, requiring that
the information, the arrangement, or both, are to be held in confidence; or
(3)information received and treated as 
ÒForeign Government Infor-
mationÓ under the terms of a predecessor order.
(e)ÒClassificationÓ means the act or process by which information is de-
termined to be classified information.(f)ÒOriginal classificationÓ means an initial determination that informa-
tion requires, in the interest of national security, protection against unauthorized
disclosure.(g)ÒOriginal classification authorityÓ means an individual authorized in
writing, either by the President, or by agency heads or other officials designatedby the President, to classify information in the first instance.
(h)ÒUnauthorized disclosureÓ means a communication or physical trans-
fer of classified information to an unauthorized recipient.
(i)ÒAgencyÓ means any 
ÒExecutive agency,Ó as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105,
and any other entity within the executive branch that comes into the possession of

classified information.(j)ÒSenior agency officialÓ means the official designated by the agency
head under section 5.6(c) of this order to direct and administer the agency
Õs pro-gram under which information is classified, safeguarded, and declassified.
(k)ÒConfidential sourceÓ means any individual or organization that has
provided, or that may reasonably be expected to provide, information to the

United States on matters pertaining to the national security with the expectation
that the information or relationship, or both, are to be held in confidence.
(l)ÒDamage to the national securityÓ means harm to the national defense
or foreign relations of the United States from the unauthorized disclosure of infor-
mation, to include the sensitivity, value, and utility of that information.
Sec. 1.2. Classification Standards.(a)Information may be originally classified under the terms of this order
only if all of the following conditions are met:
(1)an original classification authority is classifying the information;
(2)the information is owned by, produced by or for, or is under the
control of the United States Government;(3)the information falls within one or more of the categories of
information listed in section 1.5 of this order; and(4)the original classification authority determines that the unau-
thorized disclosure of the information reasonably could be expected to result in
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS591damage to the national security and the original classification authority is able to
identify or describe the damage.(b)If there is significant doubt about the need to classify information, it
shall not be classified. This provision does not:
(1)amplify or modify the substantive criteria or procedures for clas-
sification; or(2)create any substantive or procedural rights subject to judicial
review.(c)Classified information shall not be declassified automatically as a re-
sult of any unauthorized disclosure of identical or similar information.Sec. 1.3. Classification Levels.(a)Information may be classified at one of the following three levels:
(1)ÒTop SecretÓ shall be applied to information, the unauthorized
disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally grave

damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to
identify or describe.(2)ÒSecretÓ shall be applied to information, the unauthorized dis-
closure of which reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage to the
national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or
describe.(3)ÒConfidentialÓ shall be applied to information, the unauthorized
disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the nationalsecurity that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.
(b)Except as otherwise provided by statute, no other terms shall be used
to identify United States classified information.(c)If there is significant doubt about the appropriate level of classifica-
tion, it shall be classified at the lower level.
Sec. 1.4. Classification Authority.(a)The authority to classify information originally may be exercised only
by:(1)the President;
(2)agency heads and officials designated by the President in the
Federal Register; or(3)United States Government officials delegated this authority pur-
suant to paragraph (c), below.(b)Officials authorized to classify information at a specified level are also
authorized to classify information at a lower level.(c)Delegation of original classification authority.
(1)Delegations of original classification authority shall be limited to
the minimum required to administer this order. Agency heads are responsible for
ensuring that designated subordinate officials have a demonstrable and continu-
ing need to exercise this authority.(2)ÒTop SecretÓ original classification authority may be delegated
only by the President or by an agency head or official designated pursuant to
paragraph (a)(2), above.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.592APPENDIX N(3)ÒSecretÓ or 
ÒConfidentialÓ original classification authority may
be delegated only by the President; an agency head or official designated pursu-ant to paragraph (a)(2), above; or the senior agency official, provided that official
has been delegated ÒTop SecretÓ original classification authority by the agency
head.(4)Each delegation of original classification authority shall be in
writing and the authority shall not be redelegated except as provided in thisorder. Each delegation shall identify the official by name or position title.
(d)Original classification authorities must receive training in original clas-
sification as provided in this order and its implementing directives.
(e)Exceptional cases. When an employee, contractor, licensee, certificate
holder, or grantee of an agency that does not have original classification authority

originates information believed by that person to require classification, the infor-
mation shall be protected in a manner consistent with this order and its imple-
menting directives. The information shall be transmitted promptly as provided

under this order or its implementing directives to the agency that has appropriate
subject matter interest and classification authority with respect to this informa-
tion. That agency shall decide within 30 days whether to classify this information.

If it is not clear which agency has classification responsibility for this information,
it shall be sent to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office. The
Director shall determine the agency having primary subject matter interest and

forward the information, with appropriate recommendations, to that agency for a
classification determination.Sec. 1.5. Classification Categories. Information may not be considered for classifi-cation unless it concerns:
(a)military plans, weapons systems, or operations;
(b)foreign government information;

(c)intelligence activities (including special activities), intelligence sources
or methods, or cryptology;(d)foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States, including
confidential sources;(e)scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to the national
security;(f)United States Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materi-
als or facilities; or(g)vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects or plans
relating to the national security.
Sec. 1.6. Duration of Classification.(a)At the time of original classification, the original classification author-
ity shall attempt to establish a specific date or event for declassification based
upon the duration of the national security sensitivity of the information. The date
or event shall not exceed the time frame in paragraph (b), below.(b)If the original classification authority cannot determine an earlier spe-
cific date or event for declassification, information shall be marked for  declassi-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS593fication 10 years from the date of the original decision, except as provided in
paragraph (d), below.(c)An original classification authority may extend the duration of classi-
fication or reclassify specific information for successive periods not to exceed 10
years at a time if such action is consistent with the standards and procedures
established under this order. This provision does not apply to information con-

tained in records that are more than 25 years old and have been determined to
have permanent historical value under title 44, United States Code.
(d)At the time of original classification, the original classification author-
ity may exempt from declassification within 10 years specific information, the
unauthorized disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to cause damageto the national security for a period greater than that provided in paragraph (b),

above, and the release of which could reasonably be expected to:
(1)reveal an intelligence source, method, or activity, or a cryptologic
system or activity;(2)reveal information that would assist in the development or use
of weapons of mass destruction;(3)reveal information that would impair the development or use of
technology within a United States weapons system;
(4)reveal United States military plans, or national security emer-
gency preparedness plans;(5)reveal foreign government information;
(6)damage relations between the United States and a foreign gov-
ernment, reveal a confidential source, or seriously undermine diplomatic activi-

ties that are reasonably expected to be ongoing for a period greater than that

provided in paragraph (b), above;(7)impair the ability of responsible United States Government offi-
cials to protect the President, the Vice President, and other individuals for whom

protection services, in the interest of national security, are authorized; or
(8)violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.
(e)Information marked for an indefinite duration of classification under
predecessor orders, for example, ÒOriginating AgencyÕs Determination Required,Óor information classified under predecessor orders that contains no
declassification instructions shall be declassified in accordance with part 3 of this

order.Sec. 1.7. Identification and Markings.(a)At the time of original classification, the following shall appear on the
face of each classified document, or shall be applied to other classified media in an
appropriate manner:(1)one of the three classification levels defined in section 1.3 of this
order;(2)the identity, by name or personal identifier and position, of the
original classification authority;(3)the agency and office of origin, if not otherwise evident;
(4)declassification instructions, which shall indicate one of the fol-
lowing:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.594APPENDIX N(A)the date or event for declassification, as prescribed in sec-
tion 1.6(a) or section 1.6(c); or
(B)the date that is 10 years from the date of original classifica-
tion, as prescribed in section 1.6(b); or(C)the exemption category from classification, as prescribed
in section 1.6(d); and(5)a concise reason for classification which, at a minimum, cites the
applicable classification categories in section 1.5 of this order.(b)Specific information contained in paragraph (a), above, may be ex-
cluded if it would reveal additional classified information.
(c)Each classified document shall, by marking or other means, indicate
which portions are classified, with the applicable classification level, which por-

tions are exempt from declassification under section 1.6(d) of this order, and
which portions are unclassified. In accordance with standards prescribed in direc-
tives issued under this order, the Director of the Information Security Oversight

Office may grant waivers of this requirement for specified classes of documents or
information. The Director shall revoke any waiver upon a finding of abuse.(d)Markings implementing the provisions of this order, including abbre-
viations and requirements to safeguard classified working papers, shall conform
to the standards prescribed in implementing directives issued pursuant to this
order.(e)Foreign government information shall retain its original classification
markings or shall be assigned a U.S. classification that provides a degree of pro-
tection at least equivalent to that required by the entity that furnished the infor-

mation.(f)Information assigned a level of classification under this or predecessor
orders shall be considered as classified at that level of classification despite the
omission of other required markings. Whenever such information is used in the

derivative classification process or is reviewed for possible declassification, hold-
ers of such information shall coordinate with an appropriate classification author-
ity for the application of omitted markings.
(g)The classification authority shall, whenever practicable, use a classi-
fied addendum whenever classified information constitutes a small portion of an
otherwise unclassified document.
Sec. 1.8. Classification Prohibitions and Limitations.(a)In no case shall information be classified in order to:
(1)conceal violations of law, inefficiency, or administrative error;
(2)prevent embarrassment to a person, organization, or agency;
(3)restrain competition; or

(4)prevent or delay the release of information that does not require
protection in the interest of national security.
(b)Basic scientific research information not clearly related to the national
security may not be classified.(c)Information may not be reclassified after it has been declassified and
released to the public under proper authority.(d)Information that has not previously been disclosed to the public under
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS595proper authority may be classified or reclassified after an agency has received a
request for it under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or the PrivacyAct of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a), or the mandatory review provisions of section 3.6 of

this order only if such classification meets the requirements of this order and is
accomplished on a document-by-document basis with the personal participationor under the direction of the agency head, the deputy agency head, or the senior
agency official designated under section 5.6 of this order. This provision does not
apply to classified information contained in records that are more than 25 yearsold and have been determined to have permanent historical value under title 44,
United States Code.(e)Compilations of items of information which are individually unclassi-
fied may be classified if the compiled information reveals an additional associa-
tion or relationship that:(1)meets the standards for classification under this order; and
(2) is not otherwise revealed in the individual items of information.
As used in this order, ÒcompilationÓ means an aggregation of pre-existing
unclassified items of information.Sec. 1.9. Classification Challenges.(a)Authorized holders of information who, in good faith, believe that its
classification status is improper are encouraged and expected to challenge the

classification status of the information in accordance with agency proceduresestablished under paragraph (b), below.
(b)In accordance with implementing directives issued pursuant to this
order, an agency head or senior agency official shall establish procedures under

which authorized holders of information are encouraged and expected to chal-lenge the classification of information that they believe is improperly classified or
unclassified. These procedures shall assure that:(1)individuals are not subject to retribution for bringing such ac-
tions;(2)an opportunity is provided for review by an impartial official or
panel; and(3)individuals are advised of their right to appeal agency decisions
to the Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel established by section 5.4
of this order.Part 2Derivative ClassificationSec. 2.1. Definitions. For purposes of this order:(a)ÒDerivative classificationÓ means the incorporating, paraphrasing, re-
stating or generating in new form information that is already classified, and mark-

ing the newly developed material consistent with the classification markings thatapply to the source information. Derivative classification includes the classifica-
tion of information based on classification guidance. The duplication or reproduc-

tion of existing classified information is not derivative classification.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.596APPENDIX N(b)ÒClassification guidanceÓ means any instruction or source that pre-
scribes the classification of specific information.
(c)ÒClassification guideÓ means a documentary form of classification
guidance issued by an original classification authority that identifies the elementsof information regarding a specific subject that must be classified and establishes
the level and duration of classification for each such element.(d)ÒSource documentÓ means an existing document that contains classi-
fied information that is incorporated, paraphrased, restated, or generated in new
form into a new document.(e)ÒMultiple sourcesÓ means two or more source documents, classifica-
tion guides, or a combination of both.Sec. 2.2. Use of Derivative Classification.(a)Persons who only reproduce, extract, or summarize classified infor-
mation, or who only apply classification markings derived from source material
or as directed by a classification guide, need not possess original classificationauthority.(b)Persons who apply derivative classification markings shall:
(1)observe and respect original classification decisions; and
(2)carry forward to any newly created documents the pertinent
classification markings.
For information derivatively classified based on multiple sources, the derivativeclassifier shall carry forward:(A)the date or event for declassification that corresponds to
the longest period of classification among the sources; and(B)a listing of these sources on or attached to the official file
or record copy.Sec. 2.3. Classification Guides.(a)Agencies with original classification authority shall prepare classifica-
tion guides to facilitate the proper and uniform derivative classification of infor-

mation. These guides shall conform to standards contained in directives issuedunder this order.(b)Each guide shall be approved personally and in writing by an official
who:(1)has program or supervisory responsibility over the information
or is the senior agency official; and(2)is authorized to classify information originally at the highest
level of classification prescribed in the guide.
(c)Agencies shall establish procedures to assure that classification guides
are reviewed and updated as provided in directives issued under this order.
Part 3Declassification and DowngradingSec. 3.1. Definitions. For purposes of this order:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS597(a)ÒDeclassificationÓ means the authorized change in the status of infor-
mation from classified information to unclassified information.
(b)ÒAutomatic declassificationÓ means the declassification of informa-
tion based solely upon:(1)the occurrence of a specific date or event as determined by the
original classification authority; or(2)the expiration of a maximum time frame for duration of classifi-
cation established under this order.(c)ÒDeclassification authorityÓ means:
(1)the official who authorized the original classification, if that offi-
cial is still serving in the same position;(2)the originator
Õs current successor in function;(3)a supervisory official of either; or
(4)officials delegated declassification authority in writing by the
agency head or the senior agency official.
(d) 
ÒMandatory declassification reviewÓ means the review for declassi-
fication of classified information in response to a request for declassification that
meets the requirements under section 3.6 of this order.
(e)ÒSystematic declassification reviewÓ means the review for declassi-
fication of classified information contained in records that have been determined
by the Archivist of the United States (
ÒArchivistÓ) to have permanent historicalvalue in accordance with chapter 33 of title 44, United States Code.
(f)ÒDeclassification guideÓ means written instructions issued by a declas-
sification authority that describes the elements of information regarding a specific

subject that may be declassified and the elements that must remain classified.
(g) 
ÒDowngradingÓ means a determination by a declassification author-
ity that information classified and safeguarded at a specified level shall be classi-
fied and safeguarded at a lower level.
(h)ÒFile seriesÓ means documentary material, regardless of its physical
form or characteristics, that is arranged in accordance with a filing system or
maintained as a unit because it pertains to the same function or activity.
Sec. 3.2. Authority for Declassification.(a)Information shall be declassified as soon as it no longer meets the
standards for classification under this order.(b)It is presumed that information that continues to meet the classifica-
tion requirements under this order requires continued protection. In some excep-

tional cases, however, the need to protect such information may be outweighed
by the public interest in disclosure of the information, and in these cases the
information should be declassified. When such questions arise, they shall be re-

ferred to the agency head or the senior agency official. That official will deter-
mine, as an exercise of discretion, whether the public interest in disclosure out-
weighs the damage to national security that might reasonably be expected from

disclosure. This provision does not:(1)amplify or modify the substantive criteria or procedures for clas-
sification; orCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.598APPENDIX N(2)create any substantive or procedural rights subject to judicial
review.(c)If the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office determines
that information is classified in violation of this order, the Director may require
the information to be declassified by the agency that originated the classification.
Any such decision by the Director may be appealed to the President through the

Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. The information shall
remain classified pending a prompt decision on the appeal.
(d)The provisions of this section shall also apply to agencies that, under
the terms of this order, do not have original classification authority, but had suchauthority under predecessor orders.
Sec. 3.3. Transferred Information.(a)In the case of classified information transferred in conjunction with a
transfer of functions, and not merely for storage purposes, the receiving agency
shall be deemed to be the originating agency for purposes of this order.(b)In the case of classified information that is not officially transferred as
described in paragraph (a), above, but that originated in an agency that has ceased
to exist and for which there is no successor agency, each agency in possession of
such information shall be deemed to be the originating agency for purposes of this
order. Such information may be declassified or downgraded by the agency in
possession after consultation with any other agency that has an interest in thesubject matter of the information.(c)Classified information accessioned into the National Archives and
Records Administration (ÒNational ArchivesÓ) as of the effective date of this or-der shall be declassified or downgraded by the Archivist in accordance with thisorder, the directives issued pursuant to this order, agency declassification guides,
and any existing procedural agreement between the Archivist and the relevant
agency head.(d)The originating agency shall take all reasonable steps to declassify
classified information contained in records determined to have permanent his-
torical value before they are accessioned into the National Archives. However, theArchivist may require that records containing classified information beaccessioned into the National Archives when necessary to comply with the provi-

sions of the Federal Records Act. This provision does not apply to information
being transferred to the Archivist pursuant to section 2203 of title 44, UnitedStates Code, or information for which the National Archives and Records Admin-
istration serves as the custodian of the records of an agency or organization that
goes out of existence.(e)To the extent practicable, agencies shall adopt a system of records
management that will facilitate the public release of documents at the time such
documents are declassified pursuant to the provisions for automatic declassi-fication in sections 1.6 and 3.4 of this order.Sec. 3.4. Automatic Declassification.(a)Subject to paragraph (b), below, within 5 years from the date of this
order, all classified information contained in records that (1) are more than 25years old, and (2) have been determined to have permanent historical value under
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS599title 44, United States Code, shall be automatically declassified whether or not the
records have been reviewed. Subsequently, all classified information in such
records shall be automatically declassified no longer than 25 years from the date

of its original classification, except as provided in paragraph (b), below.
(b)An agency head may exempt from automatic declassification under
paragraph (a), above, specific information, the release of which should be ex-
pected to:(1)reveal the identity of a confidential human source, or reveal
information about the application of an intelligence source or method, or reveal

the identity of a human intelligence source when the unauthorized disclosure of
that source would clearly and demonstrably damage the national security inter-ests of the United States;(2)reveal information that would assist in the development or use
of weapons of mass destruction;(3)reveal information that would impair U.S. cryptologic systems
or activities;(4)reveal information that would impair the application of state of
the art technology within a U.S. weapon system;(5)reveal actual U.S. military war plans that remain in effect;
(6)reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably im-
pair relations between the United States and a foreign government, or seriously
and demonstrably undermine ongoing diplomatic activities of the United States;
(7)reveal information that would clearly and demonstrably impair
the current ability of United States Government officials to protect the President,
Vice President, and other officials for whom protection services, in the interest of
national security, are authorized;(8)reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably im-
pair current national security emergency preparedness plans; or(9)violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.
(c)No later than the effective date of this order, an agency head shall
notify the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security

Affairs of any specific file series of records for which a review or assessment hasdetermined that the information within those file series almost invariably falls
within one or more of the exemption categories listed in paragraph (b), above, and

which the agency proposes to exempt from automatic declassification. The notifi-cation shall include:(1)a description of the file series;

(2)an explanation of why the information within the file series is
almost invariably exempt from automatic declassification and why the informa-
tion must remain classified for a longer period of time; and(3)except for the identity of a confidential human source or a hu-
man intelligence source, as provided in paragraph (b), above, a specific date or
event for declassification of the information.
The President may direct the agency head not to exempt the file series or to
declassify the information within that series at an earlier date than recommended.
(d)At least 180 days before information is automatically declassified un-
der this section, an agency head or senior agency official shall notify the Director
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.600APPENDIX Nof the Information Security Oversight Office, serving as Executive Secretary of theInteragency Security Classification Appeals Panel, of any specific information
beyond that included in a notification to the President under paragraph (c), above,
that the agency proposes to exempt from automatic declassification. The notifica-
tion shall include:(1)a description of the information;

(2)an explanation of why the information is exempt from automatic
declassification and must remain classified for a longer period of time; and(3)except for the identity of a confidential human source or a hu-
man intelligence source, as provided in paragraph (b), above, a specific date orevent for declassification of the information. The Panel may direct the agency not
to exempt the information or to declassify it at an earlier date than recommended.

The agency head may appeal such a decision to the President through the Assis-tant to the President for National Security Affairs. The information will remainclassified while such an appeal is pending.(e)No later than the effective date of this order, the agency head or senior
agency official shall provide the Director of the Information Security Oversight
Office with a plan for compliance with the requirements of this section, including
the establishment of interim target dates. Each such plan shall include the require-ment that the agency declassify at least 15 percent of the records affected by this
section no later than 1 year from the effective date of this order, and similar
commitments for subsequent years until the effective date for automatic
declassification.(f)Information exempted from automatic declassification under this sec-
tion shall remain subject to the mandatory and systematic declassification review

provisions of this order.(g)The Secretary of State shall determine when the United States should
commence negotiations with the appropriate officials of a foreign government or

international organization of governments to modify any treaty or internationalagreement that requires the classification of information contained in records
affected by this section for a period longer than 25 years from the date of its

creation, unless the treaty or international agreement pertains to information thatmay otherwise remain classified beyond 25 years under this section.Sec. 3.5. Systematic Declassification Review.(a)Each agency that has originated classified information under this or-
der or its predecessors shall establish and conduct a program for systematic

declassification review. This program shall apply to historically valuable recordsexempted from automatic declassification under section 3.4 of this order. Agen-
cies shall prioritize the systematic review of records based upon:(1)recommendations of the Information Security Policy Advisory
Council, established in section 5.5 of this order, on specific subject areas for sys-tematic review concentration; or(2)the degree of researcher interest and the likelihood of
declassification upon review.(b)The Archivist shall conduct a systematic declassification review pro-
gram for classified information:Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS601(1)accessioned into the National Archives as of the effective date of
this order;(2)information transferred to the Archivist pursuant to section 2203
of title 44, United States Code; and(3)information for which the National Archives and Records Ad-
ministration serves as the custodian of the records of an agency or organization

that has gone out of existence.This program shall apply to pertinent records no later than 25 years from the date
of their creation. The Archivist shall establish priorities for the systematic review

of these records based upon the recommendations of the Information SecurityPolicy Advisory Council; or the degree of researcher interest and the likelihood of
declassification upon review. These records shall be reviewed in accordance with

the standards of this order, its implementing directives, and declassification guides
provided to the Archivist by each agency that originated the records. The Director
of the Information Security Oversight Office shall assure that agencies provide the

Archivist with adequate and current declassification guides.(c)After consultation with affected agencies, the Secretary of Defense
may establish special procedures for systematic review for declassification of clas-
sified cryptologic information, and the Director of Central Intelligence may estab-
lish special procedures for systematic review for declassification of classified in-
formation pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities), or

intelligence sources or methods.Sec. 3.6. Mandatory Declassification Review.(a)Except as provided in paragraph (b), below, all information classified
under this order or predecessor orders shall be subject to a review for
declassification by the originating agency if:(1)the request for a review describes the document or material con-
taining the information with sufficient specificity to enable the agency to locate it
with a reasonable amount of effort;(2)the information is not exempted from search and review under
the Central Intelligence Agency Information Act; and
(3)the information has not been reviewed for declassification within
the past 2 years.
If the agency has reviewed the information within the past 2 years, or the informa-
tion is the subject of pending litigation, the agency shall inform the requester of
this fact and of the requesterÕs appeal rights.(b)Information originated by:
(1)the incumbent President;
(2)the incumbent President
Õs White House Staff;(3)committees, commissions, or boards appointed by the incum-
bent President; or(4)other entities within the Executive Office of the President that
solely advise and assist the incumbent President is exempted from the provisionsof paragraph (a), above. However, the Archivist shall have the authority to re-view, downgrade, and declassify information of former Presidents under the con-
trol of the Archivist pursuant to sections 2107, 2111, 2111 note, or 2203 of title 44,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.602APPENDIX NUnited States Code. Review procedures developed by the Archivist shall providefor consultation with agencies having primary subject matter interest and shall beconsistent with the provisions of applicable laws or lawful agreements that per-

tain to the respective Presidential papers or records. Agencies with primary sub-
ject matter interest shall be notified promptly of the ArchivistÕs decision. Any finaldecision by the Archivist may be appealed by the requester or an agency to the

Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel. The information shall remainclassified pending a prompt decision on the appeal.
(c)Agencies conducting a mandatory review for declassification shall
declassify information that no longer meets the standards for classification underthis order. They shall release this information unless withholding is otherwiseauthorized and warranted under applicable law.(d)In accordance with directives issued pursuant to this order, agency
heads shall develop procedures to process requests for the mandatory review ofclassified information. These procedures shall apply to information classified un-
der this or predecessor orders. They also shall provide a means for administra-
tively appealing a denial of a mandatory review request, and for notifying therequester of the right to appeal a final agency decision to the Interagency Security
Classification Appeals Panel.(e)After consultation with affected agencies, the Secretary of Defense
shall develop special procedures for the review of cryptologic information, the
Director of Central Intelligence shall develop special procedures for the review ofinformation pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities), or
intelligence sources or methods, and the Archivist shall develop special proce-

dures for the review of information accessioned into the National Archives.Sec. 3.7. Processing Requests and Reviews. In response to a request for informa-tion under the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act of 1974, or the manda-
tory review provisions of this order, or pursuant to the automatic declassificationor systematic review provisions of this order:(a)An agency may refuse to confirm or deny the existence or nonexist-
ence of requested information whenever the fact of its existence or nonexistence is
itself classified under this order.
(b)When an agency receives any request for documents in its custody
that contain information that was originally classified by another agency, or comesacross such documents in the process of the automatic declassification or system-atic review provisions of this order, it shall refer copies of any request and the

pertinent documents to the originating agency for processing, and may, after
consultation with the originating agency, inform any requester of the referralunless such association is itself classified under this order. In cases in which the

originating agency determines in writing that a response under paragraph (a),above, is required, the referring agency shall respond to the requester in accor-dance with that paragraph.Sec. 3.8. Declassification Database.(a)The Archivist in conjunction with the Director of the Information Se-
curity Oversight Office and those agencies that originate classified information,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS603shall establish a Governmentwide database of information that has been declassi-fied. The Archivist shall also explore other possible uses of technology to facilitate
the declassification process.(b)Agency heads shall fully cooperate with the Archivist in these efforts.
(c)Except as otherwise authorized and warranted by law, all declassified
information contained within the database established under paragraph (a), above,

shall be available to the public.
Part 4SafeguardingSec. 4.1. Definitions. For purposes of this order:(a)ÒSafeguardingÓ means measures and controls that are prescribed to
protect classified information.(b)ÒAccessÓ means the ability or opportunity to gain knowledge of clas-
sified information.(c)ÒNeed-to-knowÓ means a determination made by an authorized
holder of classified information that a prospective recipient requires access to
specific classified information in order to perform or assist in a lawful and autho-
rized governmental function.(d)ÒAutomated information systemÓ means an assembly of computer
hardware, software, or firmware configured to collect, create, communicate, com-
pute, disseminate, process, store, or control data or information.(e)ÒIntegrityÓ means the state that exists when information is unchanged
from its source and has not been accidentally or intentionally modified, altered, ordestroyed.(f)ÒNetworkÓ means a system of two or more computers that can ex-
change data or information.(g)ÒTelecommunicationsÓ means the preparation, transmission, or com-
munication of information by electronic means.(h)ÒSpecial access programÓ means a program established for a specific
class of classified information that imposes safeguarding and access requirements
that exceed those normally required for information at the same classification

level.Sec. 4.2. General Restrictions on Access.(a)A person may have access to classified information provided that:
(1)a favorable determination of eligibility for access has been made
by an agency head or the agency headÕs designee;(2)the person has signed an approved nondisclosure agreement;
and(3)the person has a need-to-know the information.
(b)Classified information shall remain under the control of the originat-
ing agency or its successor in function. An agency shall not disclose information
originally classified by another agency without its authorization. An official or
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.604APPENDIX Nemployee leaving agency service may not remove classified information from the
agencyÕs control.(c)Classified information may not be removed from official premises
without proper authorization.(d)Persons authorized to disseminate classified information outside the
executive branch shall assure the protection of the information in a manner equiva-
lent to that provided within the executive branch.(e)Consistent with law, directives, and regulation, an agency head or
senior agency official shall establish uniform procedures to ensure that automated

information systems, including networks and telecommunications systems, thatcollect, create, communicate, compute, disseminate, process, or store classified
information have controls that:(1)prevent access by unauthorized persons; and
(2)ensure the integrity of the information.
(f)Consistent with law, directives, and regulation, each agency head or
senior agency official shall establish controls to ensure that classified information
is used, processed, stored, reproduced, transmitted, and destroyed under condi-tions that provide adequate protection and prevent access by unauthorized per-

sons.(g)Consistent with directives issued pursuant to this order, an agency
shall safeguard foreign government information under standards that provide a
degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the government orinternational organization of governments that furnished the information. Whenadequate to achieve equivalency, these standards may be less restrictive than the
safeguarding standards that ordinarily apply to United States ÒConfidentialÓ in-
formation, including allowing access to individuals with a need-to-know whohave not otherwise been cleared for access to classified information or executed
an approved nondisclosure agreement.(h)Except as provided by statute or directives issued pursuant to this
order, classified information originating in one agency may not be disseminatedoutside any other agency to which it has been made available without the consent
of the originating agency. An agency head or senior agency official may waive
this requirement for specific information originated within that agency. For pur-
poses of this section, the Department of Defense shall be considered one agency.Sec. 4.3. Distribution Controls.(a)Each agency shall establish controls over the distribution of classified
information to assure that it is distributed only to organizations or individuals
eligible for access who also have a need-to-know the information.(b)Each agency shall update, at least annually, the automatic, routine, or
recurring distribution of classified information that they distribute. Recipients
shall cooperate fully with distributors who are updating distribution lists andshall notify distributors whenever a relevant change in status  occurs.
Sec. 4.4. Special Access Programs.(a)Establishment of special access programs. Unless otherwise autho-
rized by the President, only the Secretaries of State, Defense and Energy, and the
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS605Director of Central Intelligence, or the principal deputy of each, may create a
special access program. For special access programs pertaining to intelligenceactivities (including special activities, but not including military operational, stra-

tegic and tactical programs), or intelligence sources or methods, this function willbe exercised by the Director of Central Intelligence. These officials shall keep thenumber of these programs at an absolute minimum, and shall establish them only

upon a specific finding that:(1)the vulnerability of, or threat to, specific information is excep-
tional; and(2)the normal criteria for determining eligibility for access appli-
cable to information classified at the same level are not deemed sufficient to
protect the information from unauthorized disclosure; or
(3)the program is required by statute.
(b)Requirements and Limitations.
(1)Special access programs shall be limited to programs in which
the number of persons who will have access ordinarily will be reasonably smalland commensurate with the objective of providing enhanced protection for the
information involved.(2)Each agency head shall establish and maintain a system of ac-
counting for special access programs consistent with directives issued pursuant tothis order.(3)Special access programs shall be subject to the oversight pro-
gram established under section 5.6(c) of this order. In addition, the Director of theInformation Security Oversight Office shall be afforded access to these programs,

in accordance with the security requirements of each program, in order to per-

form the functions assigned to the Information Security Oversight Office underthis order. An agency head may limit access to a special access program to the
Director and no more than one other employee of the Information Security Over-
sight Office; or, for special access programs that are extraordinarily sensitive and
vulnerable, to the Director only.(4)The agency head or principal deputy shall review annually each
special access program to determine whether it continues to meet the require-ments of this order.
(5)Upon request, an agency shall brief the Assistant to the Presi-
dent for National Security Affairs, or his or her designee, on any or all of theagencyÕs special access programs.(c)Within 180 days after the effective date of this order, each agency head
or principal deputy shall review all existing special access programs under theagencyÕs jurisdiction. These officials shall terminate any special access programs
that do not clearly meet the provisions of this order. Each existing special access
program that an agency head or principal deputy validates shall be treated as if itwere established on the effective date of this order.(d)Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or
under 10 U.S.C. 119.Sec. 4.5. Access by Historical Researchers and Former Presidential Appointees.
(a)The requirement in section 4.2(a)(3) of this order that access to classi-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.606APPENDIX Nfied information may be granted only to individuals who have a need-to-knowthe information may be waived for persons who:(1)are engaged in historical research projects; or

(2)previously have occupied policy-making positions to which they
were appointed by the President.(b)Waivers under this section may be granted only if the agency head or
senior agency official of the originating agency:(1)determines in writing that access is consistent with the interest
of national security;(2)takes appropriate steps to protect classified information from
unauthorized disclosure or compromise, and ensures that the information is safe-guarded in a manner consistent with this order; and(3)limits the access granted to former Presidential appointees to
items that the person originated, reviewed, signed, or received while serving as aPresidential appointee.Part 5Implementation and ReviewSec. 5.1. Definitions. For purposes of this order:(a)ÒSelf-inspectionÓ means the internal review and evaluation of indi-
vidual agency activities and the agency as a whole with respect to the implemen-
tation of the program established under this order and its implementing direc-
tives.(b)ÒViolationÓ means:
(1)any knowing, willful, or negligent action that could reasonably
be expected to result in an unauthorized disclosure of classified information;(2)any knowing, willful, or negligent action to classify or continue
the classification of information contrary to the requirements of this order or itsimplementing directives; or(3)any knowing, willful, or negligent action to create or continue a
special access program contrary to the requirements of this order.(c)ÒInfractionÓ means any knowing, willful, or negligent action contrary
to the requirements of this order or its implementing directives that does not
comprise a Òviolation,Óas defined above.Sec. 5.2. Program Direction.(a)The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation
with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and the co-chairsof the Security Policy Board, shall issue such directives as are necessary to imple-
ment this order. These directives shall be binding upon the agencies. Directivesissued by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall establishstandards for:(1)classification and marking principles;
(2)agency security education and training programs;
(3)agency self-inspection programs; and

(4)classification and declassification guides.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS607(b)The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall delegate
the implementation and monitorship functions of this program to the Director of
the Information Security Oversight Office.
(c)The Security Policy Board, established by a Presidential Decision Di-
rective, shall make a recommendation to the President through the Assistant tothe President for National Security Affairs with respect to the issuance of a Presi-

dential directive on safeguarding classified information. The Presidential direc-
tive shall pertain to the handling, storage, distribution, transmittal, and destruc-
tion of and accounting for classified information.Sec. 5.3. Information Security Oversight Office.(a)There is established within the Office of Management and Budget an
Information Security Oversight Office. The Director of the Office of Management
and Budget shall appoint the Director of the Information Security Oversight Of-
fice, subject to the approval of the President.(b)Under the direction of the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget acting in consultation with the Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs, the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall:(1)develop directives for the implementation of this order;
(2)oversee agency actions to ensure compliance with this order and
its implementing directives;(3)review and approve agency implementing regulations and
agency guides for systematic declassification review prior to their issuance by the
agency;(4)have the authority to conduct on-site reviews of each agency
Õsprogram established under this order, and to require of each agency those reports,
information, and other cooperation that may be necessary to fulfill its responsi-
bilities. If granting access to specific categories of classified information would
pose an exceptional national security risk, the affected agency head or the senior
agency official shall submit a written justification recommending the denial ofaccess to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget within 60 days of
the request for access. Access shall be denied pending a prompt decision by the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget, who shall consult on this
decision with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs;(5)review requests for original classification authority from agen-
cies or officials not granted original classification authority and, if deemed appro-
priate, recommend Presidential approval through the Director of the Office of

Management and Budget;(6)consider and take action on complaints and suggestions from
persons within or outside the Government with respect to the administration of

the program established under this order;(7)have the authority to prescribe, after consultation with affected
agencies, standardization of forms or procedures that will promote the implemen-

tation of the program established under this order;
(8)report at least annually to the President on the implementation
of this order; andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.608APPENDIX N(9)convene and chair interagency meetings to discuss matters per-
taining to the program established by this order.
Sec. 5.4. Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel.(a)Establishment and Administration.
(1)There is established an Interagency Security Classification Ap-
peals Panel (ÒPanelÓ). The Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General,
the Director of Central Intelligence, the Archivist of the United States, and the
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs shall each appoint a senior
level representative to serve as a member of the Panel. The President shall select
the Chair of the Panel from among the Panel members.(2)A vacancy on the Panel shall be filled as quickly as possible as
provided in paragraph (1), above.(3)The Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall
serve as the Executive Secretary. The staff of the Information Security Oversight
Office shall provide program and administrative support for the Panel.
(4)The members and staff of the Panel shall be required to meet
eligibility for access standards in order to fulfill the PanelÕs functions.(5)The Panel shall meet at the call of the Chair. The Chair shall
schedule meetings as may be necessary for the Panel to fulfill its functions in atimely manner.(6)The Information Security Oversight Office shall include in its
reports to the President a summary of the PanelÕs activities.(b)Functions. The Panel shall:
(1)decide on appeals by persons who have filed classification chal-
lenges under section 1.9 of this order;
(2)approve, deny, or amend agency exemptions from automatic
declassification as provided in section 3.4 of this order; and
(3)decide on appeals by persons or entities who have filed requests
for mandatory declassification review under section 3.6 of this order.(c)Rules and Procedures. The Panel shall issue bylaws, which shall be
published in the Federal Register no later than 120 days from the effective date of
this order. The bylaws shall establish the rules and procedures that the Panel willfollow in accepting, considering, and issuing decisions on appeals. The rules and

procedures of the Panel shall provide that the Panel will consider appeals only onactions in which:(1)the appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies
within th responsible agency;(2)there is no current action pending on the issue within the federal
courts; and(3)the information has not been the subject of review by the federal
courts or the Panel within the past 2 years.(d)Agency heads will cooperate fully with the Panel so that it can fulfill
its functions in a timely and fully informed manner. An agency head may appeala decision of the Panel to the President through the Assistant to the President forNational Security Affairs. The Panel will report to the President through the As-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS609sistant to the President for National Security Affairs any instance in which it
believes that an agency head is not cooperating fully with the Panel.(e)The Appeals Panel is established for the sole purpose of advising and
assisting the President in the discharge of his constitutional and discretionaryauthority to protect the national security of the United States. Panel decisions arecommitted to the discretion of the Panel, unless reversed by the President.
Sec. 5.5. Information Security Policy Advisory Council.(a)Establishment. There is established an Information Security Policy
Advisory Council (ÒCouncilÓ). The Council shall be composed of seven members
appointed by the President for staggered terms not to exceed 4 years, from among
persons who have demonstrated interest and expertise in an area related to the
subject matter of this order and are not otherwise employees of the Federal Gov-
ernment. The President shall appoint the Council Chair from among the mem-bers. The Council shall comply with the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as
amended, 5 U.S.C. App. 2.(b)Functions. The Council shall:
(1)advise the President, the Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, or such
other executive branch officials as it deems appropriate, on policies established
under this order or its implementing directives, including recommended changes

to those policies;(2)provide recommendations to agency heads for specific subject
areas for systematic declassification review; and(3)serve as a forum to discuss policy issues in dispute.
(c)Meetings. The Council shall meet at least twice each calendar year,
and as determined by the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairsor the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.(d)Administration.
(1)Each Council member may be compensated at a rate of pay not
to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for grade

GS-18 of the general schedule under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code, foreach day during which that member is engaged in the actual performance of theduties of the Council.(2)While away from their homes or regular place of business in the
actual performance of the duties of the Council, members may be allowed travel
expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for

persons serving intermittently in the Government service (5 U.S.C. 5703(b)).(3)To the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of
funds, the Information Security Oversight Office shall provide the Council with
administrative services, facilities, staff, and other support services necessary for
the performance of its functions.(4)Notwithstanding any other Executive order, the functions of the
President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, that are appli-cable to the Council, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed
by the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office in accordance with
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.610APPENDIX Nthe guidelines and procedures established by the  General Services Administra-
tion.Sec. 5.6. General Responsibilities. Heads of agencies that originate or handle clas-
sified information shall:(a)demonstrate personal commitment and commit senior management
to the successful implementation of the program established under this order;
(b)commit necessary resources to the effective implementation of the
program established under this order; and(c)designate a senior agency official to direct and administer the pro-
gram, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)overseeing the agency
Õs program established under this order,provided, an agency head may designate a separate official to oversee specialaccess programs authorized under this order. This official shall provide a full
accounting of the agencyÕs special access programs at least annually;(2)promulgating implementing regulations, which shall be pub-
lished in the Federal Register to the extent that they affect members of the public;(3)establishing and maintaining security education and training
programs;(4)establishing and maintaining an ongoing self-inspection pro-
gram, which shall include the periodic review and assessment of the agencyÕsclassified product;(5)establishing procedures to prevent unnecessary access to classi-
fied information, including procedures that: (i) require that a need for access to
classified information is established before initiating administrative clearance pro-

cedures; and (ii) ensure that the number of persons granted access to classified
information is limited to the minimum consistent with operational and security
requirements and needs;(6)developing special contingency plans for the safeguarding of
classified information used in or near hostile or potentially hostile areas;(7)assuring that the performance contract or other system used to
rate civilian or military personnel performance includes the management of clas-
sified information as a critical element or item to be evaluated in the rating of: (i)
original classification authorities; (ii) security managers or security specialists;

and (iii) all other personnel whose duties significantly involve the creation or
handling of classified information;(8)accounting for the costs associated with the implementation of
this order, which shall be reported to the Director of the Information SecurityOversight Office for publication; and(9)assigning in a prompt manner agency personnel to respond to
any request, appeal, challenge, complaint, or suggestion arising out of this orderthat pertains to classified information that originated in a component of the agency
that no longer exists and for which there is no clear successor in function.Sec. 5.7. Sanctions.(a)If the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office finds that a
violation of this order or its implementing directives may have occurred, theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS611Director shall make a report to the head of the agency or to the senior agency
official so that corrective steps, if appropriate, may be taken.(b)Officers and employees of the United States Government, and its con-
tractors, licensees, certificate holders, and grantees shall be subject to appropriatesanctions if they knowingly, willfully, or negligently:
(1)disclose to unauthorized persons information properly classi-
fied under this order or predecessor orders;(2)classify or continue the classification of information in violation
of this order or any implementing directive;(3)create or continue a special access program contrary to the re-
quirements of this order; or(4)contravene any other provision of this order or its implementing
directives.(c)Sanctions may include reprimand, suspension without pay, removal,
termination of classification authority, loss or denial of access to classified infor-

mation, or other sanctions in accordance with applicable law and agency regula-tion.(d)The agency head, senior agency official, or other supervisory official
shall, at a minimum, promptly remove the classification authority of any indi-
vidual who demonstrates reckless disregard or a pattern of error in applying theclassification standards of this order.(e)The agency head or senior agency official shall:
(1)take appropriate and prompt corrective action when a violation
or infraction under paragraph (b), above, occurs; and(2) notify the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office
when a violation under paragraph (b)(1), (2) or (3), above, occurs.Part 6General ProvisionsSec. 6.1. General Provisions.(a)Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or
under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or the National Security Act of

1947, as amended. ÒRestricted DataÓ and 
ÒFormerly Restricted DataÓ shall be
handled, protected, classified, downgraded, and declassified in conformity with
the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and regulations
issued under that Act.
(b)The Attorney General, upon request by the head of an agency or the
Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, shall render an interpreta-

tion of this order with respect to any question arising in the course of its adminis-
tration.(c)Nothing in this order limits the protection afforded any information
by other provisions of law, including the exemptions to the Freedom of Informa-tion Act, the Privacy Act, and the National Security Act of 1947, as amended. Thisorder is not intended, and should not be construed, to create any right or benefit,
substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States,
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.612APPENDIX Nits agencies, its officers, or its employees. The foregoing is in addition to thespecific provisos set forth in sections 1.2(b), 3.2(b) and 5.4(e) of this order.
(d)Executive Order No. 12356 of April 6, 1982, is revoked as of the effec-
tive date of this order.Sec. 6.2. Effective Date. This order shall become effective 180 days from the date ofthis order.WILLIAM J. CLINTON, THE WHITE HOUSE, April 17, 1995.
N.2.3Executive Order 12472 (Assignment of National Security and
Emergency Preparedness Telecommunications Functions)By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of theUnited States of America, including the Communications Act of 1934, as  amended

(47 U.S.C. 151), the National Security Act of 1947, as amended, the Defense Pro-duction Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2061), the Federal Civil DefenseAct of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2251), the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 (42
U.S.C. 5121), Section 5 of Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1977 (3 C.F.R. 197, 1978Comp.), and Section 203 of Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1978 (3 C.F.R. 389, 1978Comp.), and in order to provide for the consolidation of assignment and respon-
sibility for improved execution of national security and emergency preparedness
telecommunications functions, it is hereby ordered as follows:Sec. 1. The National Communications System.(a)There is hereby established the National Communications System
(NCS). The NCS shall consist of the telecommunications assets of the entitiesrepresented on the NCS Committee of Principals and an administrative structure

consisting of the Executive Agent, the NCS Committee of Principals and the Man-ager. The NCS Committee of Principals shall consist of representatives from thoseFederal departments, agencies or entities, designated by the President, which
lease or own telecommunications facilities or services of significance to nationalsecurity or emergency preparedness, and, to the extent permitted by law, otherExecutive entities which bear policy, regulatory or enforcement responsibilities of
importance to national security or emergency preparedness telecommunicationscapabilities.(b)The mission of the NCS shall be to assist the President, the National
Security Council, the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy and
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in:(1)the exercise of the telecommunications functions and responsi-
bilities set forth in Section 2 of this Order; and
(2)the coordination of the planning for and provision of national
security and emergency preparedness communications for the Federal govern-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS613ment under all circumstances, including crisis or emergency, attack, recovery andreconstitution.(c)The NCS shall seek to ensure that a national telecommunications in-
frastructure is developed which:(1)Is responsive to the national security and emergency prepared-
ness needs of the President and the Federal departments, agencies and other
entities, including telecommunications in support of national security leadershipand continuity of government;(2)Is capable of satisfying priority telecommunications require-
ments under all circumstances through use of commercial, government and pri-vately owned telecommunications resources;(3)Incorporates the necessary combination of hardness, redun-
dancy, mobility, connectivity, interoperability, restorability and security to ob-tain, to the maximum extent practicable, the survivability of national security andemergency preparedness telecommunications in all circumstances, including con-
ditions of crisis or emergency; and(4)Is consistent, to the maximum extent practicable, with other na-
tional telecommunications policies.(d)To assist in accomplishing its mission, the NCS shall:
(1)serve as a focal point for joint industry-government national
security and emergency preparedness telecommunications planning; and(2)establish a joint industry-government National Coordinating
Center which is capable of assisting in the initiation, coordination, restoration andreconstitution of national security or emergency preparedness telecommunica-
tions services or facilities under all conditions of crisis or emergency.(e)The Secretary of Defense is designated as the Executive Agent for the
NCS. The Executive Agent shall:(1)Designate the Manager of the NCS;

(2)Ensure that the NCS conducts unified planning and operations,
in order to coordinate the development and maintenance of an effective and re-sponsive capability for meeting the domestic and international national security
and emergency preparedness telecommunications needs of the Federal govern-ment;(3)Ensure that the activities of the NCS are conducted in conjunc-
tion with the emergency management activities of the Federal Emergency Man-agement Agency;(4)Recommend, in consultation with the NCS Committee of Princi-
pals, to the National Security Council, the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology Policy, or the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, asappropriate:a.The assignment of implementation or other responsibilities to
NCS member entities;b.New initiatives to assist in the exercise of the functions speci-
fied in Section 2; and
c.Changes in the composition or structure of the NCS;
(5)Oversee the activities of and provide personnel and administra-
tive support to the Manager of the NCS;Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.614APPENDIX N(6)Provide staff support and technical assistance to the National
Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee established by Executive Or-der No. 12382, as amended; and(7)Perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned by
the President or his authorized designee.(f)The NCS Committee of Principals shall:
(1)Serve as the forum in which each member of the Committee may
review, evaluate, and present views, information and recommendations concern-
ing ongoing or prospective national security or emergency preparedness telecom-
munications programs or activities of the NCS and the entities represented on theCommittee;(2)Serve as the forum in which each member of the Committee
shall report on and explain ongoing or prospective telecommunications plans andprograms developed or designed to achieve national security or emergency pre-paredness telecommunications objectives;(3)Provide comments or recommendations, as appropriate, to the
National Security Council, the Director of the Office of Science and TechnologyPolicy, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Executive Agent,
or the Manager of the NCS, regarding ongoing or prospective activities of theNCS; and(4)Perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned by
the President or his authorized designee.(g)The Manager of the NCS shall:
(1)Develop for consideration by the NCS Committee of Principals
and the Executive Agent:a.A recommended evolutionary telecommunications archi-
tecture designed to meet current and future Federal government national securityand emergency preparedness telecommunications requirements;b.Plans and procedures for the management, allocation and
use, including the establishment of priorities or preferences, of Federally ownedor leased telecommunications assets under all conditions of crisis or emergency;c.Plans, procedures and standards for minimizing or remov-
ing technical impediments to the interoperability of government-owned and/orcommercially-provided telecommunications systems;d.Test and exercise programs and procedures for the evalua-
tion of the capability of the NationÕs telecommunications resources to meet na-tional security or emergency preparedness telecommunications requirements; ande.Alternative mechanisms for funding, through the budget
review process, national security or emergency preparedness telecommunicationsinitiatives which benefit multiple Federal departments, agencies, or entities. Those
mechanisms recommended by the NCS Committee of Principals and the Execu-tive Agent shall be submittted to the Director of the Office of Management andBudget.(2)Implement and administer any approved plans or programs as
assigned, including any system of priorities and preferences for the provision ofcommunications service, in consultation with the NCS Committee of PrincipalsCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS615and the Federal Communications Commission, to the extent practicable or other-wise required by law or regulation;(3)Chair the NCS Committee of Principals and provide staff sup-
port and technical assistance thereto;(4)Serve as a focal point for joint industry-government planning,
including the dissemination of technical information, concerning the national se-
curity or emergency perparedness telecommunications requirements of the Fed-eral government;(5)Conduct technical studies or analyses, and examine research and
development programs, for the purpose of identifying, for consideration by theNCS Committee of Principals and the Executive Agent, improved approacheswhich may assist Federal entities in fulfilling national security or emergency pre-
paredness telecommunications objectives;(6)Pursuant to the Federal Standardization Program of the General
Services Administration, and in consultation with other appropriate entities of the
Federal government including the NCS Committee of Principals, manage the Fed-eral Telecommunications Standards Program, ensuring wherever feasible thatexisting or evolving industry, national, and international standards are used as
the basis for Federal telecommunications standards; and(7)Provide such reports and perform such other duties as are from
time to time assigned by the President or his authorized designee, the Executive
Agent, or the NCS Committee of Principals. Any such assignments of responsibil-ity to, or reports made by, the Manager shall be transmitted through the ExecutiveAgent.Sec. 2. Executive Office Responsibilities.(a)Wartime Emergency Functions.
(1)The National Security Council shall provide policy direction for
the exercise of the war power functions of the President under Section 606 of theCommunications Act of 1934, as amended (47 U.S.C. 606), should the Presidentissue implementing instructions in accordance with the National Emergencies Act
(50 U.S.C. 1601).(2)The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall
direct the exercise of the war power functions of the President under Section 606
(a), (c)-(e), of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (47 U.S.C. 606), shouldthe President issue implementing instructions in accordance with the NationalEmergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601).(b)Non-Wartime Emergency Functions.
(1)The National Security Council shall:
a.Advise and assist the President in coordinating the develop-
ment of policy, plans, programs and standards within the Federal government forthe identification, allocation, and use of the NationÕs telecommunications re-sources by the Federal government, and by State and local governments, private
industry and volunteer organizations upon request, to the extent practicable andotherwise consistent with law, during those crises or emergencies in which theexercise of the PresidentÕs war power functions is not required or permitted bylaw; andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.616APPENDIX Nb.Provide policy direction for the exercise of the President
Õsnon-wartime emergency telecommunications functions, should the President soinstruct.(2)The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall
provide information, advice, guidance and assistance, as appropriate, to the Presi-dent and to those Federal departments and agencies with responsibilities for the
provision, management, or allocation of telecommunications resources, duringthose crises or emergencies in which the exercise of the PresidentÕs war powerfunctions is not required or permitted by law;(3)The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall
establish a Joint Telecommunications Resources Board (JTRB) to assist him in theexercise of the functions specified in this subsection. The Director of the Office of
Science and Technology Policy shall serve as chairman of the JTRB; select those
Federal departments, agencies, or entities which shall be members of the JTRB;
and specify the functions it shall perform.(c)Planning and Oversight Responsibilities.
(1)The National Security Council shall advise and assist the Presi-
dent in:a.Coordinating the development of policy, plans, programs
and standards for the mobilization and use of the NationÕs commercial, govern-ment, and privately owned telecommunications resources, in order to meet na-
tional security or emergency preparedness requirements;b.Providing policy oversight and direction of the activities of
the NCS; andc.Providing policy oversight and guidance for the execution
of the responsibilities assigned to the Federal departments and agencies by thisOrder.(2)The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall
make recommendations to the President with respect to the test, exercise andevaluation of the capability of existing and planned communications systems,networks or facilities to meet national security or emergency preparedness re-

quirements and report the results of any such tests or evaluations and any recom-mended remedial actions to the President and to the National Security Council;
(3)The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy or
his designee shall advise and assist the President in the administration of a systemof radio spectrum priorities for those spectrum dependent telecommunicationsresources of the Federal government which support national security or emer-
gency preparedness functions. The Director also shall certify or approve prioritiesfor radio spectrum use by the Federal government, including the resolution of anyconflicts in or among priorities, under all conditions of crisis or emergency; and(4)The National Security Council, the Director of the Office of Sci-
ence and Technology Policy and the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget shall, in consultation with the Executive Agent for the NCS and the NCS
Committee of Principals, determine what constitutes national security and emer-gency preparedness telecommunications requirements.(d)Consultation with Federal Departments and Agencies. In performing
the functions assigned under this Order, the National Security Council and theCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS617Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, in consultation with each
other, shall:(1)Consult, as appropriate, with the Director of the Office of Man-
agement and Budget; the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agencywith respect to the emergency management responsibilities assigned pursuant toExecutive Order No. 12148, as amended; the Secretary of Commerce, with respect
to responsibilities assigned pursuant to Executive Order No. 12046; the Secretaryof Defense, with respect to communications security responsibilities assigned pur-
suant to Executive Order No. 12333; and the Chairman of the Federal Communi-

cations Commission or his authorized designee; and(2)Establish arrangements for consultation among all interested
Federal departments, agencies or entities to ensure that the national security and
emergency preparedness communications needs of all Federal government enti-ties are identified; that mechanisms to address such needs are incorporated intopertinent plans and procedures; and that such needs are met in a manner consis-
tent, to the maximum extent practicable, with other national telecommunications
policies.(e)Budgetary Guidelines. The Director of the Office of Management and
Budget, in consultation with the National Security Council and the NCS, willprescribe general guidelines and procedures for reviewing the financing of theNCS within the budgetary process and for preparation of budget estimates by
participating agencies. These guidelines and procedures may provide for mecha-nisms for funding, through the budget review process, national security and emer-gency preparedness telecommunications initiatives which benefit multiple Fed-
eral departments, agencies, or entities.Sec. 3. Assignment of Responsibilities to Other Departments and Agencies. Inorder to support and enhance the capability to satisfy the national security and
emergency preparedness telecommunications needs of the Federal government,State and local governments, private industry and volunteer organizations, underall circumstances including those of crisis or emergency, the Federal departments
and agencies shall perform the following functions:(a)Department of Commerce. The Secretary of Commerce shall, for all
conditions of crisis or emergency:(1)Develop plans and procedures concerning radio spectrum as-
signments, priorities and allocations for use by Federal departments, agencies andentities; and(2)Develop, maintain and publish policy, plans, and procedures for
the control and allocation of frequency assignments, including the authority toamend, modify or revoke such assignments, in those parts of the electromagnetic
spectrum assigned to the Federal government.(b)Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Director of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency shall:
(1)Plan for and provide, operate and maintain telecommunications
services and facilities, as part of its National Emergency Management System,adequate to support its assigned emergency management responsibilities;(2)Advise and assist State and local governments and volunteer
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.618APPENDIX Norganizations, upon request and to the extent consistent with law, in developingplans and procedures for identifying and satisfying their national security oremergency preparedness telecommunications requirements;(3)Ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that national secu-
rity and emergency preparedness telecommunications planning by State and lo-cal governments and volunteer organizations is mutually supportive and consis-
tent with the planning of the Federal government; and(4)Develop, upon request and to the extent consistent with law and
in consonance with regulations promulgated by and agreements with the Federal
Communications Commission, plans and capabilities for, and provide policy andmanagement oversight of, the Emergency Broadcast System, and advise and as-sist private radio licensees of the Commission in developing emergency commu-
nications plans, procedures and capabilities.(c)Department of State. The Secretary of State, in accordance with as-
signed responsibilities within the Diplomatic Telecommunications System, shall
plan for and provide, operate and maintain rapid, reliable and secure telecommu-nications services to those Federal entities represented at United States diplomaticmissions and consular offices overseas. This responsibility shall include the provi-
sion and operation of domestic telecommunications in support of assigned na-tional security or emergency preparedness responsibilities.(d)Department of Defense. In addition to the other responsibilities as-
signed by this Order, the Secretary of Defense shall:(1)Plan for and provide, operate and maintain telecommunications
services and facilities adequate to support the National Command Authorities
and to execute the responsibilities assigned by Executive Order No. 12333; and(2)Ensure that the Director of the National Security Agency pro-
vides the technical support necessary to develop and maintain plans adequate toprovide for the security and protection of national security and emergency
preparedness telecommunications.(e)Department of Justice. The Attorney General shall, as necessary, re-
view for legal sufficiency, including consistency with the antitrust laws, all poli-
cies, plans or procedures developed pursuant to responsibilities assigned by thisOrder.(f)Central Intelligence Agency. The Director of Central Intelligence shall
plan for and provide, operate, and maintain telecommunications services ad-equate to support its assigned responsibilities, including the dissemination ofintelligence within the Federal government.(g)General Services Administration. Except as otherwise assigned by this
Order, the Administrator of General Services, consistent with policy guidanceprovided by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall ensure
that Federally owned or managed domestic communications facilities and ser-vices meet the national security and emergency preparedness requirements of theFederal civilian departments, agencies and entities.(h)Federal Communications Commission. The Federal Communications
Commission shall, consistent with Section 4(c) of this Order:(1)Review the policies, plans and procedures of all entities licensed
or regulated by the Commission that are developed to provide national security
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS619or emergency preparedness communications services, in order to ensure that such
policies, plans and procedures are consistent with the public interest, convenience
and necessity;(2)Perform such functions as required by law with respect to all
entities licensed or regulated by the Commission, including (but not limited to)the extension, discontinuance or reduction of common carrier facilities or ser-
vices; the control of common carrier rates, charges, practices and classifications;the construction, authorization, activation, deactivation or closing of radio sta-tions, services and facilities; the assignment of radio frequencies to Commission

licensees; the investigation of violations of pertinent law and regulation; and the
initiation of apppropriate enforcement actions;(3)Develop policy, plans and procedures adequate to execute the
responsibilities assigned in this Order under all conditions of crisis or emergency;
and(4)Consult as appropriate with the Executive Agent for the NCS
and the NCS Committee of Principals to ensure continued coordination of theirrespective national security and emergency preparedness activities.
(i)All Federal departments and agencies, to the extent consistent with
law (including those authorities and responsibilities set forth in Section 4(c) of this
Order), shall:(1)Determine their national security and emergency preparedness
telecommunications requirements, and provide information regarding such re-
quirements to the Manager of the NCS;(2)Prepare policies, plans and procedures concerning telecommu-
nications  facilities, services or equipment under their management or operational

control to maximize their capability of responding to the national security oremergency preparedness needs of the Federal government;(3)Provide, after consultation with the Director of the Office of Man-
agement and Budget, resources to support their respective requirements for na-tional security and emergency preparedness telecommunications; and providepersonnel and staff support to the Manager of the NCS as required by the Presi-
dent;(4)Make information available to, and consult with, the Manager of
the NCS regarding agency telecommunications activities in support of national
security or emergency preparedness;(5)Consult, consistent with the provisions of Executive Order No.
12046, as amended, and in conjunction with the Manager of the NCS, with the
Federal Communications Commission regarding execution of responsibilities as-signed by this Order;(6)Submit reports annually, or as otherwise requested, to the Man-
ager of the NCS, regarding agency national security or emergency preparednesstelecommunications activities; and(7)Cooperate with and assist the Executive Agent for the NCS, the
NCS Committee of Principals, the Manager of the NCS, and other departmentsand agencies in the execution of the functions set forth in this Order, furnishingthem such information, support and assistance as may be required.(j)Each Federal department or agency shall execute the responsibilities
assigned by this Order in conjunction with the emergency management activitiesCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.620APPENDIX Nof the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and in regular consultation withthe Executive Agent for the NCS and the NCS Committee of Principals to ensurecontinued coordination of NCS and individual agency telecommunications activi-

ties.Sec. 4. General Provisions.(a)All Executive departments and agencies may issue such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the functions assigned under thisOrder.(b)In order to reflect the assignments of responsibility provided by this
Order,(1)Sections 2-414, 4-102, 4-103, 4-202, 4-302, 5-3, and 6-101 of Execu-
tive Order No. 12046, as amended, are revoked;(2)The Presidential Memorandum of August 21, 1963, as amended,
entitled  ÒEstablishment of the National Communications SystemÓ, is hereby su-perseded; and(3)Section 2-411 of Executive Order No. 12046, as amended, is fur-
ther amended by deleting the period and inserting Ò, except as otherwise pro-vided by Executive Order No. Ò and inserting the number assigned to this Order.(c)Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to affect the authorities or
responsibilities of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, or any
Office or official thereof; or reassign any function assigned any agency under theFederal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, as amended; or under
any other law; or any function vested by law in the Federal Communications
Commission.Sec. 5. This Order shall be effective upon publication in the Federal Register.RONALD REAGAN, THE WHITE HOUSE, April 3, 1984.
N.2.4National Security Directive 42
5(National Policy for the Security of National SecurityTelecommunications and Information Systems)Continuing advances in microelectronics technology have stimulated an un-precedented growth in the demand for and supply of telecommunications andinformation processing services within the government and throughout the pri-vate sector.  As new technologies have been applied, traditional distinctions be-

tween telecommunications and information systems have begun to disappear.5The text presented was released to Marc Rotenberg, Electronic Privacy Information Cen-ter, under the Freedom of Information Act and is available on-line at http://snyside.sunnyside.com/cpsr/privacy/computer_security/nsd_42.txt.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS621Although this trend promises greatly improved efficiency and effectiveness, italso poses significant security challenges.Telecommunications and information processing systems are highly suscep-tible to interception, unauthorized electronic access, and related forms of techni-cal exploitation, as well as other dimensions of the foreign intelligence threat.  The
technology to exploit these electronic systems is widespread and is used exten-
sively by foreign nations and can be employed, as well, by terrorist groups andcriminal elements.  A comprehensive and coordinated approach must be taken to
protect the governmentÕs national security telecommunications and informationsystems (national security systems) against current and projected threats.  This
approach must include mechanisms for formulating policy, overseeing systemssecurity resources programs, and coordinating and executing technical activities.This Directive establishes initial objectives of policies, and an organizationalstructure to guide the conduct of activities to secure national security systemsfrom exploitation; establishes a mechanism for policy development and dissemi-
nation; and assigns responsibilities for implementation.  It is intended to ensure
full participation and cooperation among the various existing centers of technicalexpertise throughout the Executive branch, and to promote a coherent and coordi-
nated defense against the foreign intelligence threat to these systems.  This Direc-
tive recognizes the special requirements for protection of intelligence sources andmethods.1.  Objectives.  Ensuring the security of national security systems is vitally impor-
tant to the operational effectiveness of the national security activities of the gov-
ernment and to military combat readiness.  I therefore, direct that the govern-

mentÕs capabilities for securing national security systems against technicalexploitation threats be maintained or, if inadequate, improved to provide for:a.Reliable and continuing assessment of threats and vulnerabilities, and
implementation of appropriate effective countermeasures;b.A technical base within the U.S. Government to achieve this security,
and initiatives with the private sector to maintain, complement, or enhance that
government technical base and to ensure information systems security productsare available to secure national security systems; and;c.Effective and efficient application of U.S. Government resources.
2.  Policies.  In support of these objectives the following policies are established:
a.U.S. Government national security systems shall be secured by such
means as are necessary to prevent compromises denials or exploitation;b.Federal agencies shall require that national security systems operated
and maintained by U.S. Government contractors likewise be secured.3.  Implementation
.  This Directive establishes an NSC Policy Coordinating Com-
mittee for National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems, an
interagency group at the operating level, an executive agent and a national man-ager to implement these objectives and policies.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.622APPENDIX N4.  National Security Council/Policy Coordinating Committee for National Security Tele-communications and Information Systems.The National Security Council/Policy Coordinating Committee (PCC) for Na-tional Security Telecommunications, chaired by the Department of Defense, un-der the authority of National Security Directives I and 10f assumed the responsi-
bility for the National Security Telecommunications NSDD 97 Steering Group.  By
authority of this Directive, the PCC for National Security Telecommunications isrenamed the PCC for National Security Telecommunications and Information
Systems, and shall expand its authority to include the responsibilities to protectthe governmentÕs national security telecommunications and information systems.When addressing issues concerning the security of national security telecommu-
nications and information systems, the membership of the PCC shall be expandedto include representatives of the Secretary Of State, the Secretary of the Treasury,the Attorney General, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Commerce, and
the Director of Central Intelligence.  The National Manager for National Security
Telecommunications and Information Systems Security shall be invited as an ob-server.  The Policy Coordinating Committee shall:
a.Oversee the implementation of this Directive;
b.Develop Policy recommendations and provide guidance to the operat-
ing level National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Secu-
rity Committee (NSTISSC);c.Review and resolve matters referred to it by the NSTISSC in fulfilling
the responsibilities outlined in paragraph 5, below; -d.Be subject to the policies of the Director of Central Intelligence on
matters pertaining to the protection of intelligence sources and methods; and,e.Recommend for Presidential approval additions or revisions to this
Directive as national interests may require.5.  The National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Com-mittee.a.The NSTISSC is established to consider technical matters and develop
operating policies, procedures, guidelines, instructions, and standards as neces-sary to implement provisions of this Directive.  The Committee shall be chaired by

the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Command, Control, Communications andIntelligence) and shall be composed of a voting representative of each of thefollowing:The Secretary of StateThe Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of DefenseThe Attorney GeneralThe Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of TransportationThe Secretary of EnergyDirector, Office of Management and Budget
Assistant to the President for National Security AffairsCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS623Director of Central IntelligenceChairman of the Joint Chiefs of StaffDirector, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Director, Federal Emergency Management AgencyAdministrator, General Services AdministrationThe Chief of Staff, United States Army
The Chief of Naval OperationsThe Chief of Staff, United States Air ForceCommandant, United States Marine Corps
Director, National Security AgencyManager, National Communications SystemDirector, Defense Intelligence Agency b.The NSTISSC shall:
 (1)Develop such specific operating policies, procedures, guidelines,
instructions, standards, objectives, and priorities as may be required to imple-ment this Directive; (2)Provide systems security guidance for national security systems
to Executive departments and agencies; (3)Submit annually to the Executive Agent an evaluation of the
security status of national security systems with respect to established objectives
and priorities; (4)Approve the release of cryptologic national security systems
technical security material, information, and techniques to foreign governments
or international organizations.  The concurrence of the Director of Central Intelli-

gence shall be obtained with respect to those activities which he manages; (5)Establish and maintain a national system for promulgating the
operating policies, instructions, directives, and guidancet which may be issued
pursuant to this Directive; (6)Establish permanent and temporary subcommittees as neces-
sary to discharge its responsibilities; (7)Make recommendations to the PCC for NSTISSC membership
and establish criteria and procedures for permanent observers from other depart-ments or agencies affected by specific matters under deliberation, who may at-
tend meetings upon invitation of the Chairman; and, (8)Interact, as necessary, with the National Communications Sys-
tem Committee of Principals established by Executive Order 12472 to ensure the
coordinated execution of assigned responsibilities. c.The Committee shall have two subcommittees, one focusing on tele-
communications security and one focusing an information systems security.  The

two subcommittees shall coordinate their actions and recommendations concern-ing implementation of protective measures, which shall combine and coordinateboth areas where appropriate. d.The Committee shall have a permanent secretariat composed of per-
sonnel of the National Security Agency and such other personnel from Executivedepartments and agencies represented on the Committee as are requested by the
Chairman.  The National Security Agency shall provide facilities and support as
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.624APPENDIX Nrequired.  Other Executive departments and agencies shall provide facilities and
support as requested by the Chairman.6.  The Executive Agent of the Government for National Security Telecommunications
and Information Systems Security.a.Consistent with the authority for communications security given the
Secretary of Defense in Executive Order 12333, the Secretary of Defense shallserve as Executive Agent of the Government for National Security Telecommuni-cations and Information Systems Security and shall be responsible for implement-
ing, under his signature, policies and procedures to: (1)Ensure the development, in conjunction with Committee mem-
ber departments and agencies of plans and programs to fulfill the objectives of
this Directive, including the development of necessary security architectures; (2)Procure for and provide to Executive departments and agencies
and, where appropriate, to government contractors and foreign governments,
consistent with the laws of the United States such technical security material,other technical assistance, and other related services of common concern as re-quired to accomplish the objectives of this Directive; (3)Approve and provide minimum security standards and doc-
trine for systems subject to this Directive; (U) (4)Conduct, approve, or endorse research and development of tech-
niques and equipment to secure national security systems; and, (5)Operate, or coordinate the efforts, of U.S. Government technical
centers related to national security telecommunications and information systems
security.b.The Executive Agent shall review and assess the National Manager
Õsrecommendations on the proposed national security telecommunications and in-formation systems security programs and budgets for the Executive departments
and agencies.  Where appropriate, alternative systems security recommendationswill be provided to agency heads, to National Security Council Committees andto the OMB.  In addition, the Executive Agent shall submit, annually, the security

status of national security systems with respect to established objectives and pri-orities through the National Security Council to the President.7.  The National Manager for National Security Telecommunications and InformationSystems Security.The Director, National Security Agency, is designated the National Manager forNational Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security and isresponsible to the Secretary of Defense as Executive Agent for carrying out the
foregoing responsibilities.  In fulfilling these responsibilities the National Man-
ager shall:a.Examine U.S. Government national security systems and evaluate their
vulnerability to foreign interception and exploitation.  Any such activities, includ-
ing those involving monitoring of official telecommunications, shall be conductedin strict compliance with law, Executive Order and implementing procedures,Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS625and applicable Presidential directive.  No monitoring shall be performed without
advising the heads of the agencies, departments, or services concerned;b.Act as the U.S. Government focal point for cryptography, telecommu-
nications systems security, and information systems security for national securitysystems;c.Conduct, approve, or endorse research and development of techniques
and equipment to secure national security systems;d.Review and approve all standards, techniques, systems, and equip-
ment related to the security of national security systems;e.Conduct foreign computer security and communications security liai-
son, including entering into agreements with foreign governments and with inter-national and private organizations regarding national security systems, except for
those foreign intelligence relationships conducted for intelligence purposes by theDirector of Central Intelligence.  Any such agreements shall be coordinated with
affected departments and agencies;f.Operate such printing and fabrication facilities as may be required to
perform critical functions related to the provisions of cryptographic and othertechnical security material or services;g.Assess the overall security posture of and disseminate information on
threats to and vulnerabilities of national security systems;h.Operate a central technical center to evaluate and certify the security
of national security telecommunications and information systems;i.Prescribe the minimum standards, methods and procedures for pro-
tecting cryptographic and other technical security material, techniques, and infor-
mation related to national security systems;j.Review and assess annually the national security telecommunications
systems security programs and budgets of Executive departments and agencies ofthe U.S. Government, and recommend alternatives, where appropriate, for the
Executive Agent;k.Review annually the aggregated national security information sys-
tems security program and budget recommendations of the Executive depart-
ments and agencies of the U.S. Government for the Executive Agent;l.Request from the heads of Executive departments and agencies such
information and technical support as may be needed to discharge the responsibili-
ties assigned herein;m.Coordinate with the National Institute for Standards and Technology
in accordance with the provisions of the Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L.  100-

235); andn.Enter into agreements for the procurement of technical-security mate-
rial and other equipment, and their provision to Executive departments and agen-
cies, where appropriate, to government contractors, and foreign governments.8.  The Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies shall:
a.Be responsible for achieving and maintaining secure national security
systems within their departments or agencies;b.Ensure that policies, procedures, guidelines, instructions, and stan-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.626APPENDIX Ndards issued pursuant to this Directive are implemented within their depart-ments or agencies; andc.Provide to the NSTISSC, the Executive Agent, and the National Man-
ager, as appropriate, such information as may be required to discharge responsi-bilities assigned herein, consistent with relevant law, Executive Order, and Presi-dential directive.9.  Additional Responsibilities.  The Director, Office of Management and Budget,
shall:a.Specify data to be provided during the annual budget review by Ex-
ecutive departments and agencies on program and budgets relating to security oftheir national security systems;b.Consolidate and provide such data to the National Manager via the
Executive Agent; andc.Review for consistency with this Directive, and amend as appropriate,
OMB policies and regulations which may pertain to the subject matter herein.10.  Nothing in this Directive shall:a.Alter or supersede the existing authorities of the Director of Central
Intelligence;b.Authorize the Committee, the Executive Agent, or the National Man-
ager authority to examine the facilities of other Executive departments and agen-cies without approval of the head of such department or agency, nor to request orcollect information concerning their operation for any purpose not provided for
herein;c.Amend or contravene the provisions of existing law, Executive Order,
or Presidential directive which pertain to the protection of sensitive information,to the protection of national security information, to the privacy aspects or finan-
cial management of information systems or to the administrative requirements forsafeguarding such resources against fraud, waste, and abuse;d.Provide authority to issue policies, procedure, guidelines, instructions,
standards, or priorities or operate programs concerning security of systems otherthan national security systems;e.Be intended to establish additional review processes for the procure-
ment of information processing systems;f.Alter or rescind policies or programs begun under PD-24 or NSDD-
145 that may be pertinent to national security systems.  Policies or programs

retained pursuant to this provision shall not be construed to apply to systemswithin the purview of the Computer Security Act of 1987 (PL100-235); or[NOTE:  In documents received, approximately two paragraphs of material
deleted by redaction of text in this place.]11.  For the purposes of this Directive the following terms shall have the meaningsindicated:a.Telecommunications means the preparation transmission, communica-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS627tions or related processing of information (writing, images, sounds or other data)by electrical, electromagnetic, electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronicmeans;b.Information Systems means any equipment or interconnected system or
subsystems of equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition storage ma-nipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching interchange,
transmission, or reception of data and includes computer software, firmware, andhardware;c.Telecommunications and Information Systems Security means protection
afforded to telecommunications and information systems in order to prevent ex-ploitation through interception, unauthorized electronic access, or related techni-cal intelligence threats, and to ensure authenticity.  Such protection results from

the application of security measures (including cryptosecurity, transmission secu-rity, emission security, and computer security) to systems which generate, storeprocess transfer, or communicate information of use to an adversary, and also
includes the physical protection of technical security material and technical secu-rity information;d.Technical security material means equipment components, devices, and
associated documentation or other media which pertain to cryptographic or to thesecuring of telecommunications and information systems;e.National security systems are those telecommunications and informa-
tion systems operated by the U.S. Government, its contractors, or agents thatcontain classified information or, as set forth in 10 U.S.C. Section 2315, that in-volves intelligence activities involves cryptologic activities related to national se-
curity, involves command and control Of military forces, involves equipment that
is an integral part of a weapon or weapon system, or involves equipment that iscritical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions.12.  Except for ongoing telecommunications protection activities mandated by and pursu-ant to PD-24 and NSDD-145, NSDD-145 is hereby rescinded.July 5, 1990N.3MEMORANDUMS OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU)
AND AGREEMENT (MOA)N.3.1National Security Agency/National Institute of Standards
and Technology MOUMemorandum of Understanding Between the Director of the National Institute ofStandards and Technology and the Director of the National Security Agency Con-
cerning the Implementation of Public Law 100-235Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.628APPENDIX NRecognizing that:A.Under Section 2 of the Computer Security Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-
235), (the Act), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has the
responsibility within the Federal Government for:
1.Developing technical, management, physical, and administra-
tive standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensi-
tive information in Federal computer systems as defined in the Act; and,
2.Drawing on the computer system technical security guidelines
of the National Security Agency (NSA) in this regard where appropriate.
B.Under Section 3 of the Act, the NIST is to coordinate closely with other
agencies and offices, including the NSA, to assure:
1.Maximum use of all existing and planned programs, materials,
studies, and reports relating to computer systems security and privacy, in order to
avoid unnecessary and costly duplication of effort; and,
2.To the maximum extent feasible, that standards developed by
the NIST under the Act are consistent and compatible with standards and proce-
dures developed for the protection of classified information in Federal computer

systems.C.Under the Act, the Secretary of Commerce has the responsibility,
which he has delegated to the Director of NIST, for appointing the members of the

Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, at least one of whom
shall be from the NSA.Therefore, in furtherance of the purposes of this MOU, the Director of the NIST
and the Director of the NSA hereby agree as follows:
I.The NIST will:
1.Appoint to the Computer Security and Privacy Advisory Board
at least one representative nominated by the Director of the NSA.
2.Draw upon computer system technical security guidelines de-
veloped by the NSA to the extent that the NIST determines that such guidelines
are consistent with the requirements for protecting sensitive information in Fed-
eral computer systems.
3.Recognize the NSA-certified rating of evaluated trusted systems
under the Trusted Computer Security Evaluation Criteria Program without re-
quiring additional evaluation.
4.Develop telecommunications security standards for protecting
sensitive unclassified computer data, drawing upon the expertise and products of
the National Security Agency, to the greatest extent possible, in meeting these

responsibilities in a timely and cost effective manner.5.Avoid duplication where possible in entering into mutually
agreeable arrangements with the NSA for the NSA support.
6.Request the NSA
Õs assistance on all matters related to crypto-
graphic algorithms and cryptographic techniques including but not limited to
research, development, evaluation, or endorsement.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS629II.The NSA will:
1.Provide the NIST with technical guidelines in trusted technol-
ogy, telecommunications security, and personal identification that may be used in

cost-effective systems for protecting sensitive computer data.
2.Conduct or initiate research and development programs in
trusted technology, telecommunications security, cryptographic techniques and

personal identification methods.
3.Be responsive to the NIST
Õs requests for assistance in respect to
all matters related to cryptographic algorithms and cryptographic techniques in-

cluding but not limited to research, development, evaluation, or endorsement.
4.Establish the standards and endorse products for application to
secure systems covered in 10 USC Section 2315 (the Warner Amendment).
5.Upon request by Federal agencies, their contractors, and other
government-sponsored entities, conduct assessments of the hostile intelligence
threat to federal information systems, and provide technical assistance and rec-

ommend endorsed products for application to secure systems against that threat.
III.The NIST and the NSA shall:
1.Jointly review agency plans for the security and privacy of com-
puter systems submitted to NIST and NSA pursuant to section 6(b) of the Act.
2.Exchange technical standards and guidelines as necessary to
achieve the purposes of the Act.3.Work together to achieve the purposes of this memorandum
with the greatest efficiency possible, avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort.
4.Maintain an ongoing, open dialogue to ensure that each organi-
zation remains abreast of emerging technologies and issues affecting automated

information system security in computer-based systems.
5.Establish a Technical Working Group to review and analyze is-
sues of mutual interest pertinent to protection of systems that process sensitive or

other unclassified information. The Group shall be composed of six federal em-
ployees, three each selected by NIST and NSA and to be augmented as necessary
by representatives of other agencies.  Issues may be referred to the group by either

the NSA Deputy Director for Information Security or the NIST Deputy Director or
may be generated and addressed by the group upon approval by the NSA DDI or
NIST Deputy Director. Within days of the referral of an issue to the Group by

either the NSA Deputy Director for Information Security or the NIST Deputy
Director, the Group will respond with a progress report and plan for further
analysis, if any.6.Exchange work plans on an annual basis on all research and
development projects pertinent to protection of systems that process sensitive or
other unclassified information, including trusted technology, for protecting the

integrity and availability of data, telecommunications security and personal iden-
tification methods. Project updates will be exchanged quarterly, and project re-
views will be provided by either party upon request of the other party.
7.Ensure the Technical Working Group reviews prior to public
disclosure all matters regarding technical systems security techniques to be devel-
oped for use in protecting sensitive information in federal computer systems to

ensure they are consistent with the national security of the United States. If NIST
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.630APPENDIX Nand NSA are unable to resolve such an issue within 60 days, either agency may
elect to raise the issue to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Commerce.
It is recognized that such an issue may be referred to the President through the

NSC for resolution. No action shall be taken on such an issue until it is resolved.
8.Specify additional operational agreements in annexes to this
MOU as they are agreed to by NSA and NIST.IV.Either party may elect to terminate this MOU upon six months written
notice. This MOU is effective upon approval of both signatories.
RAYMOND G. KAMMER, Acting Director, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, 24 March 1989
W.O. STUDEMAN, Vice Admiral, U.S. Navy; Director, National Security Agency,23 March 1989N.3.2National Security Agency/
Federal Bureau of Investigation MOUMemorandum of Understanding Between Federal Bureau of Investigation andNational Security Agency(u) 1. Purpose
. This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) implements thoseportions of the Department of Defense E.O. 12036 replaced by 12333 (see 12333para. 3.6) procedures that regulate the provision by NSA of specialized equip-
ment, technical knowledge, and expert personnel to the FBI. (The applicable pro-
cedures are attached.)(u) 2. Background. The National Security Agency possesses unique skills and equip-ment developed to support its cryptologic mission. In the past, the Federal Bureauof Investigation has requested, and NSA has provided, assistance related to theseskills and equipment for both the BureauÕs intelligence and law enforcement func-tions. Section 2-309(c) of E.O. 12036 permits NSA to continue providing suchassistance.(u) 3. Agreement. The undersigned parties, representing their respective agencies,hereby agree to the following procedures for requesting and providing such assis-tance in the future:a.When the FBI determines that the assistance of NSA is needed to
accomplish its lawful functions, the FBI shall:(1)determine whether the requested assistance involves the
BureauÕs intelligence of law enforcement missions. Since a counterintelligence orcounterterrorism intelligence investigation can develop into a law enforcementinvestigation, the following guidelines will be used to determine which type of
investigation the FBI is conducting. A counterintelligence or counterterrorisminvestigation which is undertaken to protect against espionage and other clandes-tine intelligence activities, sabotage, international terrorist activities or assas-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS631inations conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers does not have a law enforce-ment purpose until such time as the focus of the investigation shifts from intelli-gence gathering to prosecution.(2)coordinate with the appropriate NSA element to determine
whether NSA is capable of providing the assistance;(3)notify the Office of General Counsel, NSA, that a request for
assistance is being considered; and(4)if NSA is able to provide the assistance, provide a certification to
the General Counsel, NSA, that the assistance is necessary to accomplish one or
more of the FBIÕs lawful functions. In normal circumstances, this certification shallbe in writing and signed by an Assistant Director or more senior official. If theassistance involves provision of expert personnel and is for a law enforcement
purpose, the certification must be signed by the Director, FBI, and shall includeaffirmation of the facts necessary to establish the provisions of Section 4.A., Proce-dure 16, DoD Regulation 5240.1-R. In an emergency, the certification may be oral,
but it shall be subsequently confirmed in writing. If the assistance requested is forthe support of an activitiy that may only be conducted pursuant to court order orAttorney General authorization, the certification shall include a copy of the order
or authorization. If the requested assistance is to support an intelligence investiga-tion which subsequently develops into a law enforcement investigation, the FBIshall provide the additional supporting data required by Procedure 16.b.When the FBI requests assistance from NSA, NSA shall:
(1)determine whether it is capable of providing the requested assis-
tance;(2)determine whether the assistance is consistent with NSA policy,
including protection of sources and methods;(3)agree to provide assistance within its capabilities and when con-
sistent with NSA policy after receipt of the certification discussed in a.(4) above;
and(4)if the assistance requires the detailing of expert personnel, ob-
serve the administrative requirements of Procedures 16 and 17, DoD regulation
5240.1-R.(u) 4. Effective Date.
 This MOU is effective upon signature by the parties below. It
remains in effect until superseded by a new MOU or until Section 2-309(c) of E.O.12036 is revised. Changes to this MOU may be made by joint agreement of theundersigned or their successors.WILLIAM H. WEBSTER, Director, Federal Bureau of InvestigationB.R. INMAN, Vice Admiral, U.S. Navy, Director, NSA/Chief, CSSCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.632APPENDIX NN.3.3National Security Agency/Advanced Research Projects
Agency/Defense Information Systems Agency MOAInformation Systems Security Research Joint Technology Office Memorandum ofAgreement Between The Advanced Research Projects Agency, The Defense Infor-
mation Systems Agency, and The National Security Agency Concerning The In-
formation Systems Security Research Joint Technology OfficePurposeThe Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), the Defense Infor-mation Systems Agency (DISA), and the National Security Agency (NSA) agree tothe establishment of the Information System Security Research Joint Technology
Office (ISSR-JTO) as a joint activity. The ISSR-JTO is being established to coordi-nate the information systems security research programs of ARPA and NSA. TheISSR-JTO will work to optimize use of the limited research funds available, and
strengthen the responsiveness of the programs to DISA, expediting delivery oftechnologies that meet DISAÕs requirements to safeguard the confidentiality, in-tegrity, authenticity, and availability of data in Department of Defense informa-
tion systems, provide a robust first line of defense for defensive information war-fare, and permit electronic commerce between the Department of Defense and itscontractors.BackgroundIn recent years, exponential growth in government and private sectoruse of networked systems to produce and communicate information has given
rise to a shared interest by NSA and ARPA in focusing government R&D on
information systems security technologies. NSA and its primary network securitycustomer, DISA, have become increasingly reliant upon commercial informationtechnologies and services to build the Defense Information Infrastructure, and the
inherent security of these technologies and services has become a vital concern.From ARPAÕS perspective, it has become increasingly apparent that security iscritical to the success of key ARPA information technology initiatives. ARPAÕsrole in fostering the development of advanced information technologies now re-quires close attention to the security of these technologies.NSAÕs security technology plan envisions maximum use of commercialtechnology for sensitive but unclassified applications, and, to the extent possible,for classified applications as well. A key element of this plan is the transfer ofhighly reliable government-developed technology and techniques to industry for
integration into commercial off-the-shelf products, making quality-tested securitycomponents available not only to DoD but to the full spectrum of government andprivate sector users as well. ARPA is working with its contractor community to
fully integrate security into next generation computing technologies being devel-oped in all its programs, and working with the research community to developstrategic relationships with industry so that industry will develop modular secu-
rity technologies with the capability of exchanging appropriate elements to meetvarious levels of required security.NSA and ARPA now share a strong interest in promoting the develop-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS633ment and integration of security technology for advanced information systemsapplications. The challenge at hand is to guide the efforts of the two agencies in away that optimizes use of the limited research funds available and maximizes
support to DISA in building the Defense Information Infrastructure.NSA acts as the U.S. GovernmentÕs focal point for cryptography, tele-communications security, and information systems security for national security
systems. It conducts, approves, or endorses research and development of tech-niques and equipment to secure national security systems. NSA reviews andapproves all standards, techniques, systems, and equipment related to the secu-
rity of national security systems. NSAÕs primary focus is to provide informationsystems security products, services, and standards in the near term to help itscustomers protect classified and national security-related sensitive but unclassi-
fied information. It develops and assesses new security technology in the areas ofcryptography, technical security, and authentication technology; endorses crypto-graphic systems protecting national security information; develops infrastructure
support technologies; evaluates and rates trusted computer and network prod-ucts; and provides information security standards for DoD. Much of the work inthese areas is conducted in a classified environment, and the balancing of national
security and law enforcement equities has been a significant constraint.ARPAÕs mission is to perform research and development that helps theDepartment of Defense to maintain U.S. technological superiority over potential
adversaries. At the core of the ARPA mission is the goal to develop and demon-strate revolutionary technologies that will fundamentally enhance the capabilityof the military. ARPAÕs role in fostering the development of advanced computingand communications technologies for use by the DoD requires that long term
solutions to increasing the security of these systems be developed. ARPA is inter-ested in commercial or dual-use technology, and usually technology that providesrevolutionary rather than evolutionary enhancements to capabilities. ARPA is
working with industry and academia to develop technologies that will enableindustry to provide system design methodologies and secure computer, operat-ing system, and networking technologies. NSA and ARPA research interests have
been converging in these areas, particularly with regard to protocol developmentinvolving key, token, and certificate exchanges and processes.One of the key differences between ARPAÕs work and NSAÕs is thatARPAÕs is performed in unclassified environments, often in university settings.This enables ARPA to access talent and pursue research strategies normally closedto NSA due to security considerations. Another difference is that while NSAÕsresearch is generally built around developing and using specific cryptographicalgorithms, ARPAÕs approach is to pursue solutions that are independent of thealgorithm used and allow for modularly replaceable cryptography. ARPA will, to
the greatest extent possible, allow its contractor community to use cryptographydeveloped at NSA, and needs solutions from NSA on an expedited basis so as notto hold up its research program.DISA functions as the Department of DefenseÕs information utility. Itsrequirements for information systems security extend beyond confidentiality toinclude protection of data from tampering or destruction and assurance that data
exchanges are originated and received by valid participants. DISA is the first lineCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.634APPENDIX Nof defense for information warfare, and needs quality technology for detectingand responding to network penetrations. The growing vulnerability of the De-fense information infrastructure to unauthorized access and use, demonstrated in
the penetration of hundreds of DoD computer systems during 1994, makes deliv-ery of enabling security technologies to DISA a matter of urgency.The Information Systems Security Research Joint Technology OfficeThis MOA authorizes the ISSR-JTO as a joint undertaking of ARPA,DISA, and NSA. It will perform those functions jointly agreed to by these agen-
cies. Each agency shall delegate to the ISSO-JTO such authority and responsibilityas is necessary to carry out its agreed functions. Participation in the joint programdoes not relieve ARPA, DISA, or NSA of their respective individual charter re-
sponsibilities, or diminish their respective authorities.A Joint Management Plan will be developed to provide a detailed defi-nition of the focus, objectives, operation, and costs of the Joint Technology Office.
The ISSR-JTO will be jointly staffed by ARPA, DISA, and NSA, with respectivestaffing levels to be agreed upon by the three parties. Employees assigned to theJTO will remain on the billets of their respective agency. Personnel support for
employees assigned to the JTO will be provided by their home organization. TheISSR-JTO will be housed within both ARPA and NSA, except as agreed otherwiseby the three parties. To the greatest extent possible, it will function as a virtual
office, using electronic connectivity to minimize the need for constant physical co-location. Physical security support will be provided by the party responsible forthe specific facilities occupied. Assignment of the ISSR-JTO Director, Deputy Di-
rector, and management of other office elements will be made by mutual agree-
ment among the Directors of ARPA, DISA, and NSA upon recommendation oftheir staffs.FunctionsBy mutual agreement of ARPA, DISA, and NSA, the ISSR-JTO willperform the following joint functions:¥Review and coordinate all Information System Security Research programsat ARPA and NSA to ensure that there is no unnecessary duplication, that the
programs are technically sound, that they are focused on customer requirementswhere available, and that long term research is aimed at revolutionary increasesin DoD security capabilities.¥Support ARPA and NSA in evaluating proposals and managing projectsarising from their information systems security efforts, and maintain a channel forthe exchange of technical expertise to support their information systems security
research programs.¥Provide long range strategic planning for information systems security re-search. Provide concepts of future architectures which include security as an inte-
gral component and a road map for the products that need to be developed to fitthe architectures, taking into account anticipated DoD information systems secu-rity research needs for command and control, intelligence, support functions, andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS635electronic commerce. The long range security program will explore technologieswhich extend security research boundaries.¥Develop measures of the effectiveness of the information systems securityresearch programs in reducing vulnerabilities.¥Work with DISA, other defense organizations, academic, and industrial or-ganizations to take new information systems security research concepts and ap-
ply them to selected prototype systems and testbed projects.¥Encourage the U.S. industrial base to develop commercial products withbuilt-in security to be used in DoD systems. Develop alliances with industry to
raise the level of security in all U.S. systems. Bring together private sector leadersin information systems security research to advise the JTO and build consensusfor the resulting programs.¥Identify areas for which standards need to be developed for informationsystems security.¥Facilitate the availability and use of NSA certified cryptography within in-formation systems security research programs.¥Proactively provide a coherent, integrated joint vision of the program ininternal and public communications.Program Oversight and RevisionsThe Director, ISSR-JTO, has a joint reporting responsibility to the Direc-tors of ARPA, DISA, and NSA. The Director, ISSR-JTO, will conduct a formalProgram Status Review for the Directors of ARPA, DISA, and NSA on an annualbasis, and will submit mid-year progress reports between formal reviews. Specific
reporting procedures and practices of the JTO to ARPA, DISA, and NSA will be
detailed in the Joint Technology Management Plan. This MOA will be reviewed atleast annually, and may be revised at any time, based on the mutual consent ofARPA, DISA, and NSA, to assure the effective execution of the joint initiative.
Any of the parties may withdraw from participation in the MOA upon six monthswritten notice. The MOA is effective 2 April 1995.Dr. Gary L. Denman, Director, ARPALtGen Albert J. Edmonds, Director, DISAVADM John M. McConnell, Director, NSA
Dr. Anita K. Jones, Director, DDR&EEmmett Paige, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control,Communications and IntelligenceCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.636APPENDIX NN.4 REGULATIONSN.4.1International Traffic in Arms Regulations (22 CFR, Excerpts
from Parts 120-123, 125, and 126)Part 120Purpose and DefinitionsSec. 120.1ÑGeneral authorities and eligibility.(a)Section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778) authorizes
the President to control the export and import of defense articles and defense
services. The statutory authority of the President to promulgate regulations with
respect to exports of defense articles and defense services was delegated to the
Secretary of State by Executive Order 11958, as amended (42 FR 4311). This
subchapter implements that authority. By virtue of delegations of authority by the
Secretary of State, these regulations are primarily administered by the Director of
the Office of Defense Trade Controls, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Depart-ment of State.(b)Authorized Officials. All authorities conferred upon the Director of the
Office of Defense Trade Controls by this subchapter may be exercised at any time
by the Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, the Assistant

Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs, or the Deputy Assistant Secretary

of State for Politico-Military Affairs responsible for supervising the Office of De-
fense Trade Controls unless the Legal Adviser or the Assistant Legal Adviser forPolitico-Military Affairs of the Department of State determines that any specific
exercise of this authority under this subsection may be inappropriate.(c)Eligibility. Only U.S. persons (as defined in Sec. 120.15) and foreign
governmental entities in the United States may be granted licenses or other ap-
provals (other than retransfer approvals sought pursuant to this subchapter).Foreign persons (as defined in Sec. 120.16) other than governments are not eli-
gible. U.S. persons who have been convicted of violating the criminal statutesenumerated in Sec. 120.27, who have been debarred pursuant to part 127 or 128 of
this subchapter, who are the subject of an indictment involving the criminal stat-
utes enumerated in Sec. 120.27, who are ineligible to contract with, or to receive alicense or other form of authorization to import defense articles or defense ser-vices from any agency of the U.S. Government, who are ineligible to receive
export licenses (or other forms of authorization to export) from any agency of the
U.S. Government, who are subject to Department of State Suspension/Revocationunder Sec. 126.7 (a)(1)-(a)(7) of this subchapter, or who are ineligible under Sec.

127.6(c) of this subchapter are generally ineligible. Applications for licenses orother approvals will be considered only if the applicant has registered with theOffice of Defense Trade Controls pursuant to part 122 of this subchapter. AllCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS637applications and requests for approval must be signed by a U.S. person who has
been empowered by the registrant to sign such documents. . . .Sec. 120.3ÑPolicy on designating and determining defense articles and ser-vices.An article or service may be designated or determined in the future to be a
defense article (see Sec. 120.6) or defense service (see Sec. 120.9) if it:(a)Is specifically designed, developed, configured, adapted, or modified
for a military application, and(i)Does not have predominant civil applications, and

(ii)Does not have performance equivalent (defined by form, fit and function) to
those of an article or service used for civil applications; or(b)Is specifically designed, developed, configured, adapted, or modified
for a military application, and has significant military or intelligence applicability
such that control under this subchapter is necessary.
The intended use of the article or service after its export (i.e., for a military or
civilian purpose) is not relevant in determining whether the article or service is
subject to the controls of this subchapter. Any item covered by the U.S. Munitions
List must be within the categories of the U.S. Munitions List. The scope of the U.S.Munitions List shall be changed only by amendments made pursuant to section
38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778).Sec. 120.4ÑCommodity jurisdiction.(a)The commodity jurisdiction procedure is used with the U.S. Govern-
ment if doubt exists as to whether an article or service is covered by the U.S.
Munitions List. It may also be used for consideration of a redesignation of an

article or service currently covered by the U.S. Munitions List. The Department
must submit a report to Congress at least 30 days before any item is removed from
the U.S. Munitions List. Upon written request, the Office of Defense Trade Con-
trols shall provide a determination of whether a particular article or service is
covered by the U.S. Munitions List. The determination, consistent with Secs. 120.2,120.3, and 120.4, entails consultation among the Departments of State, Defense,
Commerce and other U.S. Government agencies and industry in appropriate cases.(b)Registration with the Office of Defense Trade Controls as defined in
part 122 of this subchapter is not required prior to submission of a commodity
jurisdiction request. If it is determined that the commodity is a defense article or
service covered by the U.S. Munitions List, registration is required for exporters,

manufacturers, and furnishers of defense articles and defense services (see part
122 of this subchapter).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.638APPENDIX N(c)Requests shall identify the article or service, and include a history of the
productÕs design, development and use. Brochures, specifications and any other
documentation related to the article or service shall be submitted in seven collated

sets.(d)(1)A determination that an article or service does not have predomi-
nant civil applications shall be made by the Department of State, in accordance
with this subchapter, on a case-by-case basis, taking into account:
(i)The number, variety and predominance of civil applications;

(ii)The nature, function and capability of the civil applications; and
(iii)The nature, function and capability of the military applications.
(2)A determination that an article does not have the performance equivalent,

defined by form, fit and function, to those used for civil applications shall be madeby the Department of State, in accordance with this subchapter, on a case-by-casebasis, taking into account:
(i)The nature, function, and capability of the article;
(ii)Whether the components used in the defense article are identical to those
components originally developed for civil use.Note: The form of the item is its defined configuration, including the geo-
metrically measured configuration, density, and weight or other visual param-eters which uniquely characterize the item, component or assembly. For software,
form denotes language, language level and media. The fit of the item is its ability
to physically interface or interconnect with or become an integral part of another
item. The function of the item is the action or actions it is designed to perform.
(3)A determination that an article has significant military or intelligence appli-
cations such that it is necessary to control its export as a defense article shall be
made, in accordance with this subchapter, on a case-by-case basis, taking into

account:(i)The nature, function, and capability of the article;
(ii)The nature of controls imposed by other nations on such items (including

COCOM and other multilateral controls), and(iii)That items described on the COCOM Industrial List shall not be designated
defense articles or defense services unless the failure to control such items on the

U.S. Munitions List would jeopardize significant national security or foreign policyinterests.(e)The Office of Defense Trade Controls will provide a preliminary re-
sponse within 10 working days of receipt of a complete request for commodity
jurisdiction. If after 45 days the Office of Defense Trade Controls has not provided

a final commodity jurisdiction determination, the applicant may request in writ-
ing to the Director, Center for Defense Trade that this determination be givenexpedited processing.(f)State, Defense and Commerce will resolve commodity jurisdiction dis-
putes in accordance with established procedures. State shall notify Defense and

Commerce of the initiation and conclusion of each case.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS639(g)A person may appeal a commodity jurisdiction determination by sub-
mitting a written request for reconsideration to the Director of the Center for
Defense Trade. The Center for Defense Trade will provide a written response of

the DirectorÕs determination within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. If desired, an
appeal of the DirectorÕs decision can then be made directly to the Assistant Secre-tary for Politico-Military Affairs. . . .Sec. 120.6ÑDefense article.Defense article means any item or technical data designated in Sec. 121.1 of
this subchapter. The policy described in Sec. 120.3 is applicable to designations of

additional items. This term includes technical data recorded or stored in any
physical form, models, mockups or other items that reveal technical data directly
relating to items designated in Sec. 121.1 of this subchapter. It does not include

basic marketing information on function or purpose or general system descrip-
tions. . . .Sec. 120.9ÑDefense service.Defense service means:(1)The furnishing of assistance (including training) to foreign persons,
whether in the United States or abroad in the design, development, engineering,

manufacture, production, assembly, testing, repair, maintenance, modification,operation, demilitarization, destruction, processing or use of defense articles; or(2)The furnishing to foreign persons of any technical data controlled un-
der this subchapter (see Sec. 120.10), whether in the United States or abroad.
Sec. 120.10ÑTechnical data.Technical data means, for purposes of this subchapter:(1)Information, other than software as defined in Sec. 120.10(d), which is
required for the design, development, production, manufacture, assembly, opera-

tion, repair, testing, maintenance or modification of defense articles. This includesinformation in the form of blueprints, drawings, photographs, plans, instructionsand documentation.(2)Classified information relating to defense articles and defense services;
(3)Information covered by an invention secrecy order;
(4)Software as defined in Sec. 121.8(f) of this subchapter directly related to
defense articles;(5)This definition does not include information concerning general scien-
tific, mathematical or engineering principles commonly taught in schools, col-

leges and universities or information in the public domain as defined in Sec.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.640APPENDIX N120.11. It also does not include basic marketing information on function or pur-pose or general system descriptions of defense articles.Sec. 120.11ÑPublic domain.Public domain means information which is published and which is gener-
ally accessible or available to the public:(1)Through sales at newsstands and bookstores;
(2)Through subscriptions which are available without restriction to any
individual who desires to obtain or purchase the published information;(3)Through second class mailing privileges granted by the U.S. Govern-
ment;(4)At libraries open to the public or from which the public can obtain
documents;(5)Through patents available at any patent office;
(6)Through unlimited distribution at a conference, meeting, seminar, trade
show or exhibition, generally accessible to the public, in the United States;
(7)Through public release (i.e., unlimited distribution) in any form (e.g.,
not necessarily in published form) after approval by the cognizant U.S. govern-

ment department or agency (see also Sec. 125.4(b)(13) of this subchapter);(8)Through fundamental research in science and engineering at accredited
institutions of higher learning in the U.S. where the resulting information is ordi-

narily published and shared broadly in the scientific community. Fundamental

research is defined to mean basic and applied research in science and engineering
where the resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly withinthe scientific community, as distinguished from research the results of which are
restricted for proprietary reasons or specific U.S. Government access and dissemi-nation controls. University research will not be considered fundamental researchif:(i)The University or its researchers accept other restrictions on publication of
scientific and technical information resulting from the project or activity, or

(ii)The research is funded by the U.S. Government and specific access and
dissemination controls protecting information resulting from the research are ap-
plicable. . . .Sec. 120.14ÑPerson.Person means a natural person as well as a corporation, business associa-
tion, partnership, society, trust, or any other entity, organization or group, includ-

ing governmental entities. If a provision in this subchapter does not refer exclu-
sively to a foreign person ( Sec. 120.16) or U.S. person (Sec. 120.15), then it refers to
both.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS641Sec. 120.15ÑU.S. person. U.S. person means a person (as defined in Sec. 120.14 of this part) who is a
protected individual as defined by 8 U.S.C. 1324b(a)(3). It also means any corpora-tion, business association, partnership, society, trust or any other entity, organiza-
tion or group that is incorporated to do business in the United States. It also

includes any governmental (federal, state or local) entity. It does not include any
foreign person as defined in Sec. 120.16 of this part.
Sec. 120.16ÑForeign person.Foreign person means any natural person who is not a protected individualas defined by 8 U.S.C. 1324b(a)(3). It also means any foreign corporation, business
association, partnership, trust, society or any other entity or group that is not
incorporated or organized to do business in the United States, as well as interna-
tional organizations, foreign governments and any agency or subdivision of for-eign governments (e.g., diplomatic missions).
Sec. 120.17ÑExport.Export means:(1)Sending or taking a defense article out of the United States in any
manner, except by mere travel outside of the United States by a person whose
personal knowledge includes technical data; or(2)Transferring registration, control or ownership to a foreign person of
any aircraft, vessel, or satellite covered by the U.S. Munitions List, whether in theUnited States or abroad; or(3)Disclosing (including oral or visual disclosure) or transferring in the
United States any defense article to an embassy, any agency or subdivision of a
foreign government (e.g., diplomatic missions); or(4)Disclosing (including oral or visual disclosure) or transferring technical
data to a foreign person, whether in the United States or abroad; or
(5)Performing a defense service on behalf of, or for the benefit of, a foreign
person, whether in the United States or abroad. . . .Sec. 120.18ÑTemporary import.Temporary import means bringing into the United States from a foreigncountry any defense article that is to be returned to the country from which it was

shipped or taken, or any defense article that is in transit to another foreign desti-
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.642APPENDIX Nnation. Temporary import includes withdrawal of a defense article from a cus-toms bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone for the purpose of returning it tothe country of origin or country from which it was shipped or for shipment to
another foreign destination. Permanent imports are regulated by the Departmentof the Treasury (see 27 CFR parts 47, 178 and 179).Sec. 120.19ÑReexport or retransfer.Reexport or retransfer means the transfer of defense articles or defense ser-
vices to an end use, end user or destination not previously authorized.
Sec. 120.20ÑLicense.License means a document bearing the word license issued by the Director,Office of Defense Trade Controls or his authorized designee which permits the
export or temporary import of a specific defense article or defense service con-

trolled by this subchapter.Sec. 120.21ÑManufacturing license agreement.An agreement (e.g., contract) whereby a U.S. person grants a foreign person
an authorization to manufacture defense articles abroad and which involves or

contemplates:(a)The export of technical data (as defined in Sec. 120.10) or defense ar-
ticles or the performance of a defense service; or(b)The use by the foreign person of technical data or defense articles previ-
ously exported by the U.S. person. (See part 124 of this subchapter.)Sec. 120.22ÑTechnical assistance agreement.An agreement (e.g., contract) for the performance of a defense service(s) orthe disclosure of technical data, as opposed to an agreement granting a right orlicense to manufacture defense articles. Assembly of defense articles is includedunder this section, provided production rights or manufacturing know-how are

not conveyed. Should such rights be transferred, Sec. 120.21 is applicable. (Seepart 124 of this subchapter.)Sec. 120.23ÑDistribution agreement.An agreement (e.g., a contract) to establish a warehouse or distribution
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS643point abroad for defense articles exported from the United States for subsequent
distribution to entities in an approved sales territory (see part 124 of this
subchapter). . . .Part 121The United States Munitions ListSec. 121.1ÑGeneral. The United States Munitions List.(a)The following articles, services and related technical data are desig-
nated as defense articles and defense services pursuant to sections 38 and 47(7) of

the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778 and 2794(7)). Changes in designa-tions will be published in the Federal Register. Information and clarifications onwhether specific items are defense articles and services under this subchapter

may appear periodically in the Defense Trade News published by the Center forDefense Trade. . . .Category XIIIAuxiliary Military Equipment. . . .
(b)Information Security Systems and equipment, cryptographic devices,
software, and components specifically designed or modified therefor, including:
(1)Cryptographic (including key management) systems, equipment, assem-

blies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software with the capability of

maintaining secrecy or confidentiality of information or information systems, ex-
cept cryptographic equipment and software as follows:
(i)Restricted to decryption functions specifically designed to allow the execu-

tion of copy protected software, provided the decryption functions are not user-
accessible.(ii)Specially designed, developed or modified for use in machines for banking

or money transactions, and restricted to use only in such transactions. Machines
for banking or money transactions include automatic teller machines, self-servicestatement printers, point of sale terminals or equipment for the encryption of

interbanking transactions.(iii)Employing only analog techniques to provide the cryptographic processing
that ensures information security in the following applications:
(A)Fixed (defined below) band scrambling not exceeding 8 bands and in which
the transpositions change not more frequently than once every second;(B)Fixed (defined below) band scrambling exceeding 8 bands and in which the

transpositions change not more frequently than once every ten seconds;
(C)Fixed (defined below) frequency inversion and in which the transpositions
change not more frequently than once every second;(D)Facsimile equipment;
(E)Restricted audience broadcast equipment;
(F)Civil television equipment.
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.644APPENDIX NNote: Special Definition. For purposes of this subparagraph, fixed means
that the coding or compression algorithm cannot accept externally supplied pa-
rameters (e.g., cryptographic or key variables) and cannot be modified by the

user.(iv)Personalized smart cards using cryptography restricted for use only in
equipment or systems exempted from the controls of the USML.(v)Limited to access control, such as automatic teller machines, self-service
statement printers or point of sale terminals, which protects password or personal
identification numbers (PIN) or similar data to prevent unauthorized access to
facilities but does not allow for encryption of files or text, except as directly related
to the password of PIN protection.(vi)Limited to data authentication which calculates a Message Authentication
Code (MAC) or similar result to ensure no alteration of text has taken place, or to
authenticate users, but does not allow for encryption of data, text or other mediaother than that needed for the authentication.(vii)Restricted to fixed data compression or coding techniques.

(viii)Limited to receiving for radio broadcast, pay television or similar restricted
audience television of the consumer type, without digital encryption and wheredigital decryption is limited to the video, audio or management functions.
(ix)Software designed or modified to protect against malicious computer dam-
age (e.g., viruses).Note: A procedure has been established to facilitate the expeditious transferto the Commodity Control List of mass market software products with encryption

that meet specified criteria regarding encryption for the privacy of data and the

associated key management. Requests to transfer commodity jurisdiction of massmarket software products designed to meet the specified criteria may be submit-ted in accordance with the commodity jurisdiction provisions of Sec. 120.4. Ques-
tions regarding the specified criteria or the commodity jurisdiction process should
be addressed to the Office of Defense Trade Controls. All mass market softwareproducts with cryptography that were previously granted transfers of commodity

jurisdiction will remain under Department of Commerce control. Mass marketsoftware governed by this note is software that is generally available to the publicby being sold from stock at retail selling points, without restriction, by means of

over the counter transactions, mail order transactions, or telephone call transac-tions; and designed for installation by the user without further substantial sup-port by the supplier.(2)Cryptographic (including key management) systems, equipment, assem-
blies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software which have the capa-
bility of generating spreading or hopping codes for spread spectrum systems or
equipment.
(3)Cryptanalytic systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits,
components or software.(4)Systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components

or software providing certified or certifiable multi-level security or user isolation
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS645exceeding class B2 of the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC)
and software to certify such systems, equipment or software.(5)Ancillary equipment specifically designed or modified for paragraphs (b)

(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this category;  . . .
Category XXIMiscellaneous Articles
(a)Any article not specifically enumerated in the other categories of the
U.S. Munitions List which has substantial military applicability and which has
been specifically designed or modified for military purposes. The decision on
whether any article may be included in this category shall be made by the Director

of the Office of Defense Trade Controls.(b)Technical data (as defined in Sec. 120.21 of this subchapter) and defense
services (as defined in Sec. 120.8 of this subchapter) directly related to the defense
articles enumerated in paragraphs (a) of this category. . . .
Part 122Registration of Manufacturers and ExportersSec. 122.1ÑRegistration requirements.(a)Any person who engages in the United States in the business of either
manufacturing or exporting defense articles or furnishing defense services is re-
quired to register with the Office of Defense Trade Controls. Manufacturers who
do not engage in exporting must nevertheless register.(b) Exemptions. Registration is not required for:
(1)Officers and employees of the United States Government acting in an offi-

cial capacity.(2) Persons whose pertinent business activity is confined to the production of
unclassified technical data only.
(3)Persons all of whose manufacturing and export activities are licensed under
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.(4)Persons who engage only in the fabrication of articles for experimental or

scientific purpose, including research and development.(c)Purpose. Registration is primarily a means to provide the U.S. Govern-
ment with necessary information on who is involved in certain manufacturing
and exporting activities. Registration does not confer any export rights or privi-
leges. It is generally a precondition to the issuance of any license or other approval
under this subchapter.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.646APPENDIX NSec. 122.2ÑSubmission of registration statement.(a)General. The Department of State Form DSP-9 (Registration Statement)
and the transmittal letter required by paragraph (b) of this section must be sub-mitted by an intended registrant with a payment by check or money order pay-able to the Department of State of one of the fees prescribed in Sec. 122.3(a) of this
subchapter. The Registration Statement and transmittal letter must be signed by asenior officer who has been empowered by the intended registrant to sign suchdocuments. The intended registrant shall also submit documentation that demon-
strates that it is incorporated or otherwise authorized to do business in the UnitedStates. The Office of Defense Trade Controls will return to the sender any Regis-
tration Statement that is incomplete, or that is not accompanied by the required

letter or payment of the proper registration fee.(b)Transmittal letter. A letter of transmittal, signed by an authorized se-
nior officer of the intended registrant, shall accompany each Registration State-ment.(1)The letter shall state whether the intended registrant, chief executive officer,

president, vice-presidents, other senior officers or officials (e.g. comptroller, trea-surer, general counsel) or any member of the board of directors:
(i)Has ever been indicted for or convicted of violating any of the U.S. criminal

statutes enumerated in Sec. 120.27 of this subchapter; or(ii)Is ineligible to contract with, or to receive a license or other approval to
import defense articles or defense services from, or to receive an export license or
other approval from, any agency of the U.S. Government.
(2)The letter shall also declare whether the intended registrant is owned or
controlled by foreign persons (as defined in Sec. 120.16 of this subchapter). If the
intended registrant is owned or controlled by foreign persons, the letter shall also

state whether the intended registrant is incorporated or otherwise authorized toengage in business in the United States.(c)Definition. For purposes of this section, ownership means that more
than 50 percent of the outstanding voting securities of the firm are owned by one
or more foreign persons. Control means that one or more foreign persons have the

authority or ability to establish or direct the general policies or day-to-day opera-tions of the firm. Control is presumed to exist where foreign persons own 25percent or more of the outstanding voting securities if no U.S. persons control an

equal or larger percentage. The standards for control specified in 22 CFR 60.2(c)
also provide guidance in determining whether control in fact exists. . . .Part 123Licenses for the Export of Defense ArticlesSec. 123.7ÑExports to warehouses or distribution points outside the UnitedStates.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS647Unless the exemption under Sec. 123.16(b)(1) is used, a license is required to
export defense articles to a warehouse or distribution point outside the UnitedStates for subsequent resale and will normally be granted only if an agreement
has been approved pursuant to Sec. 124.14 of this subchapter. . . .Sec. 123.9ÑCountry of ultimate destination and approval of reexports orretransfers.(a)The country designated as the country of ultimate destination on an
application for an export license, or on a ShipperÕs Export Declaration where an
exemption is claimed under this subchapter, must be the country of ultimate end-
use. The written approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls must be ob-

tained before reselling, transferring, transshipping, or disposing of a defense ar-
ticle to any end user, end use or destination other than as stated on the export
license, or on the ShipperÕs Export Declaration in cases where an exemption is
claimed under this subchapter. Exporters must ascertain the specific end-user and
end-use prior to submitting an application to the Office of Defense Trade Controls
or claiming an exemption under this subchapter.(b)The exporter shall incorporate the following statement as an integral
part of the bill of lading, and the invoice whenever defense articles on the U.S.

Munitions List are to be exported:These commodities are authorized by the U.S. Government for export onlyto country of ultimate destination for use by end-user. They may not be trans-
ferred, transshipped on a non-continuous voyage, or otherwise be disposed of in

any other country, either in their original form or after being incorporated intoother end-items, without the prior written approval of the U.S. Department of
State.Ó(c)A U.S. person or a foreign person requesting approval for the reexport
or retransfer, or change in end-use, of a defense article shall submit a written

request which shall be subject to all the documentation required for a permanentexport license (see Sec. 123.1) and shall contain the following:(1)The license number under which the defense article was previously autho-

rized for export from the United States;(2)A precise description, quantity and value of the defense article;
(3)A description of the new end-use; and

(4)Identification of the new end-user.
(d)The written approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls must be
obtained before reselling, transferring, transshipping on a non-continuous voy-
age, or disposing of a defense article in any country other than the country of
ultimate destination, or anyone other than the authorized end-user, as stated on

the ShipperÕs Export Declaration in cases where an exemption is claimed under
this subchapter.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.648APPENDIX N(e)Reexports or retransfers of U.S.-origin components incorporated into a
foreign defense article to a government of a NATO country, or the governments ofAustralia or Japan, are authorized without the prior written approval of the Office

of Defense Trade Controls, provided:(1)The U.S.-origin components were previously authorized for export from the
United States, either by a license or an exemption;
(2)The U.S.-origin components are not significant military equipment, the items
are not major defense equipment sold under a contract in the amount of
$14,000,000 ($14 million) or more; the articles are not defense articles or defense

services sold under a contract in the amount of $50,000,000 ($50 million) or more;
and are not identified in part 121 of this subchapter as Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR) items; and
(3)The person reexporting the defense article must provide written notification
to the Office of Defense Trade Controls of the retransfer not later than 30 days
following the reexport. The notification must state the articles being reexported
and the recipient government.(4)In certain cases, the Director, Office of Defense Trade Controls, may place
retransfer restrictions on a license prohibiting use of this exemption.
Sec. 123.10ÑNon transfer and use assurances.(a)A nontransfer and use certificate (Form DSP-83) is required for the
export of significant military equipment and classified articles including classified

technical data. A license will not be issued until a completed Form DSP-83 has
been received by the Office of Defense Trade Controls. This form is to be executedby the foreign consignee, foreign end-user, and the applicant. The certificate stipu-lates that, except as specifically authorized by prior written approval of the De-
partment of State, the foreign consignee and foreign end-user will not reexport,resell or otherwise dispose of the significant military equipment enumerated inthe application outside the country named as the location of the foreign end-use
or to any other person.(b)The Office of Defense Trade Controls may also require a DSP-83 for the
export of any other defense articles or defense services.(c)When a DSP-83 is required for an export of any defense article or de-
fense service to a non-governmental foreign end-user, the Office of Defense Trade
Controls may require as a condition of issuing the license that the appropriate
authority of the government of the country of ultimate destination also execute

the certificate. . . .Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS649Part 125Licenses for the Export of Technical Data and Classified Defense ArticlesSec. 125.1ÑExports subject to this part.(a)The controls of this part apply to the export of technical data and the
export of classified defense articles. Information which is in the public domain
(see Sec. 120.11 of this subchapter and Sec. 125.4(b)(13)) is not subject to the con-
trols of this subchapter.(b)A license for the export of technical data and the exemptions in Sec.
125.4 may not be used for foreign production purposes or for technical assistance
unless the approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls has been obtained.
Such approval is generally provided only pursuant to the procedures specified in
part 124 of this subchapter.(c)Technical data authorized for export may not be reexported, transferred
or diverted from the country of ultimate end-use or from the authorized foreign
end-user (as designated in the license or approval for export) or disclosed to a
national of another country without the prior written approval of the Office of

Defense Trade Controls.(d)The controls of this part apply to the exports referred to in paragraph
(a) of this section regardless of whether the person who intends to export the

technical data produces or manufactures defense articles if the technical data is
determined by the Office of Defense Trade Controls to be subject to the controls of
this subchapter.(e)The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to technical data related
to articles in Category VI(e) and Category XVI. The export of such data is con-

trolled by the Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Act of 1978.Sec. 125.2ÑExports of unclassified technical data.(a)A license (DSP-5) is required for the export of unclassified technical
data unless the export is exempt from the licensing requirements of this

subchapter. In the case of a plant visit, details of the proposed discussions must be
transmitted to the Office of Defense Trade Controls for an appraisal of the techni-
cal data. Seven copies of the technical data or the details of the discussion must be
provided.(b)Patents. A license issued by the Office of Defense Trade Controls is
required for the export of technical data whenever the data exceeds that which isCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.650APPENDIX Nused to support a domestic filing of a patent application or to support a foreign
filing of a patent application whenever no domestic application has been filed.
Requests for the filing of patent applications in a foreign country, and requests for

the filing of amendments, modifications or supplements to such patents, shouldfollow the regulations of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in accordance with37 CFR part 5. The export of technical data to support the filing and processing of
patent applications in foreign countries is subject to regulations issued by the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 184.(c)Disclosures. Unless otherwise expressly exempted in this subchapter, a
license is required for the oral, visual or documentary disclosure of technical data
by U.S. persons to foreign persons. A license is required regardless of the manner

in which the technical data is transmitted (e.g., in person, by telephone, corre-spondence, electronic means, etc.). A license is required for such disclosures byU.S. persons in connection with visits to foreign diplomatic missions and consular
offices. . . .Sec. 125.4ÑExemptions of general applicability.(a)The following exemptions apply to exports of unclassified technical
data for which approval is not needed from the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
These exemptions, except for paragraph (b)(13) of this section, do not apply to
exports to proscribed destinations under Sec. 126.1 of this subchapter or for per-
sons considered generally ineligible under Sec. 120.1(c) of this subchapter. The

exemptions are also not applicable for purposes of establishing offshore procure-ment arrangements. If Sec. 126.8 of this subchapter requirements are applicable,they must be met before an exemption under this section may be used. Transmis-
sion of classified information must comply with the requirements of the Depart-
ment of Defense Industrial Security Manual and the exporter must certify to thetransmittal authority that the technical data does not exceed the technical limita-
tion of the authorized export.(b)The following exports are exempt from the licensing requirements of
this subchapter.(1)Technical data, including classified information, to be disclosed pursuant to
an official written request or directive from the U.S. Department of Defense;
(2)Technical data, including classified information, in furtherance of a manu-
facturing license or technical assistance agreement approved by the Department
of State under part 124 of this subchapter and which meet the requirements of Sec.

124.3 of this subchapter;(3)Technical data, including classified information, in furtherance of a contract
between the exporter and an agency of the U.S. Government, if the contract pro-

vides for the export of the data and such data does not disclose the details ofdesign, development, production, or manufacture of any defense article;
(4)Copies of technical data, including classified information, previously autho-

rized for export to the same recipient. Revised copies of such technical data are
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS651also exempt if they pertain to the identical defense article, and if the revisions are
solely editorial and do not add to the content of technology previously exported

or authorized for export to the same recipient;
(5) Technical data, including classified information, in the form of basic opera-
tions, maintenance, and training information relating to a defense article lawfully

exported or authorized for export to the same recipient. Intermediate or depot-
level repair and maintenance information may be exported only under a license oragreement approved specifically for that purpose;

(6)Technical data, including classified information, related to firearms not in
excess of caliber .50 and ammunition for such weapons, except detailed design,development, production or manufacturing information;

(7)Technical data, including classified information, being returned to the origi-
nal source of import;(8)Technical data directly related to classified information which has been pre-

viously exported or authorized for export in accordance with this part to the same
recipient, and which does not disclose the details of the design, development,
production, or manufacture of any defense article;
(9)Technical data, including classified information, sent by a U.S. corporation
to a U.S. person employed by that corporation overseas or to a U.S. Government
agency. This exemption is subject to the limitations of Sec. 125.1(b) and may be

used only if:(i)The technical data is to be used overseas solely by U.S. persons;
(ii)If the U.S. person overseas is an employee of the U.S. Government or is

directly employed by the U.S. corporation and not by a foreign subsidiary; and

(iii)The classified information is sent overseas in accordance with the require-
ments of the Department of Defense Industrial Security Manual.(10)Disclosures of unclassified technical data in the U.S. by U.S. institutions of

higher learning to foreign persons who are their bona fide and full time regular
employees. This exemption is available only if:(i)The employee
Õs permanent abode throughout the period of employment is
in the United States;(ii)The employee is not a national of a country to which exports are prohibited
pursuant to Sec. 126.1 of this subchapter; and
(iii)The institution informs the individual in writing that the technical data may
not be transferred to other foreign persons without the prior written approval of
the Office of Defense Trade Controls;
(11)Technical data, including classified information, for which the exporter,
pursuant to an arrangement with the Department of Defense, Department ofEnergy or NASA which requires such exports, has been granted an exemption in

writing from the licensing provisions of this part by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls. Such an exemption will normally be granted only if the arrangementdirectly implements an international agreement to which the United States is a

party and if multiple exports are contemplated. The Office of Defense Trade Con-trols, in consultation with the relevant U.S. Government agencies, will determinewhether the interests of the United States Government are best served by expedit-

ing exports under an arrangement through an exemption (see also paragraph
(b)(3) of this section for a related exemption);
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.652APPENDIX N(12)Technical data which is specifically exempt under part 126 of this sub-
chapter; or(13)Technical data approved for public release (i.e., unlimited distribution) by
the cognizant U.S. Government department or agency or Directorate for Freedom
of Information and Security Review. This exemption is applicable to informationapproved by the cognizant U.S. Government department or agency for public

release in any form. It does not require that the information be published in order
to qualify for the exemption. . . .Sec. 125.8ÑFiling of licenses for exports of unclassified technical data.(a)Licenses for the export of unclassified technical data must be presented
to the appropriate District Director of Customs or Postmaster at the time of ship-
ment or mailing. The District Director of Customs or Postmaster will endorse andtransmit the licenses to the Office of Defense Trade Controls in accordance with

the instructions contained on the reverse side of the license.
(b)If a license for the export of unclassified technical data is used but not
endorsed by U.S. Customs or a Postmaster for whatever reason (e.g., electronic
transmission, unavailability of Customs officer or Postmaster, etc.), the person
exporting the data must self-endorse the license, showing when and how the

export took place. Every license must be returned to the Office of Defense Trade
Controls when the total value authorized has been shipped or when the date ofexpiration has been reached, whichever occurs first. . . .
Part 126General Policies and ProvisionsSec. 126.1ÑProhibited exports and sales to certain countries.(a)It is the policy of the United States to deny licenses, other approvals,
exports and imports of defense articles and defense services, destined for or origi-
nating in certain countries. This policy applies to: Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan,

Bulgaria, Byelarus, Cambodia, Cuba, Estonia, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Libya,Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Mongolia, North Korea,Romania, Russia, South Africa, Syria, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan and Vietnam. This policy also applies to countries with respect to
which the United States maintains an arms embargo (e.g., Burma, China, Liberia,Somalia, the Sudan, the former Yugoslavia, and Zaire) or for whenever an export
would not otherwise be in furtherance of world peace and the security and for-eign policy of the United States. Comprehensive arms embargoes are normallythe subject of a State Department notice published in the Federal Register. The
exemptions provided in the regulations in this subchapter, except Secs. 123.17 andCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS653125.4(b)(13) of this subchapter, do not apply with respect to articles originating inor for export to any proscribed countries or areas.(b)Shipments. A defense article licensed for export under this subchapter
may not be shipped on a vessel, aircraft or other means of conveyance which is
owned or operated by, or leased to or from, any of the proscribed countries orareas.(c)South Africa. South Africa is subject to an arms embargo and thus to the
policy specified in paragraph (a) of this section. Exceptions may be made to this
policy only if the Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military Affairs determines that:

(1)The item is not covered by United Nations Security Council Resolution 418
of November 4, 1977; and(2)The item is to be exported solely for commercial purposes and not for use by

the armed forces, police, or other security forces of South Africa or for any other
similar purpose.(d)Terrorism. Exports to countries which the Secretary of State has deter-
mined to have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism are
contrary to the foreign policy of the United States and are thus subject to the

policy specified in paragraph (a) of this section and the requirements of section 40
of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2780) and the Omnibus Diplomatic
Security and Anti-Terrorism Act of 1986 (22 U.S.C. 4801, note). The countries in
this category are: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea and Syria. The same coun-
tries are identified pursuant to section 6(j) of the Export Administration Act, asamended (50U.S.C. App. 2405(j)).(e)Proposed sales. No sale or transfer and no proposal to sell or transfer
any defense articles, defense services or technical data subject to this subchapter
may be made to any country referred to in this section (including the embassies or
consulates of such a country), or to any person acting on its behalf, whether in theUnited States or abroad, without first obtaining a license or written approval of
the Office of Defense Trade Controls. However, in accordance with paragraph (a)
of this section, it is the policy of the Department of State to deny licenses and
approvals in such cases. Any person who knows or has reason to know of such aproposed or actual sale, or transfer, of such articles, services or data must immedi-
ately inform the Office of Defense Trade Controls. . . .Sec. 126.5ÑCanadian exemptions.(a)District Directors of Customs and postmasters shall permit the export
or temporary import without a license of any unclassified defense article or any

unclassified technical data to Canada for end-use in Canada by Canadian citizens
or return to the United States, or from Canada for end-use in the United States orCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.654APPENDIX Nreturn to a Canadian citizen in Canada, with the exception of the articles or relatedtechnical data listed in paragraph (b) of this section.(b)Exceptions. The exemptions of this section do not apply to the follow-
ing articles and related technical data. . . .(7)Technical data for use by a foreign national other than a Canadian.

(8)Unclassified technical data directly related to a classified defense article. . . .
Sec. 126.7ÑDenial, revocation, suspension, or amendment of licenses and otherapprovals.(a)Policy. Licenses or approvals shall be denied or revoked whenever re-
quired by any statute of the United States (see Secs. 127.6 and 127.10 of thissubchapter). Any application for an export license or other approval under this

subchapter may be disapproved, and any license or other approval or exemption
granted under this subchapter may be revoked, suspended, or amended withoutprior notice whenever:
(1)The Department of State deems such action to be in furtherance of world
peace, the national security or the foreign policy of the United States, or is other-
wise advisable; or
(2)The Department of State believes that 22 U.S.C. 2778, any regulation con-
tained in this subchapter, or the terms of any U.S. Government export authoriza-
tion (including the terms of a manufacturing license or technical assistance agree-

ment, or export authorization granted pursuant to the Export Administration Act,

as amended) has been violated by any party to the export or other person havingsignificant interest in the transaction; or . . . .(b)Notification. The Office of Defense Trade Controls will notify appli-
cants or licensees or other appropriate United States persons of actions taken
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. The reasons for the action will be stated

as specifically as security and foreign policy considerations permit. . . .
Sec. 126.9ÑAdvisory opinions.Any person desiring information as to whether the Office of Defense Trade
Controls would be likely to grant a license or other approval for the export of a
particular defense article or defense service to a particular country may request an
advisory opinion from the Office of Defense Trade Controls. These opinions are

not binding on the Department of State and are revocable. A request for an advi-
sory opinion must be made in writing and must outline in detail the equipment,
its usage, the security classification (if any) of the articles or related technical data,
and the country or countries involved. An original and seven copies of the lettermust be provided along with seven copies of suitable descriptive information
concerning the defense article or defense service. . . .Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS655N.4.2Export Administration Regulations
Part 779Technical DataSec. 779.1Definitions.
6(a)Technology, technical data, technical assistance, and software.
7 These
terms are defined in Supplement No. 3 to Sec. 799.1 of this subchapter. The termi-
nology used in this part 779 will be changed in the future to conform to the terms
and definitions used in Supplement No. 3 to part Sec. 799.1 of this subchapter and

in other parts of this subchapter. In the interim, the term Òtechnical dataÓ as usedin this part 779, is understood to include both ÒtechnologyÓ (i.e., technical data
and technical assistance) and ÒsoftwareÓ. If the term ÒsoftwareÓ is cited sepa-
rately, the term refers only to software as defined in Supplement No. 3 to Sec.
799.1 of this subchapter.(b)Export of technical data
8,9(1)Export of technical data. 
ÒExport of technical dataÓ means
(i)An actual shipment or transmission of technical data out of the United

States;10(ii)Any release of technical data in the United States with the  knowledge or

intent that the data will be shipped or transmitted from  the United States to a

foreign country; or(iii)Any release of technical data of U.S.-origin in a foreign  country.
(2)Release of technical data. Technical data may be released for  export through:
(i)Visual inspection by foreign nationals of U.S.-origin equipment and facili-

ties;6See Sec. 770.2 for definitions of other terms used in this part.7The provisions of part 779 do not apply to ÒclassifiedÓ technical data, i.e., technical data
that have been officially assigned a security classification (e.g., Òtop secretÓ, ÒsecretÓ, orÒconfidentialÓ) by an officer or agency of the U.S. Government. The export of classifiedtechnical data is controlled by the Center for Defense Trade of the U.S. Department of State
or the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC.8License applications for, or questions about, the export of technical data relating to com-modities which are licensed by U.S. Government agencies other than the U.S. Department
of Commerce shall be referred to such other appropriate U.S. Government agency for con-sideration (see Sec. 770.10 of this subchapter).9Patent attorneys and others are advised to consult the U.S. Patent Office, U.S. Depart-ment of Commerce, Washington, DC 20231, regarding the U.S. Patent Office regulationsconcerning the filing of patent applications or amendments in foreign countries. In additionto the regulations issued by the U.S. Patent Office, technical data contained in or related to
inventions made in foreign countries or in the United States, are also subject to the U.S.Department of Commerce regulations covering the export of technical data, in the samemanner as the export of other types of technical data.10As used in this Part 779, the United States includes its possessions and territories.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.656APPENDIX N(ii)Oral exchanges of information in the United States or abroad;  and
(iii)The application to situations abroad of personal knowledge or technical
experience acquired in the United States.(c)Reexport of technical data. 
ÒReexport of technical dataÓ means an ac-
tual shipment or transmission from one foreign country to another, or any release

of technical data of U.S. origin in a foreign country with the knowledge or intentthat the data will be shipped or transmitted to another foreign country. Technical
data may be released for reexport through:
(1)Visual inspection of U.S.-origin equipment and facilities abroad;
(2)Oral exchanges of information abroad; and
(3)The application to situations abroad of personal knowledge or technical

experience acquired in the United States.(d)Direct product. The term 
Òdirect productÓ means the immediate product
(including processes and services) produced directly by the use of technical data.Sec. 779.2Licenses to export.
Except as provided in Sec. 770.3(a) of this subchapter, an export of technicaldata must be made under either a U.S. Department of Commerce general licenseor a validated export license. (See Secs. 771.1 and 772.2 of this subchapter fordefinitions of ÒgeneralÓ and 
ÒvalidatedÓ licenses.) General Licenses GTDA and
GTDR (see Secs. 779.3 and 779.4) apply to specific types of exports of technical
data. A validated license is required for any export of technical data where these
general licenses do not apply, except in the case of certain exports to Canada.
11,12Sec. 779.3General License GTDA: Technical data available to all destinations.
Note: In this Sec. 779.3 the word information means Òtechnical dataÓ as used
in this part (i.e., ÒtechnologyÓ and 
ÒsoftwareÓ as defined in Supplement No. 3 to
Sec. 799.1 of this subchapter).11An export of technical data to Canada may be made without either a validated orgeneral license, unless a validated license is required to Canada by a specific subcategory Dor E ECCN on the CCL.12Although the Bureau of Export Administration may provide general information onlicensing policies regarding the prospects of approval of various types of export controlactions, including actions with respect to technical data, normally it will give a formal
judgement respecting a specific request for an action only upon the actual submission of aformal application or request setting forth all of the facts relevant to the export transactionand supported by all required documentation. Advice is always available, however, re-
garding any questions as to the applicability of a general license. Such questions should besubmitted by letter to the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Export Administration,P.O. Box 273, Washington, DC 20044.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS657(a)Establishment of general license. A General License GTDA is hereby
established authorizing:(1)Unrestricted export to any destination of information that is already pub-

licly available or will be made publicly available as described in paragraph (b) of
this section;(2)Unrestricted export to any destination of information arising during or re-

sulting from fundamental research, as described in paragraph (c) of this section;Note: Paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section do not authorize the export
of data contained in a patent application for purposes of filing and/or publishingfor opposition abroad. Such exports are controlled by the U.S. Patent and Trade-

mark Office and must be licensed by that office. See EAR Sec. 770.10(j).
(3)Release of educational information, as described in paragraph (d) of this
section; and(4)Export of information in connection with certain patent applications, as

described in paragraph (e) of this section.Note 1: See paragraph (f) regarding Government sponsored research cov-
ered by contractual national security controls and the note following this sectionregarding consulting and training. Use of General License GTDA is subject to the
prohibitions of Sec. 771.2(c) (1), (4), and (9), but not to the other prohibitions of
Sec. 771.2(c).Note 2: Supplement No. 5 to part 779 contains explanatory questions andanswers about the use of General License GTDA. Certain paragraphs of this Sec.

779.3 are followed by references to relevant questions and answers in supplement

No. 5.(b)Publicly available. Information is made public and so becomes 
Òpub-licly availableÓ when it becomes generally accessible to the interested public in
any form, including:(1)Publication in periodicals, books, print, electronic, or any other media avail-
able for general distribution to any member of the public or to a community of

persons, such as those in a scientific or engineering discipline, interested in thesubject matter either free or at a price that does not exceed the cost of reproduction
and distribution (see Questions A(1) through A(6));
(2)Ready availability at libraries open to the public or at university libraries
(see Question A(6));(3)Patents available at any patent office; and

(4)Release at an open conference, meeting, seminar, trade show, or other open
gathering.(i)A conference or other gathering is 
ÒopenÓ if all technically qualified mem-
bers of the public are eligible to attend and attendees are permitted to take notes
or otherwise make a personal record (not necessarily a recording) of the proceed-ings and presentations.
(ii)All technically qualified members of the public may be considered eligible
to attend a conference or other gathering notwithstanding:
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.658APPENDIX N(A)A registration fee reasonably related to costs and reflecting an intention that
all interested and technically qualified persons be able to attend, or(B)A limitation on actual attendance, as long as attendees either are the first

who have applied or are selected on the basis of relevant scientific or technicalcompetence, experience, or responsibility (see Questions B(1) through B(6)).
This General License GTDA authorizes submission of papers to domestic or
foreign editors or reviewers of journals, or to organizers of open conferences orother open gatherings, with the understanding that the papers will be made pub-
licly available if favorably received. (See Questions A(1) and A(3).)(c)Information resulting from fundamental research
Ñ(1)Fundamental research. Paragraphs (c)(2) through (c)(4) and paragraph (f) of
this section provide specific operational rules that will be used to determine
whether research in particular institutional contexts qualifies as 
Òfundamentalresearch.Ó The intent behind those operational rules is to identify as 
ÒfundamentalresearchÓ basic and applied research in science and engineering, where the result-
ing information is ordinarily published and shared broadly within the scientific

community. Such research can be distinguished from proprietary research andfrom industrial development, design, production, and product utilization, theresults of which ordinarily are restricted for proprietary reasons or specific na-

tional security reasons as defined in Sec. 779.3(f). (See Question D(8).)
(2)University-based research.
(i)Research conducted by scientists, engineers, or students at a university nor-

mally will be considered fundamental research, as described below. (
ÒUniversityÓmeans any accredited institution of higher education located in the United States.)(ii)Prepublication review by a sponsor of university research solely to ensure
that publication would not inadvertently divulge proprietary information that the

sponsor has furnished to the researchers does not change the rule described in
paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section. However, General License GTDA does notauthorize the release of information from a corporate sponsor to university re-

searchers where the research results are subject to prepublication review. See
other sections in this part 779 for provisions that may authorize such releaseswithout a validated license. (See Questions D(7), D(9), and D(10).)
(iii)Prepublication review by a sponsor of university research solely to ensure
that publication would not compromise patent rights does not change the rule
described in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, so long as the review causes no
more than a temporary delay in publication of the research results.
(iv)However, General License GTDA does not authorize the initial transfer of
information from an industry sponsor to university researchers where the parties

have agreed that the sponsor may withhold from publication some or all of theinformation so provided. (See Question D(2).)(v)University based research is not considered 
Òfundamental researchÓ if the
university or its researchers accept (at the request, for example, of an industrialsponsor) other restrictions on publication of scientific and technical information
resulting from the project or activity. Scientific and technical information result-

ing from the research will nonetheless become subject to General License GTDA
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS659once all such restrictions have expired or have been removed. (See Questions D(7)
and D(9).)(vi)The provisions of paragraph (f) of this section will apply if a university or its
researchers accept specific national security controls (as defined in paragraph (f)of this section) on a research project or activity sponsored by the U.S. Govern-ment. (See Questions E(1) and E(2).)
(3)Research based at Federal agencies or FFRDCs. Research conducted by sci-
entists or engineers working for a Federal agency or a Federally Funded Research
and Development Center (FFRDC) may be designated as 
Òfundamental researchÓwithin any appropriate system controlling release of information by such scien-tists and engineers devised by the agency or the FFRDC. (See Questions D(8) andD(11).)
(4)Corporate research.
(i)Research conducted by scientists or engineers working for a business entity
will be considered Òfundamental researchÓ at such time and to the extent that the
researchers are free to make scientific and technical information resulting from
the research publicly available without restriction or delay based on proprietaryconcerns or specific national security controls as defined in paragraph (f) of this

section.(ii)Prepublication review by the company solely to ensure that the publication
would compromise no proprietary information provided by the company to the

researchers is not considered to be a proprietary restriction under paragraph(c)(4)(i) of this section. However General License GTDA does not authorize therelease of information to university researchers where the research results are
subject to prepublication review. See other sections in this part 779 for provisions

that may authorize such releases without a validated license. (See Questions D(8),D(9), and D(10).)(iii)Prepublication review by the company solely to ensure that prepublication
would compromise no patent rights will not be considered a proprietary restric-tion for this purpose, so long as the review causes no more than a temporary delay
in publication of the research results.
(iv)However, General License GTDA does not authorize the initial transfer of
information from a business entity to researchers where the parties have agreed
that the business entity may withhold from publication some or all of the informa-

tion so provided.(5)Research based elsewhere. Research conducted by scientists or engineers
who are not working for any of the institutions described in paragraphs (c)(2)

through (c)(4) of this section will be treated as corporate research, as described in
paragraph (c)(4) of this section. (See Question D(8)).(d)Educational information. The release of 
Òeducational informationÓ re-
ferred to in paragraph (a)(3) of this section is release by instruction in catalog
courses and associated teaching laboratories of academic institutions. Disserta-

tion research is treated in paragraph (c)(2) of this section. (See Question C(1)through C(6).)Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.660APPENDIX N(e)Patent applications. The information referred to in paragraph (a)(4) of
this section is:(1)Information contained in a patent application prepared wholly from for-

eign-origin technical data where the application is being sent to the foreign inven-
tor to be executed and returned to the United States for subsequent filing in theU.S. Patent and Trademark Office;
(2)Information contained in a patent application, or an amendment, modifica-
tion, supplement, or division of an application, and authorized for filing in aforeign country in accordance with the regulations of the Patent and Trademark

Office, 37 CFR part 5 (see Sec. 770.10(j)); or(3)Information contained in a patent application when sent to a foreign coun-
try before or within six months after the filing of a United States patent applica-

tion for the purpose of obtaining the signature of an inventor who was in theUnited States when the invention was made or who is a co-inventor with a personresiding in the United States.(f)Government-sponsored research covered by contract controls.
(1)If research is funded by the U.S. Government, and specific national security

controls are agreed on to protect information resulting from the research, para-
graph (a)(2) of this section will not apply to any export of such information in
violation of such controls. General License GTDA as described in paragraph (a)(2)

of this section is nonetheless available for any export of information resulting
from the research that is consistent with the specific controls.
(2)Examples of 
Òspecific national security controlsÓ include requirements for
prepublication review by the Government, with right to withhold permission for
publication; restrictions on prepublication dissemination of information to non-U.S. citizens or other categories of persons; or restrictions on participation of non-U.S. citizens or other categories of persons in the research. A general reference to
one or more export control laws or regulations or a general reminder that theGovernment retains the right to classify is not a 
Òspecific national security con-trolÓ. (See Questions E(1) and E(2).)(g)Advice concerning uncontrolled information. Persons may be con-
cerned that an export of uncontrolled information could adversely affect U.S.
national security interests. Exporters who wish advice before exporting such in-formation can contact the appropriate Government scientific or technical person-nel by calling the Bureau of Export Administration at (202) 377-4811.Note:  Consulting and training. Technical data can be inadvertently ex-
ported in various ways. Consulting and training are especially effective mecha-

nisms of technology transfer. The exporter should be aware that the Department
of Commerce maintains controls on exports of technical data that do not qualifyfor General License GTDA as described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this
section, including application abroad of personal knowledge or technical experi-
ence acquired in the United States. (See also paragraph (g) of this section andQuestion F(1).)Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS661Sec. 779.4General license GTDR: Technical data under restriction.
A general license designated GTDR is hereby established authorizing theexport of technical data that are not exportable under the provisions of GeneralLicense GTDA, subject to the provisions, restrictions, exclusions, and exceptionsset forth below and subject to the written assurance requirement set forth in
paragraph (f) of this section.(a)Country restrictions. General License GTDR with written assurance
may not be used for exports to Country Groups QWYS and Z, the PeopleÕs Repub-lic of China, Iran, or Syria. General License GTDR without written assurance(GTDU) may not be used for exports to Country Groups S and Z, Iran or Syria of
software available at retail outlets as described in the General Software Note.13General License GTDR without written assurance (GTDU) as described in any
entry on the Commerce Control List (Supplement No. 1 to Sec. 799.1 of this
subchapter) may not be used for exports to Country Groups S and Z. This GeneralLicense is subject to the prohibitions described in Sec. 771.2(c) of this subchapter,including the prohibition on any export to the South African military or police.(b)General License GTDR without written assurance authorizes the fol-
lowing exportsÑ(1)Operation technical data.
(i)For definitions and conditions for use of General License GTDR without
written assurance for operation technical data, refer to the third paragraph of the
General Technology Note as listed in Supplement No. 2 to Sec. 799.1 of this
subchapter. As defined in that Note, Òoperation technical dataÓ is the minimum
13The General Software Note (GSN) is contained in Supplement No. 2 to Sec. 799.1 ofSubchapter C, Chapter VII, Title 15, Code of Federal Regulations. The text of the GSN is asfollows:General License GTDR, without written assurance, is available for release ofsoftware that is generally available to the public by being:a.Sold from stock at retail selling points without restriction by means of:
1.Over the counter transactions;

2.Mail order transactions, or
3.Telephone call transactions; and
b.Designed for installation by the user without further substantial support by
the supplier.General license GTDA is available for software that is publicly available.The General Software Note does not apply to exports of ÒsoftwareÓ controlled by other
agencies of the U.S. Government.The phrase Òwithout restrictionÓ clarifies that software is not 
Ògenerally available to thepublicÓ if it is to be sold only with bundled hardware generally available to the public.
Software that is both bundled with hardware and Ògenerally available to the publicÓ does
qualify for General License GTDR without a written assurance.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.662APPENDIX Nnecessary for the installation, operations,14 maintenance (checking), and repair ofthose products that are eligible for general licenses, or that are exported under avalidated export license. The Òminimum necessaryÓ excludes from operation tech-
nical data development or production technical data and includes use technologyonly to the extent required to ensure safe and efficient use of the product. Indi-vidual entries in the software and technology subcategories of the CCL may fur-
ther restrict export of Òminimum necessaryÓ technical data. (See Supplement Nos.
2 and 3 to Sec. 799.1 of this subchapter for further information and definitions ofthe terms ÒdevelopmentÓ, ÒproductionÓ, ÒuseÓ, and ÒrequiredÓ.)(ii)Operation software may be exported under GTDR, without assurance, pro-
vided that:(A)The operation software is the minimum necessary to operate the equipment

authorized for export; and(B)The operation software is in object code.
(2)Sales technical data.

(i)ÒSales technical dataÓ is defined as data supporting a prospective or actual
quotation, bid, or offer to sell, lease, or otherwise supply any item controlled bythe EAR.
(ii)Sales technical data may be exported under GTDR, without written assur-
ances, provided that:(A)The technical data is a type customarily transmitted with a prospective or
actual quotation, bid, or offer in accordance with established business practice;and(B)The export will not disclose the detailed design, production, or manufac-
ture, or the means of reconstruction, of either the quoted item or its product. The
purpose of this limitation is to prevent disclosure of technical data so detailed thatthe consignee could use the technical data in production.Note: Neither this authorization nor its use means that the U.S. Governmentintends, or is committed, to approve an export license application for any com-
modity, plant, or technical data that may be the subject of the transaction to whichsuch quotation, bid, or offer relates. Exporters are advised to include in any quo-tations, bids, or offers, and in any contracts entered into pursuant to such quota-
tions, bids, or offers, a provision relieving themselves of liability in the event thatan export license (when required) is not approved by the Bureau of Export Ad-ministration.(3)Software updates. Software updates that are intended for and are limited to
correction of errors (ÒfixesÓ to 
ÒbugsÓ that have been identified) qualify for export
under General License GTDR, without written assurance, provided the updatesare being exported to the same consignee and do not enhance the functional
capacities of the initial software package.(4)Technical data described in the Commerce Control List. Certain other tech-
14Exporters of digital computer equipment must describe on their license applicationsany software, including that shipped under General License GTDR, to be used with theequipment.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS663nical data may be exported under GTDR without written assurance. Such techni-cal data is identified in the ÒRequirementsÓ section of the ECCN under the head-
ing ÒGTDUÓ. The designations ÒGTDU: YesÓ or 
ÒGTDU: Yes except . . . .Ó indicate
that General License GTDR without written assurance is available subject to anyapplicable exceptions. The designation ÒGTDU: NoÓ indicates that General Li-
cense GTDR without written assurance is not available. However, the designation
ÒGTDU: NoÓ does not restrict exports under paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section. Exporters have the option of using the term ÒGTDUÓ to describe
General License GTDR without written assurance for all purposes, including in-
formation requirements on the ShipperÕs Export Declaration.(c)Ð(d)[Reserved]
(e)Restrictions applicable to the Republic of South Africa
Ñ(1)General prohibition. Except as provided in Sec. 779.4 (b)(1), (b)(2), and (b)(3),

no technical data may be exported or reexported to the Republic of South Africaunder this General License GTDR where the exporter or reexporter knows or hasreason to know that the data or the direct product of the data are for delivery,
directly or indirectly, to or for use by or for military or police entities in SouthAfrica or for use in servicing equipment owned, controlled, or used by or for suchentities. In addition, no technical data relating to the commodities listed in Supple-
ment No. 2 to this Part 779 may be exported or reexported under General LicenseGTDR to any consignee in the Republic of South Africa.(2)Written assurances. In addition to any written assurances that may or may

not be required by paragraph (f) of this section, no export or reexport of technical
data may be made to the Republic of South Africa under General License GTDRuntil the exporter has received written assurance from the importer that neitherthe technical data nor the direct product of the data will be made available to or
for use by or for military or police entities of the Republic of South Africa.(f)General License GTDR with written assurances. Except as provided in
Sec. 779.4(b) and (f)(5), no export of technical data described in this Sec. 779.4(f)may be made under General License GTDR:(1)Until the U.S. exporter has received a written assurance from the foreign

importer that, unless prior authorization is obtained from the Office of ExportLicensing, the importer will not knowingly:(i)Reexport, directly or indirectly, to Country Group Q, S, W,
15 Y, or Z, or the
15Effective April 26, 1971, Country Group W no longer included Romania. Assurancesexecuted prior to April 26, 1971, that refer to Country Group W continue to apply to Roma-nia as well as Poland. Effective April 25, 1991, Czechoslovakia was added to Country Group
W. Assurances executed on or after April 25, 1991, that refer to Country Group W apply toCzechoslovakia as well as Poland. On May 8, 1992, Hungary was removed from CountryGroup W. Assurances are no longer applicable to Hungary. On January 1, 1993, Czechoslo-
vakia became two separate countries called the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic.Assurances executed prior to January 1, 1993, that refer to Czechoslovakia continue toapply to the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.664APPENDIX NPeopleÕs Republic of China any technical data relating to commodities controlledto Country Group W as described in the paragraph titled ÒValidated LicenseRequiredÓ of any entry of the Commerce Control List;
(ii)Export, directly or indirectly, to Country Group Z any direct product of the
technical data if such direct product is controlled to Country Group ÒWÓ in the
paragraph of any entry on the Commerce Control List titled ÒValidated LicenseRequiredÓ; or(iii)Export, directly or indirectly, to any destination in Country Group Q, S, W,
Y, or the PeopleÕs Republic of China, any direct product of the technical data ifsuch direct product is identified by the code letter ÒAÓ following the Export
Control Classification Number on the Commerce Control List.(2)If the direct product of any technical data is a complete plant or any major

component of a plant that is capable of producing a commodity controlled toCountry Group ÒWÓ in the paragraph of any entry on the Commerce Control List
titled ÒValidated License RequiredÓ or appears on the U.S. Munitions List, a writ-
ten assurance by the person who is or will be in control of the distribution of theproducts of the plant (whether or not such person is the importer) shall be ob-tained by the U.S. exporter (via the foreign importer), stating that, unless prior
authorization is obtained from the Office of Export Licensing, such person willnot knowingly:(i)Reexport, directly or indirectly, to Country Group Q, S, W, Y,
 or Z, or thePeopleÕs Republic of China, the technical data relating to the plant or the majorcomponent of a plant;(ii)Export, directly or indirectly, to Country Group Z, the plant or the major

component of a plant (depending upon which is the direct product of the techni-
cal data) or any product of such plant or of such major component, if such productis identified by the symbol ÒWÓ in the paragraph of any entry on the Commerce
Control List titled ÒValidated License RequiredÓ or appears on the U.S. Munitions
List; or(iii)Export, directly or indirectly, to any destination in Country Group Q, S, W,
Y, or the PeopleÕs Republic of China, the plant or the major component of a plant(depending upon which is the direct product of the technical data) or any productof such plant or of such major component, if such product is identified by the codeletter ÒAÓ following the Export Control Classification Number on the Commerce
Control List or appears on the U.S. Munitions List.Note: Effective April 1, 1964, Sec. 779.4(f)(2)(ii) and (f)(2)(iii) required certainwritten assurances relating to the disposition of the products of a complete plantor major component of a plant that is the direct product of unpublished technical
data of U.S. origin exported under General License GTDR. Except as to commodi-ties identified by the code letter ÒAÓ following the Export Control Classification
Number on the Commerce Control List, and items on the U.S. Munitions List, the
effective date of the written assurance requirements for plant products as a condi-tion of using General License GTDR for export of this type of technical data ishereby deferred until further notice, subject to the following limitations:1.The exporter shall, at least two weeks before the initial export of the
technical data, notify the Office of Export Licensing, by letter, of the facts requiredCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS665to be disclosed in an application for a validated export license covering such
technical data; and2.The exporter shall obtain from the person who is or will be in control of
the distribution of the products of the plant (whether or not such person is theimporter) a written commitment that he will notify the U.S. Government, directlyor through the exporter, whenever he enters into negotiations to export any prod-
uct of the plant to any destination covered by Sec. 779.4(f)(2)(ii), when such prod-uct is not identified by the code letter ÒAÓ following the Export Control Classifica-
tion Number on the Commerce Control List and requires a validated license for
export to Country Group W by the information set forth in the applicable CCLentry in the paragraph titled ÒValidated License RequiredÓ. The notificationshould state the product, quantity, country of destination, and the estimated date
of the shipment.Moreover, during the period of deferment, the remaining written as-
surance requirements of Sec. 779.4 (f)(2)(ii) and (f)(2)(iii) as to plant products that

are identified by the code letter ÒAÓ following the Export Control Classification
Number on the Commerce Control List, or are on the U.S. Munitions List, will bewaived if the plant is located in one of the following COCOM countries: Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Greece,Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey,
and the United Kingdom. This deferment applies to exports of technical data
pursuant to any type of contract or arrangement, including licensing agreements,
regardless of whether entered into before or after April 1, 1964.
(3)The required assurance may be made in the form of a letter or other written
communication from the importer or, if applicable, the person in control of thedistribution of the products of a plant; or the assurance may be incorporated into

a licensing agreement that restricts disclosure of the technical data to be used onlyin authorized destinations, and prohibits shipment of the direct product thereof
by the licensee to any unauthorized destination. An assurance included in a li-

censing agreement will be acceptable for all exports made during the life of the
agreement, provided that the obligations of the importer set forth in the assur-ances survive any termination of the licensing agreement. If such assurance is not
received, this general license is not applicable and a validated export license isrequired. An application for validated license shall include an explanatory state-
ment setting forth the reasons why such assurance cannot be obtained.
(4)In addition, this general license is not applicable to any export of technical
data of the kind described in this Sec. 779.4(f), if at the time of export of thetechnical data from the United States, the exporter knows or has reason to believe
that the direct product to be manufactured abroad by use of the technical data is
intended to be exported directly or indirectly to any unauthorized destination.(5)The limitations in this Sec. 779.4(f) do not apply to the export of technical

data included in an application for the foreign filing of a patent, provided such
filing is in accordance with the regulations of the U.S. Patent Office.(g)Additional restrictions applicable to chemical or biological weapons. In
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.666APPENDIX Naddition to any other restrictions in Sec. 779.4, the use of General License GTDR isfurther restricted by Sec. 778.8(a)(5) of this subchapter.Sec. 779.5Validated license applications.
(a)General. No technical data, other than that exportable without license
to Canada or under general license to other destinations, may be exported fromthe United States without a validated export license. Such validated export li-
censes are issued by the Office of Export Licensing upon receipt of an appropriate
export application or reexport request. An application for a technical data licenseshall consist of:(1)Form BXA-622P, Application for Export License, accompanied by;

(2)A letter of explanation described in Sec. 779.5(d) for technology or descrip-
tion of the capabilities of the software; and(3)For shipments to the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and the Slovak

Republic, an Import Certificate issued by the appropriate national government.
(See Sec. 775.8 and supplement No. 1 to part 775 of this subchapter.)
(b)Application Form. Form ITA-622P shall be completed as provided in
Sec. 772.4, except that Items 9(a) and 11 shall be left blank. In Item 9(b), ÒDescrip-tion of Commodity or Technical Data,Ó enter a general statement which specifies
the technical data (e.g., blueprints, manuals, etc.). In Purpose.Ó(c)[Reserved]
(d)Letter of explanation. Each application shall be supported by a compre-
hensive letter of explanation in duplicate. This letter shall set forth all the factsrequired to present to the Office of Export Licensing a complete disclosure of the

transaction including, if applicable, the following:(1)The identification of all parties to the transaction;
(2)The exact project location where the technical data will be used;

(3)The type of technical data to be exported;
(4)The form in which the export will be made;
(5)The uses for which the data will be employed;

(6)An explanation of the process, product, size, and output capacity of the
plant or equipment, if applicable, or other description that delineates, defines, andlimits the data to be transmitted (the Òtechnical scopeÓ);(7)The availability abroad of comparable foreign technical data.
(e)Special provisions
Ñ(1)Maritime nuclear propulsion plants and related commodities.
16  These spe-cial provisions are applicable to technical data relating to maritime (civil) nuclear
propulsion plants, their land prototypes, and special facilities for their construc-16See Sec. 779.8(a) which sets forth provisions prohibiting exports and reexports of cer-tain technical data and products manufactured therefrom.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS667tion, support, or maintenance, including any machinery, device, component, or
equipment specifically developed or designed for use in such plants or facilities.
Every application for license to export technical data relating to any of these
commodities shall include the following:(i)A description of the foreign project for which the technical data will be
furnished;
(ii)A description of the scope of the proposed services to be offered by the
applicant, his consultant(s), and his subcontractor(s), including all the design datawhich will be disclosed;(iii)The names, addresses and titles of all personnel of the applicant, his
consultant(s) and his subcontractor(s) who will discuss or disclose the technical
data or be involved in the design or development of the technical data;
(iv)The beginning and termination dates of the period of time during which the
technical data will be discussed or disclosed and a proposed time schedule of the
reports which the applicant will submit to the U.S. Department of Commerce,

detailing the technical data discussed or disclosed during the period of the li-cense;(v)The following certification:
I (We) certify that if this application is approved, I (we) and any consultants,subcontractors, or other persons employed or retained by us in connection with
the project thereby licensed will not discuss with or disclose to others, directly or
indirectly, any technical data relating to U.S. naval nuclear propulsion plants. I
(We) further certify that I (we) will furnish to the U.S. Department of Commerce

all reports and information which it may require concerning specific transmittals
or disclosures of technical data pursuant to any license granted as a result of this
application;(vi)A statement of the steps which the applicant will take to assure that personnel
of the applicant, his consultant(s) and his subcontractor(s) will not discuss or dis-close to others technical data relating to U.S. naval nuclear propulsion plants; and(vii)A written statement of assurance from the foreign importer that unless prior
authorization is obtained from the Office of Export Licensing, the importer will
not knowingly export directly or indirectly to Country Group Q, S, W, Y, or Z, orthe PeopleÕs Republic of China, the direct product of the technical data. However,if the U.S. exporter is not able to obtain this statement from the foreign importer,
the U.S. exporter shall attach an explanatory statement to his license applicationsetting forth the reasons why such an assurance cannot be obtained.
(2)Other license applications. For all other license applications to export tech-
nical data identified in an entry with an ECCN ending in the code letter 
ÒAÓ to
any destination, other than Country Group Q, S, W, Y, or Z, or the People
ÕsRepublic of China, an applicant shall attach to the license application a writtenstatement from his foreign importer assuring that, unless prior authorization is
obtained from the Office of Export Licensing, the importer will not knowingly

reexport the technical data to any destination, or export any national security
controlled direct product of the technical data, directly or indirectly, to Country
Group Q, S, W, Y, or Z, or the PeopleÕs Republic of China. However, if the U.S.exporter is not able to obtain the required statement from his importer, the ex-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.668APPENDIX Nporter shall attach an explanatory statement to his license setting forth the reasons
why such an assurance cannot be obtained.(f)Validity period and extension
Ñ(1)Initial validity. Validated licenses covering exports of technical data will
generally be issued for a validity period of 24 months. Upon request, a validity

period exceeding 24 months may be granted where the facts of the transaction
warrant it and the Office of Export Licensing determines that such action wouldbe consistent with the objectives of the applicable U.S. export control program.

Justification for a validity period exceeding 24 months should be provided in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Sec. 772.9(d)(2) for requesting an
extended validity period with a license application. The Office of Export Licens-

ing will make the final decision on what validity beyond 24 months, if any, shouldbe authorized in each case.(2)Extensions. A request to extend the validity period of a technical data li-

cense shall be made on Form ITA-685P in accordance with the procedures setforth in Sec. 772.12(a). The request shall include on Form ITA-685P, in the spaceentitled ÒAmend License to Read as Follows,
Ó whether the license has been previ-
ously extended and the date(s) and duration of such extension(s). The Office ofExport Licensing will make the final decision on what extension beyond 24months, if any, should be authorized in each case. (See Sec. 779.8(c)(1) for validity
period extensions for reexports of technical data.)Sec. 779.6Exports under a validated license.
(a)Use of validated licenses
Ñ(1)Retention of license. The validated technical data license need not be pre-

sented to the customs office or post office but shall be retained and made availablefor inspection in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 787.13 of this subchapter.(2)Return of revoked or suspended technical data licenses. If the Office of

Export Licensing revokes or suspends a technical data license, the licensee shallreturn the license immediately to the Office of Export Licensing in accordancewith the instructions in Sec. 786.2(d) of this subchapter.(b)Records. Any person to whom a validated technical data license has
been issued shall retain the license and maintain complete records in accordance

with Sec. 786.2(d) of this subchapter, including any export licenses (whether usedor unused, valid or expired) and all supporting documents and shipping records.Sec. 779.7Amendments.
Requests for amendments shall be made in accordance with the provisionsof Sec. 772.11. Changes requiring amendment include any expansion or upgrade
of the technical scope that was described in the letter of explanation, as approved
or modified on the export license.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS669Sec. 779.8Reexports of technical data and exports of the product manufac-
tured abroad by use of United States technical data.(a)Prohibited exports and reexports. Unless specifically authorized by the
Office of Export Licensing, or otherwise authorized under the provisions of para-
graph (b) of this section, no person in the United States or in a foreign country
may:(1)Reexport any technical data imported from the United States, directly or
indirectly, in whole or in part, from the authorized country(ies) of ultimate desti-
nation;(2)Export any technical data from the United States with the knowledge that it
is to be reexported, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from the authorized

country(ies) of ultimate destination; or(3)Export or reexport to Country Group Q, S, W, Y or Z, the People
Õs Republicof China or Afghanistan any foreign produced direct product of U.S. technical

data, or any commodity produced by any plant or major component thereof that
is a direct product of U.S. technical data, if such direct product or commodity iscovered by the provisions of Sec. 779.4(f) or Sec. 779.5(e)(1); or(b)Permissive reexports
Ñ(1)Exportable under General License GTDA or GTDR. Any technical data

which have been exported from the United States may be reexported from any
destination to any other destination provided that, at the time of reexport, the
technical data may be exported directly from the United States to the new country
of destination under General License GTDA or GTDR and provided that all of the
requirements and conditions for use of these general licenses have been met.
(2)COCOM authorization. Separate specific authorization by the Office of Ex-
port Licensing to reexport any U.S. origin technical data is not required if all of the

following conditions are met:(i)The data being exported are identified by the suffix 
ÒAÓ on the CCL;
(ii)The export or reexport is from a COCOM participating country, i.e., Austra-

lia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Greece,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, orthe United Kingdom;(iii)The export or reexport is made in accordance with the conditions of the licens-
ing authorization issued by the applicable COCOM participating country; and(iv)The export or reexport is to a country in Country Group Q, W, or Y or the

PeopleÕs Republic of China.(3)Direct product. Separate specific authorization by the Office of Export Li-
censing to export or reexport the direct product of U.S. origin technical data is not

required if the direct product, were it of U.S. origin, could be shipped under anyof the permissive reexport provisions of Sec. 774.2 of this subchapter.
(4)People
Õs Republic of China. Separate specific authorization by the Office ofExport Licensing is not required to reexport software from a COCOM participat-ing country, Austria, Finland, Hong Kong, Ireland, New Zealand, Sweden, orSwitzerland to the PeopleÕs Republic of China that meets the requirements set
forth in Advisory Notes for the PeopleÕs Republic of China or for Country GroupsCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.670APPENDIX NQ, W, Y in the Commerce Control List (Supplement No. 1 to Sec. 799.1 of thissubchapter) and are licensed for shipment by the country from which reexported.
(c)Specific authorization to reexport
Ñ(1)Submission of request for reexport authorization. Requests for specific au-
thorization to reexport technical data or to export any product thereof, as appli-

cable, shall be submitted on Form ITA-699P, Request To Dispose of Commoditiesor Technical Data Previously Exported (OMB approval No. 0625-0009), to: Officeof Export Licensing, P.O. Box 273, Washington, DC 20044.(See Supplement No. 1 to Part 774 for instructions on completing the form.)If Form ITA-699P is not readily available, a request for specific authorization toreexport technical data or to export any product thereof, as applicable, may besubmitted by letter. The letter shall bear the words ÒTechnical Data ReexportRequestÓ immediately below the heading or letterhead and contain all the infor-
mation required by Sec. 779.5(d). Authorization to reexport technical data or toexport the product thereof, if granted, will generally be issued with a validity

period of 24 months on Form ITA- 699P, or by means of a letter from the Office ofExport Licensing. Any request for extension of the validity period shall be re-quested in accordance with Sec. 774.5(b), and shall specify the period for which

additional validity is required. The Office of Export Licensing will make the finaldecision on what validity beyond 24 months, if any, should be authorized in eachcase.(2)Return of reexport authorization. If the Office of Export Licensing revokes
or suspends a reexport authorization, the licensee shall return the reexport autho-

rization immediately to the Office of Export Licensing.(3)Records. Any person to whom a reexport authorization has been issued
shall retain and make available for inspection records in accordance with the
provisions of Sec. 787.13 of this subchapter, including any reexport authorizations(whether used or unused, valid or expired) and all supporting documents andshipping records.(d)Effect of foreign laws. No authority granted by the U.S. Office of Export
Licensing, or under the provisions of the U.S. Export Administration Regulations,

to reexport technical data or export a product thereof shall in any way relieve anyperson from his responsibility to comply fully with the laws, rules, and regula-tions of the country from which the reexport or export is to be made or of any

other country having authority over any phase of the transaction. Conversely, no
foreign law, rule, regulation, or authorization in any way relieves any person
from his responsibility to obtain such authorization from the U.S. Office of Export
Licensing as may be required by the U.S. Export Administration Regulations.Sec. 779.9Commercial agreements with certain countries.
Pursuant to section 5(j) of the Export Administration Amendments Act of
1979, as amended, any non-governmental U.S. person or firm that enters into anCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS671agreement with any agency of the government of a controlled country (CountryGroups Q, W, Y, and the PeopleÕs Republic of China), which agreement encour-
ages technical cooperation and is intended to result in the export from the U.S. to
the other party of U.S.-origin technical data (except under General License GTDAor General License GTDR as provided under the provisions of Sec. 779.4(b)), shall
submit those portions of the agreement that include the statement of work and

describe the anticipated exports of data to the Office of Technology and PolicyAnalysis, Room 4054, P.O. Box 273, Washington, DC 20044. This material shall besubmitted no later than 30 days after the final signature on the agreement.(a)This requirement does not apply to colleges, universities and other
educational institutions.(b)The submission required by this section does not relieve the exporter
from the licensing requirements for controlled technical data and goods.
(c)Acceptance of a submission does not represent a judgment as to whether
Export Administration will or will not issue any authorization for export of tech-
nical data.Sec. 779.10Other applicable provisions.
As far as may be consistent with the provisions of this part, all of the other
provisions of the Export Administration Regulations shall apply equally to ex-
ports of technical data and to applications for licenses and licenses issued underthis part.Supplement No. 1 to Part 779ÑTechnical Data Interpretations1.Technology based on U.S.-origin technical data. U.S.-origin technical
data does not lose its U.S.-origin when it is redrawn, used, consulted, or otherwise

commingled abroad in any respect with other technical data of any other origin.Therefore, any subsequent or similar technical data prepared or engineered abroadfor the design, construction, operation, or maintenance of any plant or equipment,
or part thereof, which is based on or utilizes any U.S.-origin technical data, is
subject to the same U.S. Export Administration Regulations that are applicable to
the original U.S.-origin technical data, including the requirement for obtaining
Office of Export Licensing authorization prior to reexportation.2.Distinction between General and Validated License requirements for
shipment to QWY destinations of technical data and replacement parts.
A number of exporters have recently asked where the line is drawn be-
tween general license and validated license exports to PQWY destinations of tech-
nical data related to equipment exports.The export of technical data under validated license is authorized only to
the extent specifically indicated on the face of the license. The only data related to
equipment exports that can be provided under general license is the publicly
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.672APPENDIX Navailable data authorized by General License GTDA, or the assembly, installation,maintenance, repair, and operation data authorized by General License GTDR.
771.20General License GLX; exports to Country Groups QWY and the People
ÕsRepublic of China.(a)Scope.A general license designated GLX is established, authorizing
exports to civil end-users in Country Group QWY and the PeopleÕs Republic ofChina (PRC) of certain specified items.(b)Eligible exports.The items eligible for this general license are those
described in the Advisory Notes in the CCL that indicate likelihood of approvalfor ÒCountry Groups QWY and the PRC,Ó except items described in the notes to
ECCNs 1C18A and 2B18A. Likelihood of approval notes that apply only to the
PRC, or to specified destinations in Country Group Y also qualify for this generallicense to eligible destinations (however, those notes indicating Country Group Qor W only, are specifically not eligible). In addition, those entries and sub-entires
listed in Supplement No. 1 to this Part 771 are eligible to export under this generallicense. However, this general license is not available for items that are also sub-ject to missile technology (MT), nuclear nonproliferation (NP), or foreign policy
(FP) controls to the recipient country.(c)Eligible consignees.This general license is available only for exports
to civil end-users for civil end-uses. Exports under this general license may not be
made to military end-users or to known military uses. Such exports will continueto require an individual validated license and be considered on a case-by-casebasis. In addition to conventional military activities, military uses include any
proliferation activities described in Part 778 of this subchapter. Retransfers tomilitary end-users or end-uses in eligible countries are strictly prohibited, with-out prior authorization.The relevant part of the Commerce Control List is the ÒInformation Secu-rityÓ category, as described below (taken from Supplement Number 1 to Section
799.1 of the Code of Federal Regulations).II. ÒInformation SecurityÓNOTE: The control status of Òinformation securityÓ equipment, 
ÒsoftwareÓ,systems, application specific ÒassembliesÓ, modules, integrated circuits, compo-nents, technology or functions is defined in the Òinformation securityÓ entries in
this Category even if they are components or ÒassembliesÓ of other equipment.
NOTE: ÒInformation securityÓ equipment, 
ÒsoftwareÓ, systems, applicationspecific ÒassembliesÓ, modules, integrated circuits, components, technology orfunctions that are excepted from control, not controlled, or eligible for licensing
under an Advisory Note are under the licensing jurisdiction of the Department ofCommerce. For all other, exporters requesting a validated license from the De-Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS673partment of Commerce must provide a statement from the Department of State,Office of Defense Trade Control, verifying that the equipment intended for exportis under the licensing jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce.A. Equipment, Assemblies and Components5A11A Systems, equipment, application specific ÒassembliesÓ, modules or inte-grated circuits for Òinformation securityÓ, as described in this entry, and otherspecially designed components therefor.List of Items ControlledSystems, equipment, application specific ÒassembliesÓ, modules or inte-grated circuits for Òinformation security,Ó as follows, and other specially designed
components therefor:a.Designed or modified to use 
ÒcryptographyÓ employing digital tech-
niques to ensure Òinformation securityÓ;b.Designed or modified to perform cryptanalytic functions;
c.Designed or modified to use 
ÒcryptographyÓ employing analog tech-
niques to ensure Òinformation securityÓ, except:c.1.Equipment using 
ÒfixedÓ band scrambling not exceeding 8 bands and
in which the transpositions change not more frequently than once very second;c.2.Equipment, using 
ÒfixedÓ band scrambling exceeding 8 bands and in
which the transpositions change not more frequently than once every ten seconds;c.3.Equipment using 
ÒfixedÓ frequency inversion and in which the trans-
positions change not more frequently than once every second;c.4.Facsimile equipment;

c.5.Restricted audience broadcast equipment;
c.6.Civil television equipment;
d.Designed or modified to suppress the compromising emanations of
information-bearing signals;NOTE: 5A11.d does not control equipment specially designed to suppressemanations for health and safety reasons.e.Designed or modified to use cryptographic techniques to generate the
spreading code for Òspread spectrumÓ or hopping code for 
Òfrequency agilityÓsystems;f.Designed or modified to provide certified or certifiable 
Òmultilevel se-curityÓ or user isolation at a level exceeding Class B2 of the Trusted Computer
System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) or equivalent;g.Communications cable systems designed or modified using mechani-
cal, electrical or electronic means to detect surreptitious intrusion.5B11A Equipment specially designed for the development of equipment or func-tions controlled by the Òinformation securityÓ entries in this Category, including
measuring or test equipment.Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.674APPENDIX N5B12A Equipment specially designed for the production of equipment or func-tions controlled by the Òinformation securityÓ entries in this Category, including
measuring, test, repair or production equipment.5B13A Measuring equipment specially designed to evaluate and validate the Òin-formation securityÓ functions controlled by the 
Òinformation securityÓ entries in
5A or 5D.C. Materials [Reserved]D. ÒSoftwareÓ5D11A ÒSoftwareÓ specially designed or modified for the 
ÒdevelopmentÓ, Òpro-ductionÓ, or ÒuseÓ of equipment controlled by 
Òinformation securityÓ entries 5A11,
5B11, 5B12, or 5B13 or ÒsoftwareÓ controlled by 
Òinformation securityÓ entries
5D11, 5D12, or 5D13.5D12A ÒSoftwareÓ specially designed or modified to support technology con-
trolled by Òinformation securityÓ entry 5E11.
5D13A Specific ÒsoftwareÓ as follows.
NOTE: Exporter must have determined that the software is not controlled bythe Office of Defense Trade Control, Department of State, before using this gen-
eral license.List of Items Controlleda.ÒSoftwareÓ having the characteristics, or performing or simulating the
functions of the equipment controlled by the Òinformation securityÓ entries in 5A
or 5B.b.ÒSoftwareÓ to certify 
ÒsoftwareÓ controlled by 5D13.a;
c.ÒSoftwareÓ designed or modified to protect against malicious computer
damage, e.g., viruses.E. Technology5E11A Technology according to the General Technology Note for the Òdevelop-mentÓ, ÒproductionÓ, or ÒuseÓ of equipment controlled by 
ÒInformation SecurityÓentries 5A11, 5B11, 5B12, or 5B13 or ÒsoftwareÓ controlled by 
Òinformation secu-rityÓ entries 5D11, 5D12, or 5D13.
NOTES for ÒInformation SecurityÓ:NOTE 1:ÒInformation securityÓ entries in this Category do not control:
a.ÒPersonalized smart cardsÓ using 
ÒcryptographyÓ restricted for use only in equip-
ment or systems released from control under 5A11.c.1 to c.6, by this Note or as described in
ÒInformation SecurityÓ Advisory Notes 3 and 4 below;
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RELEVANT LAWS, DOCUMENTS, AND REGULATIONS675b.Equipment containing 
ÒfixedÓ data compression or coding techniques;
c.Receiving equipment for radio broadcast, pay television or similar restricted audi-
ence television of the consumer type, without digital encryption and where digital
decryption is limited to the video, audio or management functions;d.Portable (personal) or mobile radio-telephones for civil use; e.g., for use with com-
mercial civil cellular radiocommunications systems, containing encryption, when accompa-
nying their users;e.Decryption functions specially designed to allow the execution of copy-protected
ÒsoftwareÓ, provided that the decryption functions are not user-accessible.NOTE 2: ÒInformation SecurityÓ entries in this Category do not control:
a.ÒSoftwareÓ ÒrequiredÓ for the 
ÒuseÓ of equipment released by 
ÒInformation SecurityÓNote 1;b.ÒSoftwareÓ providing any of the functions of equipment released by 
ÒInformationSecurityÓ Note 1;
ADVISORY NOTE 3:Licenses are likely to be approved, as administrative exceptions, for
exports to Country Group W or cellular radio equipment or systems specially designed forcryptographic operation, provided any message traffic encryption capability that is within
the scope of the control of the Òinformation securityÓ entries in Category 5 and that is
contained in such equipment or systems is irreversibly disabled.N.B.:Provided message traffic encryption is not possible within such a system, the export
of mobile or portable cellular radio subscriber equipment containing cryptographic capa-
bilities is permitted under this Advisory Note.ADVISORY NOTE 4: Licenses are likely to be approved, as administrative exceptions, forexports to satisfactory end-users in Country Groups QWY and the PRC of the followingcryptographic equipment, provided that the equipment is intended for civil use:a.Access control equipment, such as automatic teller machines, self-service statement
printers or point of sale terminals, that protects password or personal identification num-
bers (PIN) or similar data to prevent unauthorized access to facilities, but does not allow forencryption of files or text, except as directly related to the password of PIN protection;b.Data authentication equipment that calculates a Message Authentication Code (MAC)
or similar result to ensure no alteration of text has taken place, or to authenticate users, butdoes not allow for encryption of data, text or other media other than that needed for theauthentication;c.Cryptographic equipment specially designed, developed or modified for use in ma-
chines for banking or money transactions, such as automatic teller machines, self-servicestatement printers, point of sale terminals or equipment for the encryption of interbanking
transactions, and intended for use only in such applications.ADVISORY NOTE 5:(Eligible for GTDR). Licenses are likely to be approved as adminis-
trative exceptions, for exports to satisfactory end-users in Country Groups QWY and thePRC of the following cryptographic ÒsoftwareÓ;a.ÒSoftwareÓ required for the 
ÒuseÓ of equipment eligible for administrative exceptions
treatment under Advisory Notes 3 and 4 in the Notes for ÒInformation SecurityÓ (Category
5);b.ÒSoftwareÓ providing any of the functions of equipment eligible for administrative
exceptions treatment under Advisory Notes 3 and 4 in the Notes for ÒInformation SecurityÓ(Category 5).  [End of  Notes for ÒInformation Security.Ó]
Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.676APPENDIX NIII. Other Equipment, Materials, ÒSoftwareÓ and Technology
A. Equipment, Assemblies and Components5A20B Telemetering and telecontrol equipment usable as launch support equip-ment for unmanned air vehicles or rocket systems.5A80D Communications intercepting devices; and parts and accessories therefor.(Specify by name.) (Also see S776.13 of this subchapter.)NOTES:1.These items are subject to the United Nations Security Council arms embargo
against Rwanda described in S785.4 (a) of this subchapter.2.Controls on this equipment are maintained in accordance with the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (Pub. L. 90-351).Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.677IndexAAccess, 353control, 26Ð27defined, 55Ð56, 94n, 353facilitators, 60Ð65see also Back door access
inhibitors, 58Ð60Advanced Research Projects Agency(ARPA), 237nMemorandum of Agreement withDefense Information Systems
Agency and National SecurityAgency (text of), 633Ð636AECA, see Arms Export Control Act (AECA)Algorithm, 378and key length, 353America Online, 42Ð43n, 148
American National Standards Institute(ANSI), 486Anonymity, 43, 59, 480
ANSI, see American National Standards
Institute (ANSI)Applications programming interfaces, seeCryptographic applicationsprogramming interfaces (CAPI)Arms Export Control Act (AECA), 114Ð116,118, 255text of, 558Ð573ARPA, see Advanced Research Projects
Agency (ARPA)Assurance, 353Asymmetric cryptography, 53Ð54, 63, 75,313n, 353, 365Ð367, 375Ð377, 385Ð388AT&T, 60, 70n, 419Clipper phones, 174Ð175Secure Telephone Unit (STU), 74Ð75,235Surity Telephone Device, 175Attacks on cryptographic systemsfor asymmetric cryptography, 63
brute-force search, 62Ð63, 124, 276, 287,381chosen plaintext, 381Ð382
ciphertext only, 287, 381exploitation of design factors, 60Ð62exploitation of operational errors, 383
known ciphertext, 390known plaintext, 381shortcuts, 63
for symmetric cryptography, 63timing attacks, 63work factor, 64n, 181, 214, 288
see also Information warfare (IW);
Strong encryptionAudit trails, 3, 354, 370Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.678INDEXAuditing, 354Authenticationof an identity, 354, 367Ð370, 374, 450, 468defined, 354of digital cash tokens, 478Ð479of a file, 354
infrastructure for, 338Ð339of a message, 354, 367uses of, 42Ð43, 47, 123Ð125see also Audit trails
Authenticity, 354Authorization, 354, 368n
Availability, 354BBack dooraccess, 56
defined, 354hidden, 201Ð201n, 203, 277open, 276Ð277see also Escrowed encryptionBanking and finance services, vii, 23, 35Ð36n, 57, 123, 179, 312, 455Ð458,470; see also Credit cards; Digital
cashBinary digit, 354Biometric identifiers, 368Ð369Bit, 354
Bit stream, 355Bollinger, Lee, 344Bush, President George, 100; see alsoNational Security Directive 42CCALEA, see Communications Assistance
for Law Enforcement Act of 1995
(CALEA)Cantwell bill, 254Ð255CAPI, see Cryptographic applications
programming interfaces (CAPI)Capstone chip, 176, 355Capstone/Fortezza initiative, 10, 176Ð177,179, 355Caracristi, Ann, 344CCL, see Commerce Control List (CCL)
Cellular phones, 11, 67, 217, 295, 327Ð328Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 91n, 95,100, 403, 422Ð423, 428Ð429; seealso Executive Order 12333 and
Executive Order 12472CERT, see  Computer Emergency Response
Team (CERT)Certificateauthorities, 75Ð77, 355, 450Ð454infrastructure, 232Ð234Certification, 355Certification authority, 355
Checksum, 367CIA, see Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Ciphertext, 172n, 355, 374
Circumventing laws against unescrowedencryption, 269, 330Civil liberties, viii, 44n, 44Ð46Civiletti, Benjamin R., 344Ð345CJ, see Commodity jurisdiction (CJ)
Cleartext, 355
Clinton, President William, 95, 100Clinton Administration, 41, 170, 235, 265Ð266, 303, 376Clipperchip, xii, 171Ð174, 230, 355initiative, 356, 376, 445n
see also Escrowed Encryption Standard
(EES)CMVP, see Cryptographic Module
Validation Program (CMVP)CoCom, see Coordinating Committee
(CoCom) nationsCode grabbers, 42nCollateral cryptography, 356
Commerce Control List (CCL), 8n, 115, 117,122, 125n, 135, 160n, 260; see alsoExport controlsCommerce Department, see Department of
CommerceCommodity jurisdiction (CJ), 8n, 115, 165,260, 638Ð640Communications, xii, 20, 53Ð54Communications Assistance for LawEnforcement Act of 1995(CALEA), 216Ð221, 278, 281, 503,510Ð511text of, 540Ð550Competitive access providers, 356Compuserve, 148, 431Ð432nComputer Emergency Response Team(CERT), 241Ð242Computer Science andTelecommunications Board(CSTB), xviiiÐxix, 20n, 73nCryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX679Computer Security Act of 1987, 235Ð236text of, 551Ð557Computer System Security and PrivacyAdvisory Board (CSSPAB), 242Conference on Computers, Freedom, andPrivacy, xvii, 45n, 219nConfidentiality, 17, 53Ð54, 123Ð125, 371Ð373of communications, 356of data, 356, 374
defined, 3, 79Ð81, 108relative levels of, 181, 183, 254, 314reliance upon authentication, 373
see also Cryptography; encryption
Congress, see U.S. Congress
Constitutional issues regarding laws onencryption, viii, 7, 85n, 160Ð161n,271Ð273, 304Coordinating Committee (CoCom) nations,231, 251n, 310, 356, 434Ð436, 442,639Cordless phones, 218, 398n
Countermeasure, 356Credit cards, 22, 76, 481Crime prevention, xv, 10, 47, 323, 472Ð473,480Criminalizing useof cryptography for criminal purposes,12, 94, 273Ð274, 332Ð333of unescrowed cryptography, 192, 265Ð273Crook, Colin, 345Cryptanalysis, 62, 379n, 380nof 40-bit encryption algorithms, 8n, 63,73n, 115Ð117, 120Ð124, 276, 314Ð317of 56-bit encryption algorithms, 8, 63,71n, 121, 172, 288Ð289, 312, 316Ð318defined, 356see also Data Encryption Standard(DES); Strong encryptionCryptographicalgorithms, 62Ð64, 159defined, 356
secret, 171, 201Ð204applications programming interfaces(CAPI), 259Ð262, 311, 474Ð476sockets, 66, 127systems, 374Ð377attacks on, 378Ð383see also Modularity; KeyCryptographic Module Validation Program(CMVP), 233Cryptographyfor authentication, 3Ð4, 10, 55Ð56, 176,324Ð327, 469Ð472for confidentiality, 3Ð4, 8Ð9, 54, 176, 296,470Ð472for criminal purposes, 3Ð4, 10Ð11, 43Ð43n, 84, 91, 303Ð304for data integrity, 3Ð4, 10, 55, 176, 324Ð327, 472Ð473defined, 356
domestic availabilty of, 72Ð74, 135, 138,299, 310foreign availabilty of, 4, 214, 308
history of, xiiÐxiii, 52Ð54, 149Ð150, 202,364Ð365in information security products, 65Ð66,476foreign, 132Ð133market for, xii, 66Ð72, 135Ð136, 145Ð152,310for nonrepudiation, 55as one element of information security,10, 296, 298regulations relevant to (text of), 637Ð677strength of, 63, 152Ð153, 250see also Encryption
Cryptography policy, 16adopting standards, 7, 222, 290, 316committee recommendations on, viiiÐxvii, 1, 5Ð13, 303Ð339current U.S. policies, xi, 6, 15, 111Ð112,249, 298, 301history of, 414Ð420international dimensions of, 243Ð244,430Ð431, 438Ð449process of formulating, viii, 226public debate over, xvii, 4, 7, 297Ð298urgency regarding, xvÐxvi, 39Ð40,151Ð152proper objectives for, 57, 68, 297Ð303role of executive and legislativebranches, 7, 305see also Executive branch; Legislative
branch; Standards; U.S. CongressCSSPAB, see Computer System Security
and Privacy Advisory Board(CSSPAB)CSTB, see Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board(CSTB)Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.680INDEXDDam, Kenneth W., Committee Chair, xvÐxix, 343DARPA, see Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA)Dataaggregation, 459Ð460communications, 199, 441Ð442nversus data storage, 323Ð324, 528Ð529compression, 270Ð270n, 304integrity, 365Ð367, 374Data Encryption Standard (DES), 72, 207,223, 228Ð232, 288, 314Ð318, 334,357, 365, 388Ð389, 417Ð420triple-DES, 178, 203n, 214Ð215Date/time stamping, 57, 357, 371nDecompiling, 204, 357Decryption, 185, 357; see also Back door
access; CryptanalysisDecryption algorithm, 374Defense Advanced Research ProjectsAgency (DARPA), 241Defense Department, see Department of
DefenseDefense Information Systems Agency(DISA), 237Ð237nDefense Intelligence Agency (DIA), seeExecutive Order 12333Denial of service, 357
Department of Commerce, 73, 117, 128n,173, 176; see also Executive Order12472; Commerce Control List
(CCL)Department of Defense, 158, 187n, 237Ð238,487n; see also Executive Order
12333; Executive Order 12472Department of Energy, see Executive Order
12333Department of Justice, 274Department of State, 114Ð117, 121Ð122, 126,142Ð144, 162, 321; see alsoExecutive Order 12333; ExecutiveOrder 12472Department of the Treasury, 173, 176, 190,468; see also Executive Order
12333DES, see Data Encryption Standard (DES)
Deutch, John, 97Ð98DIA, see Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
Differential work factor cryptography, 264,287Ð288; see also Attacks on
cryptographic systemsDigests, 357Digitalcash, 339, 477Ð482information, 220, 280signatures, 57, 226Ð227, 261, 326, 357,367, 370stream, 355Digital Signature Standard (DSS), 176, 222Ð223, 225n, 229Ð230, 259, 301, 357,418, 488Digital Telephony Act, 357; see alsoCommunications Assistance for
Law Enforcement Act (CALEA)DISA, see Defense Information Systems
Agency (DISA)Disassembly, 156n, 204, 215, 357Disclosure of data, 357DNA computing, 393Ð394DOD, see Department of Defense
Double encryption. See Multiple encryption
DSS, see Digital Signature Standard (DSS)
Dual-use system, 358EEAA, see Export Administration Act (EAA)
EAR, see Export Administration
Regulations (EAR)Economiccompetitivenessof U.S. industry and businesses, 1Ð2,37Ð40, 99of U.S. information technologyindustry, x, 38Ð39, 73, 128Ð129,155Ð156espionage, 3, 46, 98ECPA, see Electronic Communications
Privacy Act (ECPA)EES, see Escrowed Encryption Standard
(EES)Electromagnetic emissions, monitoring, 64,397Ð398Electroniccommerce, vii, 24Ð26, 413, 478surveillancedefined, 587history of, 218, 410Ð413Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX681legal requirements for, 84Ð88, 396Ð410and minimization requirement,218n, 219, 400Ð401, 513see also Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act of 1978;
U.S.Intelligence Activities; Wireand Electronic CommunicationsInterception and Interception of
Oral Communications ActElectronic Communications Privacy Act(ECPA), 396Ð403, 412Ð413Elliptic curve cryptographic systems, 394E-mail, 403Ð403n, 469Encryption, 15Ð16defined, 53, 58Ð59, 90n, 372technicalities in legal definitions of,269Ð270, 273Ð274, 303, 332see also Confidentiality
Encryption algorithm, 374Error-correction, 366n
Escrowagents, 77affiliation of, 180, 189Ð193, 444certification of, 175liability of, 191, 197Ð198, 330, 452Ð454number of, 180, 183n, 188n, 189Ð194,212responsibilities of, 180, 194Ð198, 330,444Ð447, 452trustworthiness of, 190binding, 210Ð211, 215Escrowable encryption products, 182, 262Escrowed encryption, 15Ð16, 61, 81, 298,359benefits of, 170contract-based, 191Ð193, 263Ð264defined, 167Ð169economic implications, 177Ð182, 271,330government control of, 158, 266Ð268,328Ð332law enforcement benefits, 4, 9, 11, 184Ð187liabilities, 184, 329mandatory versus voluntary use, 185Ð188, 199, 265, 320Ð321policy issues associated with, 170proper escrowing, 177Ð178, 188, 213Ð214, 250nand signals intelligence, 175, 202Ð203versus  strong encryption, 169
weaknesses of, 183
see also Unescrowed encryption
Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES), xvi,9, 168Ð175, 181, 223, 301, 358,419Ð420, 488Evaluation, 358Exceptional access, 16, 80Ð81, 109business or corporate, 104Ð107defined, 169n, 250, 358end-user, 106Ð107, 320government, 81Ð104, 297time scale of operations, 94, 103voice versus data communications, 281Ð284Executive branch, role of, 7, 189Ð190, 231,291Ð292, 305Executive Order 12333 (U.S. IntelligenceActivities), 573-589Executive Order 12472 (Assignment ofNational Security andEmergency PreparednessTelecommunications Functions),
612-620Executive Order 12958 (Classified NationalSecurity Information), 589-612Export Administration Act (EAA), 114Ð115,118, 255, 415Export Administration Regulations (EAR),115, 415Ð416Part 779, Technical Data (text of), 656Ð677Export controls, 7Ð9, 15, 249Ð251, 298, 307Ð322circumvention of, 133corporate perceptions of, 152Ð153cryptography exemptions from, xi, 120Ð125, 144, 188, 256description of, 114Ð122dimensions of choice in, 252Ð253of dual-use items, 8, 118, 162, 264, 310economic impact of, 40, 153Ð154effect on national security, 157Ð165effect on sales, 145Ð153effectiveness of, 127Ð134elimination of, 251, 254
and end-use certification, 320export defined, 142foreign policy considerations, 162Ð163,170Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.682INDEXhistory of, 414Ð415impact on authentication products, 123Ð125international harmonization of, 8, 243Ð244, 256Ð257, 443, 447Ð449and liberal consideration, 117, 256Ð262,317Ð318licensing practices, current, 117, 122Ð127, 249Ð250licensing process for, 9, 114, 142Ð144,647Ð653, 667Ð669limiting domestic availability, 7, 12,134Ð138of other nations, 257, 434Ð436providing technical data, 9, 159Ð161,313Ð314rationale for, 113Ð114stimulating foreign competition, 8,155n, 155Ð159, 309threshold between CCL and USML,118Ð121, 138, 141, 254Ð255, 310Ð312, 415of transnational corporations, 126uncertainty of, 138Ð144, 251, 321Ð322see also Arms Export Control Act
(AECA); Commerce Control List(CCL); Export AdministrationRegulations (EAR); Foreignownership, control or interest
(FOCI); International Traffic inArms Regulations (ITAR)Export defined, 641FFacsimile communications, 2, 149FAR, see Federal Acquisition Regulations
(FAR)FBI, see Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI)FCC, see Federal Communications
Commission (FCC)Fear, uncertainty, doubt, 225Ð227Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR), 187n
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 82Ð83, 88Ð90, 138n, 184, 236Ð237,334n, 399, 423; see also
 Executive
Order 12333Federal Communications Commission(FCC), 220Ð221, 493; see alsoExecutive Order 12472Federal Emergency Management Agency(FEMA), see Executive Order
12472Federal government, information securityfor, 289Ð292, 328Ð332; see also
Computer Security Act of 1987Federal Information Processing Standards(FIPS), 485Ð488defined, 358
development of, 222Ð224NIST role in, 222, 289Ð290related to cryptography, 173, 176, 223,418Federal Reserve Board, 290Ð291FEMA, see Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)Fermat numbers, 386Ð387FIPS, see
 Federal Information Processing
Standards (FIPS)Firmware, 358First party, 358
FISA, see Foreign Intelligence SurveillanceAct (FISA) of 1978FOCI, see
 Foreign ownership, control or
interest (FOCI), U.S. companiesunderForeign Intelligence Surveillance Act(FISA) of 1978, 87Ð88, 173, 189,403Ð410, 494text of, 511Ð526Foreign ownership, control or interest(FOCI), U.S. companies under,
126nFortezza cards, 176Ð177, 225, 259Ð260, 468Freeh, Louis, 92nÐ93n, 93Ð94, 268, 281Freeware, 129n, 272; see also Internet
Fuller, Samuel H., 345Ð346Functionality, 358GGelb, Leslie H., 346General Services Administration (GSA), seeExecutive Order 12472GII, see Global information infrastructure
(GII)Global information infrastructure (GII),439Ð441n, 483Globalization, 27Ð29, 38, 50, 188, 308, 430GOSIP, see Government Open Systems
Interconnect (OSI) Profile (GOSIP)Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX683Government classification, xiii, 4, 238, 307;see also Executive Order 12958
Government Open Systems Interconnect(OSI) Profile (GOSIP), 224Ð225Government procurement, 225, 487nGraham, Ronald, xxxii, 346Ð347GSA, see General Services Administration
(GSA)HHackers, 67nHardwareproduct implementations in, 65, 74, 205,296, 369nsecurity advantages of, 130security disadvantages of, 206Ð209Hashes, 367; see also
 One-way hash
function; Secure hash algorithm;Secure Hash StandardHealth care industry, 256, 457, 459Ð461Hellman, Martin, 347Hewlett-Packard, 261nHomologation laws, 437IIBM, 228Ð229, 417Ð418IDEA block cipher, 229
Identification, 358Identification key, 358IITF, see Information Infrastructure Task
Force (IITF)Implementation, 358Import controls, 114Ð115, 436Ð438Informationproprietarypotential value of, 153Ð154security, 15, 66Ð68, 294Ð295government needs for, 10, 12, 46Ð48,157Ð159, 240, 267, 302private sector needs for, viiÐviii, 12Ð13, 30Ð31, 40Ð46, 152Ð153, 302,335Ð338threats to, xii, 2Ð3, 32Ð38, 153Ð154,239, 299technologies, viii, xii, 19Ð21need for research and development,12speed of change in, xv, 5, 281, 300Ð302technology industryand economic security, 22Ð23, 46,67Ð68and national security, vii, xv, 3Ð4, 9Ð11, 47Ð48, 94Ð104, 157Ð159U.S. leadership in, x, 38Ð39, 73, 128Ð129, 155Ð156, 299, 308Ð311theory, 364vulnerability, 15Ð50, 293Ð296warfare (IW), 35, 49, 108Information Infrastructure Task Force(IITF), 41, 242, 335, 483Inman, Bobby, xiii, 267Integrated product, 358Integrity, 359
Integrity check, 359, 366Intellectual property, protecting, 228Ð230,465, 482Ð484Intelligence communityand the intelligence cycle, 10, 425Ð429mission of, 95, 423Ð425regulation of, 87, 404Ð405n, 408, 423see also Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA); Executive Order 12333;
Federal Bureau of Investigation(FBI); Foreign IntelligenceSurveilllance Act (FISA) of 1978;National Security Agency (NSA);SIGINTInterception, 286Ð289, 359, 399, 490, 492Ð510Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 466Ð467International aspects of cryptographypolicy, 243similar and different national interests,viiiÐx, xivÐxv, 104, 431Ð434U.S. cooperation with other nations,102, 231Ð232, 331Ð332see also Export controls; Import controls;
Use controlsInternational Traffic in Arms Regulations(ITAR), 114Ð116, 120, 127, 133Ð137, 142, 159Ð161, 256, 359, 415Ð416, 476excerpts from Parts 120-123, 125, and126 (text of), 637Ð655Internet, 21, 34Ð35, 59, 64, 86n, 106n, 221,282, 432ngrowth of, 293loan application by, 458and networks, 52, 149
protocols, 224Ð225, 280Ð281Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.684INDEXsoftware distributed on, 129Ð132, 268see also Netscape Navigator; World
Wide WebInteroperability, 150, 178, 439, 443; see alsoStandardsInterpretation of digital streams, 220
IRS, see Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
ITAR, see International Traffic in Arms
Regulations (ITAR)IW, see Information warfare (IW)
JJudicial branch, role of, 190Justice Department, see
 Department of
JusticeKKatz, Ambassador Julius L., 347
KEAs, see Escrow agents
Keydefined, 202, 359, 378distribution, 359
distribution center (KDC), 377escrow. See Escrowed encryption
escrow agents (KEAs). See Escrow
agentsescrow encryption, 359
generation, 211Ð213, 454length, 63, 214Ð215, 287Ð288, 319, 353, 380management, 53, 74Ð75, 133, 173, 223,280, 359, 376Ð377retrieval, 284Ð285revocation, 105n, 213, 452Key Exchange Algorithm, 176LLatent demand, for cryptography products,149Ð151Law enforcement, 302central decryption facility for, 285Ð286impact of cryptography on, 3Ð4, 9Ð10,90Ð94, 184Ð187, 322Ð335impact of information technologies on,viii, 46Ð47, 333Ð335infringing on civil liberties, viii, 45n, 93requirements for escrowed encryption,180, 194Ð197and seizure of records, 81Ð83technical center for, 334wiretapping/electronic surveillance, seeElectromagnetic emissions;Wiretappingsee also Communications Assistance for
Law Enforcement Act of 1995(CALEA); Federal Bureau ofInvestigation (FBI); Executive
Order 12333Law enforcement access field (LEAF), 171Ð173Layered encryption, 277; see also
 Multiple
encryptionLEAF, see Law enforcement access field
(LEAF)Legislative branch, role of, 7, 199Link encryption, 11Ð11n, 274Ð276, 279, 327Ð328Lost sales, 146Ð148, 214MManufacturing industry, 461Ð463, 469Ð470;see also Vendors
Marketdevelopment, 151Ð152forces, xv, 7, 305Ð307Master Card, see Credit cards
Microsoft Windows NT, 135, 259Ð260Modularity, 140Ð142, 223Monitoring, 359
MooreÕs law, 63, 276, 385nMultiple encryption, 58Ð59, 178, 215,383Mutual Law Enforcement AssistanceTreaties, 331, 446NNACIC, see National Counterintelligence
Center (NACIC)National Communications System (NCS),see Executive Order 12472
National Computer Security Center(NCSC), 232Ð233National Counterintelligence Center(NACIC), 2, 242Ð243National information infrastructure (NII),235, 483Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX685National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST), 228, 235Ð238,335Ð337, 365, 418Ð420, 485Ð488public-key infrastructure requirements,450Ð454see also Federal Information Processing
Standards (FIPS)National Security Act of 1947, see Executive
Order 12333National Security Agency (NSA), xi, xiv,158, 227Ð228, 235Ð241, 289, 335,338, 416Ð420, 422Ð423role in export licensing, 123n, 126, 128n,141Ð144, 162, 256role in Skipjack/Clipper, 173n, 174
see also Executive Order 12333
National Security Council (NSC), seeNational Security Directive 42;
Executive Order 12333National Security Directive 42 (text of),620Ð628National Security Telecommunications andInformation Systems SecurityCommittee (NSTISSC), seeNational Security Directive 42NCS, see National Communications System
(NCS)NCSC, see National Computer Security
Center (NCSC)Netscape Navigator, 73n, 76, 124, 132n,135, 208Network Working Group, 280n
Network-based encryption, 199, 278Ð281Networks, 149applications of, 282Ð284backward compatibility issues, 151nvulnerabilities of, 52, 195, 274Neumann, Peter G., 347Ð348New Forum nations, 442; see also CoCom
nationsNII, see National information infrastructure
(NII)NIST, see National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST)Node, 359Nonrepudiation, 359, 365, 370Ð371, 479NSA, see National Security Agency (NSA)
NSTISSC, see National Security
Telecommunications andInformation Systems Security
Committee (NSTISSC)OObject code, 360Object linking and embedding (OLE), 360,475OECD, see Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development(OECD) nationsOffice of Management and Budget (OMB),335, 486Ð487; see also Executive
Order 12958OLE, see Object linking and embedding
(OLE)OMB, see Office of Management and
Budget (OMB)Omnibus Crime Control and Safe StreetsAct, 396Ð397One-way hash function, 360, 367Online services, 217Ð218, 221; see alsoAmerica Online; Compuserve;
Netscape Navigator; Prodigy;World Wide WebOperating system, 360
Oral communications, see Wire and
Electronic CommunicationsInterception and Interception ofOral Communications ActOrganization for Economic Cooperationand Development (OECD)nations, 244, 331, 442, 448OSI, see Government Open Systems
Interconnect (OSI) Profile(GOSIP)Ozzie, Raymond, 348PParallel processing, 63Partial key escrow, 180Password, 360
Patent and Trademark Office (PTO), 230Patents, xii, 228Ð230PCMCIA card (or PC-card), 176, 360, 468;see also Fortezza cards
Pen Register and Traffic Analysis Act (textof), 526Ð540Pen registers, 62, 84, 402defined, 360, 540Perry, William, 310
Personal identification number (PIN), 360Petroleum industry, 463Ð465Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.686INDEXPGP, see Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
Pharmaceutical industry, 200, 465Ð466PIN, see Personal identification number
(PIN)Plaintext, 9, 53, 270, 355, 360, 374Plug-in cryptography, see Cryptographic
socketsPretty Good Privacy (PGP), 76, 163Ð164,182Private-key cryptography, 360, 375Prodigy, 148Productscertification and evaluation of, 70cryptography, 148, 201Ð208defaults, 250, 258
integrated or general-purpose, 65Ð66stand-alone or security-specific, 65, 149,208Ð211weaknesses in, 74Proper escrowing, see Escrowed encryption
Proprietary algorithms, 70, 174, 203verifying, 207nProtocol, 73analyzers, 62
negotiation, 71Pseudorandom function, 367PSTN, see Public switched
telecommunications network(PSTN)PTO, see Patent and Trademark Office
(PTO)Public Cryptography Study Group, 267Ð268Public Law 103-160, ix, xivPublic switched telecommunicationsnetwork (PSTN), 11counterintelligence access to, 534Ð535national security/emergencypreparedness (NS/EP) network,35vulnerability of, 34Ð37, 327Ð328see also National Security Directive 42Public-key certificate, 360Ð361Public-key cryptography, 53, 70, 290, 296,313, 353, 360, 375; see also NIST
QQuantumcomputing, 392Ð393cryptography, 394Ð395RRC2/RC4 algorithms, 361Reagan, President Ronald, 99, 423; see alsoExecutive Order 12333; Executive
Order 12472Real-time surveillance, 89Ð90, 103Reliability, 361
Remailer, 361Reverse engineering, 205, 210, 230, 361Risks addressed by cryptography, 361,469Ð473RSA algorithm, 182, 227Ð229, 313n, 325,361, 376RSA Data Security Conference, 141nSSafety margins in key length, 361, 384Ð385Satellite uplinks, 438
Schmults, Edward C., 348Schneier, Bruce, 160n, 163Ð165Second party, 361
Secrecy, xiiiÐxiv, 201Ð208, 307, 378Secret-keycryptography, 53, 171, 366, 375cryptosystem, 361, 383Ð384Secure hash algorithm, 361Ð362, 370nSecure Hash Standard, 176, 223, 362Secure Sockets Layer protocol, 124Secure Telephone Unit (STU), 74Ð75, 235Security, 362Security Policy Board (SPB), 241Security-specific cryptography product,362SED, see Shipper
Õs Export Declaration(SED)Shannon, Claude, 364Shareware, 362ShipperÕs Export Declaration (SED), 119SIGINT (Signals intelligence)and cryptography, 101Ð102, 114, 317,335, 428historical examples of, 96Ð99, 427utility of, 87Ð88, 100Ð101, 174Ð175, 421Ð423, 470Ð471Signaling System 7, 34Skipjack algorithm, 171Ð172, 176, 201, 212n,230, 362, 383, 391, 420Slippery slope, 266Smith, W.Y., Committee Vice Chair, 343Ð344Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX687Softwareadvantages of, 191Ð192backward compatibility, 151n, 151Ð152disadvantages of, 62, 64, 130integrated, 148object-oriented, 137n, 140, 165
product implementations in, 20Ð21, 65,204Ð205Source code, 362
Sovereign immunity, 189, 199SPB, see Security Policy Board (SPB)
Specification, 362
Spillover effect, 123Ð125Spoofing, 362, 367Stand-alone cryptography product, 362
Standards, 70Ð71, 197, 222, 232Ð234, 254,306, 485Ð486n, 551Ð556State Department, see Department of State
Steganography, 270n, 372Ð372nStone, Elliot M., 348Ð349Strategic intelligence, 97Ð101Strong encryption, 101Ð102, 114, 123, 170,254, 296, 382Ð383STU, see Secure Telephone Unit (STU)
STU-III, 362Superencryption, 269, 438Symmetriccryptography, 53Ð54, 172n, 362, 375Ð376cryptosystem, 362System, 362TTactical intelligence, 96Ð97Taxation, 482
TCP/IP, 225Telephony, see Facsimile communications;
Voice communicationsTEMPEST techniques, 64Third party access, 362Ð363; see also
Exceptional accessThreat, 363Time stamping, 357Title III intercept, see Wire and ElectronicCommunications Interceptionand Interception of OralCommunications ActToken, 363TPEP, see Trusted Product Evaluation
Program (TPEP)Traffic analysis, see Pen Register and
Traffic Analysis ActTranslucent cryptography, 277Ð278Transparency, 185Trap-and-trace devices, 84, 402defined, 363, 540
see also Pen Register and Traffic
Analysis ActTreasury Department, see Department of
the TreasuryTrojan horses, 56n, 64Ð65n, 363Trust, 363, 480Ð482Trusted Product Evaluation Program(TPEP), 233Trustworthiness, 363, 379
Turner, Stansfield, 98UUnescrowed encryption, 7, 181Ð183, 186Ð187, 199, 268Ð273, 303Ð304United States Postal Service (USPS), 468U.S. Code, Title 18, Chapter 119, see Wire
and Electronic Communications
Interception and Interception ofOral Communications Act (textof)U.S. Code, Title 18, Chapter 121 and 206,see Pen Register and Traffic
Analysis Act (text of)U.S. Code, Title 22, Chapter 39, see Arms
Export Control Act (AECA)U.S. Code, Title 50, Chapter 36, see Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act of1978 (text of)U.S. Congress, viii, 162, 187, 231, 305, 332Ð333oversight by, 587
reports to, 508, 524Ð525, 539, 550, 561see also Legislative branch, role of
U.S. Munitions List (USML), 114Ð117, 125Ð127, 135Ð137, 140, 162Ð163, 389,644Ð646separating cryptography products on,264Use controls on cryptography, 436Ð438USML, see U.S. Munitions List (USML)
USPS, see United States Postal Service
(USPS)Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information SocietyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.688INDEXVVendors, role of, 140, 149Ð153, 191, 206,274VeriSign, 76Viruses, 64, 206
Visa, see Credit cards
Voice communications, secure, 174, 278Ð280vs data communications, 199, 221, 280Ð281Vulnerabilities, 24, 57, 293Ð296, 363WWare, Willis H., 349Weak encryption, 29, 61Ð62, 101, 257Ð258,276Web of trust, 75Ð76Windows NT, see Microsoft Windows NT
Wire and Electronic CommunicationsInterception and Interception ofOral Communications Act (text
of), 489Ð511Wireless communications, viiÐviii, 61, 275,279Ð280; see also Cellular phones;
Cordless phonesWiretapping, 62, 103, 218Ð220, 439legal framework governing, 84Ð88, 170and protection of civil liberties, 44n,285n, 285Ð286utility of, 82Ð84see also Electronic surveillance
Work factor, 64n, 363World Wide Web, 65nZZimmerman, Philip, 163Ð164