DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/5260Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information andCommunication Technology304 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05483-6 | DOI 10.17226/5260Panel on Planning for Scientific and Technological Information (STI) Systems inSub-Saharan Africa, National Research CouncilBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BRIDGE BUILDERSAfrican Experiences with Information and
Communication Technology
Office of International Affairs
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C. 1996
iBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 
 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
 Washington, DC
 20418NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine for their special

competence and with regard for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
This report has been prepared by the editorial subcommittee of the Advisory Panel on Planning
for Scientific and Technological Information (STI) Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa. Support for the

project and for this report was provided by the Carnegie Corporation of New York.
A limited number of copies of this report are available from:

Office of International Affairs
National Research Council
2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.

Washington, D.C. 20418
Additional copies are available for sale from: National Academy Press 2101 Constitution
Avenue. N.W. Box 285 Washington, D.C. 20418 Tel: 1-800-624-6242 or (202)334-3313 (in the

Washington Metropolitan Area).
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 96-68711
International Standard Book Number 0-309-05483-4
Copyright 1996 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
iiBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Panel on Planning for Scientific and Technological Information
(STI) Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa
Co-chairsDR. JOHN BLACK, Chief Librarian (retired), University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada
JANE BORTNICK GRIFFITH, Chief, Science Policy Research Division,
Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
MembersDR. GBADE A. ALABI, Department of Library, Archival, and Information
Studies, Faculty of Education, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria
STEVE CISLER, Senior Scientist, Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, California

DR. NANCY HAFKIN, Head, Pan African Development Information Systems
(PADIS), United Nations/Economic Commission for Africa, Addis Ababa,

EthiopiaDR. HEATHER HUDSON, Director, Telecommunications Program, University
of San Francisco, McLaren College of Business, San Francisco, California
DR. BERNARD LOWN (IOM), Lown Cardiovascular Center, Brookline,
MassachusettsTHEOPHILUS E. MLAKI, Director of Information and Documentation, 
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
DR. ALEX TINDIMUBONA, African Science and Technology Exchange,
Kampala, UgandaStaffWENDY D. WHITE, Senior Program Officer, Office of International Affairs
PAMELA GAMBLE, Assistant, Office of International Affairs
iiiBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, non-profit, self-perpetuating society
of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to

the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.

Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy

has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and

technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of

Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding

engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,

sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the

federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering

programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and

recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Harold Liebowitz is president

of the National Academy of Engineering.

The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the

examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts

under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its

congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own

initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Kenneth I.

Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.

The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with

the Academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal

government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the

National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in

providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering

communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute

of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Harold Liebowitz are chairman and vice

chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.

The Office of International Affairs (OIA) is concerned with the development of

international and national policies to promote effective application of science and

technology to economic and social problems facing both industrialized and

developing countries. OIA participates in international cooperative activities, engages

in joint studies and projects with counterpart organizations, manages scientific

exchange programs, and represents the Academy complex at many national and

international meetings directed toward facilitating international cooperation in science

and engineering. Dr. F. Sherwood Rowland, Dr. Harold Forsen, and Dr. David Rall

are the foreign secretaries of the National Academy of Sciences, the National

Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine, respectively.
ivBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceBridge-Builders: African Experiences with Information and Communication
Technology brings good news from that continent. This volume tells sixteen
remarkable stories
Šfirst-person accounts of how information and
communication technologies (ICT) have been successfully introduced into

institutions for the benefit of scientists and engineers in sub-Saharan Africa. The

projects described by the authors are case studies that focus on the lessons learned

in designing and implementing projects dealing with scientific and technological

information (STI) and that examine the impacts these projects have had. For the

most part, these are not big projects in terms of funding. They do, however,

demonstrate just how much can be accomplished through leadership, dedication,

and determination. The authors are very honest in discussing the problems they

faced and the lessons they learned.
By providing this systematic examination of the lessons learned by these
project managers, the National Research Council's Advisory Panel on Planning
for STI Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa hopes to encourage the donor community
and many others in the STI community to engage in strategic planning for STI

and to strengthen the design and management of scientific and technical systems.

The Advisory Panel expects this volume to contribute to the development of

national STI projects that are based on a firm and educated comprehension of

what is already in place and to catalyze necessary linkages between STI

institutions and actors so that national STI networks can be developed to support

African scientists and engineers. The stories told by these authors should also

encourage managers of other fledgling STI initiatives whose objectives are

similar or complementary.
PREFACEvBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This volume has been a long time in the making. Since 1989, the Advisory
Panel has observed the STI scene in Africa with growing interest. Through a

number of workshops and seminars in Africa and through the travel of staff and

panel members, we have had the opportunity to observe, first-hand, the growing

impact of STI in Africa. We have also been privileged to meet the authors from

the volume and many others who are struggling to bring ICT to their institutions
and countries.The authors included in this volume are not the only successful ICT project
managers in Africa and the panel regrets that it had neither the time nor the

resources to bring more success stories to light. We hope that the NCR can salute

additional projects in future volumes of case studies. In the meantime, we trust

that those bridge builders whose work is not described in this volume will be
encouraged to share their activities with us and with others in their countries who
can benefit from their experiences.
This volume would not have been possible without the tireless efforts of the
authors themselves. They patiently wrote, rewrote, answered questions, and

brought their contributions to the standards demanded of them. The editorial

review committee, which I also chaired and which was composed of panel
members Nancy Hafkin, Theo Mlaki, G.B. Alabi, and Alex Tindimubona, gave
much of their time to read drafts of the studies and make queries of the authors.

Their knowledge of the field and their expertise on the situation in Africa have

been invaluable.
As chair of the Advisory Panel, I wish to acknowledge the Carnegie
Corporation of New York, whose generous support of this project made this

volume possible. Realizing that information and communication technologies

could only be tools of empowerment for those who had access to them, Carnegie

helped to "jumpstart" the information revolution in Africa by supporting many of
the projects described in 
Bridge Builders
. By supporting small pilot and
demonstration projects, Carnegie has helped innovative project managers

overcome the social, technical, political, and economic barriers to introducing

new ideas and technologies.I also wish to acknowledge the leadership role of the Office of International
Affairs (OIA) of the National Research Council. Since 1989, they have been

helping donors, policy-makers, and project managers realize the benefits and

problems associated with the introduction of information and communication

technologies. Through this and proceeding projects, they have encouraged the
Advisory Panel and others to study many aspects of STI activities and to
concentrate on the role information and communication services can play in

decreasing scientific isolation and in improving the effectiveness of scientific

research.Most of all the OIA, through this Advisory Panel, and Carnegie have proven
that small projects can have a big impact. Projects that encourage the process of

learning, familiarize users with computers and other information technologies,

and demonstrate the use of these technologies in an everyday setting often have a

greater impact than large projects that tax scarce resources.
PREFACEviBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Finally, on behalf of the Advisory Panel, I want to give particular thanks to
several OIA staff members. First, our appreciation goes to Pamela Gamble, who

made sure everyone arrived at the writing workshops when they were supposed to

be there and who handled all other logistical concerns with grace, good humor,

and her usual efficiency. We also want to thank Wendy White, the NRC program

officer who assisted the Advisory Panel throughout its activities. Her knowledge
of the African STI environment and the people involved, combined with her
sensitivity to the African context, has been invaluable to the work of the panel

and, in particular, to the completion of this volume. Her willingness to share her

expertise and to provide moral support to all involved goes far beyond the line of

duty.Together, the Advisory Panel members, the case study authors, and the OIA
staff have a broad understanding of STI, an appreciation for the unique

opportunities and challenges in Africa, a thorough knowledge of ongoing STI

activities, and a demonstrated commitment to create an enabling environment

within which African STI networks can flourish. Their wisdom, vision, and

dedication are reflected in this report.
John B. Black, 
ChairmanAdvisory PanelPREFACEviiBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviiiBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  INTRODUCTION 1  CASE STUDIES ON THE INTRODUCTION OF CD-ROM TO
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
 11  The CD-ROM Service for the University of Dar es Salaam
by John M. Newa 13  CD-ROM for Health Information in Zimbabwe
by Helga Patrikios
 27  Background Summary: African Index Medicus Project
 45  Communications for Better Health Project in Zambia
by Regina Shakakata
 47  CASE STUDIES ON DESKTOP PUBLISHING
 63  Desktop Publishing at the University of Zimbabwe
by Xavier F. Carelse
 65  Desktop Publishing at the Tanzania Commission for Science and
Technologyby Albina Kasango 85  Environmental Publishing Network
ŠENVIRONET at ICIPEScience Pressby Agnes Katama
 95  Innovations in Desktop Publishing at the African Academy of
Sciences 1989Œ1992by Alex R. Tindimubona
 109CONTENTSixBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  CASE STUDIES ON ELECTRONIC NETWORKING
 121  Electronic Networking for the Research Community in Ethiopia
by Lishan Adam 123  Networking in West Africa
by Moussa Fall 141  Background Summary: SatelLife and HealthNet
 153  MUKLA: Evolution of a Homegrown Network in Uganda
by Charles Musisi
 157  The UNIMA Fidonet Network: Computer Networking for Com-
munications in Malawi

by Paulos Nyirenda
 177  Background Summary: A Global Computer Network for Change
 189  Bringing the Internet to Zambia
by Neil Robinson
 191  CASE STUDIES ON THE COLLECTION, MANAGEMENT,
AND DISSEMINATION OF LOCAL INFORMATION

RESOURCES 215  NAPRECA and Its Role in the Dissemination of Information on
Natural Products Research in Africa

by Ermias Dagne
 217  A Socioeconomic Development Information System for Botswana
by Stella Monageng
 233  KEMRI's Management Information Systemby James N. Muttunga
 247  The Ghana National Scientific and Technological Information
Network Project
by John A. Villars
 259  CONCLUSION 273  APPENDIXES  A List of authors
 281B List of acronyms and abbreviations
 283C Glossary 285CONTENTSxBridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IntroductionBACKGROUNDSince 1989, with support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the
National Research Council (NRC) through its Office of International Affairs
(OIA) has reviewed and identified ways to strengthen the state of planning,
design, and management of scientific and technical information (STI) services in

selected African countries. The program has studied many aspects of STI

activities, including database access and management, library development,

scientific publishing and communication, and the role information technologies

play in supporting these. The OIA program has concentrated on the role

information and communication services play in decreasing scientific isolation

and in improving the effectiveness of scientific research.
In 1989, an OIA-sponsored meeting in Nairobi identified the information
and communication technologies that held the most potential for the African
scientific and research community.
1 Looking at information and communication
both as inputs to and results of the scientific process, the workshop participants

identified CD-ROM, desktop publishing, and electronic networking as key

information technologies for African scientists. In addition, they identified the

collection, management and dissemination of local information resources as an

area of both great need and potential in Africa.
Since that workshop, OIA's Advisory Panel on Planning for STI Systems in
sub-Saharan Africa has provided advice to the managers of the diverse STI
projects that the Corporation and others are supporting in Africa. The panel found
thatINTRODUCTION1Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.some of these projects are models for the further development of STI services in
their communities and that the project managers are in a unique position to

contribute to their own country's national STI planning efforts.
They could play this important role, however, only if they first analyzed
their own projects and looked closely at the experience and knowledge they had

gained. The panel recommended to Carnegie that it draw on its knowledge of STI

projects in Africa to produce a volume of case studies that would:
Ł   focus on the lessons learned in designing and implementing STI projects;
 the impacts these projects have had;

 in our information base;

  share innovative and cost-effective ways to market new products and
services and ways to measure the impact of these on the users; and
  share information on proposal formulation, evaluation methods, and
information marketing.
THE EDITORIAL AND SELECTION PROCESSES
To collect the case studies, the Advisory Panel appointed an editorial
subcommittee to design and manage the process in an efficient manner and to

formally select the authors to be invited. This subcommittee met in Addis Ababa,

Ethiopia in April 1995. The subcommittee decided that the projects selected for

inclusion in the case study volume should demonstrate the use of the key
information technologies and services that had been identified as most critical in
the 1989 Nairobi Conference.
The subcommittee then debated the criteria to be used in the final selection
of case study authors. They decided that each project selected for inclusion in the

case study volume must:
  Be catalytic
Šit should promote STI beyond the original parameters of the
project and have an effect beyond what might have been expected;
  Demonstrate the use of local resources and not be totally dependent on
external funding;
  Be relatively small in terms of the amount of external funding available to
it; demonstrable results; that is, the project must be beyond the planning
stages and be offering services to users; and
  Highlight the personal commitment and leadership of an STI pioneer.
After identifying many projects that fit these criteria, the subcommittee
looked for gender and geographical balance and selected projects to represent as

many countries in sub-Saharan Africa as possible. Following much debate, the

subcommittee reached a consensus and nominated 18 projects to be included in

the case study volume. (One nomination was later withdrawn after the

subcommittee determined that it did not meet the criteria; and one nominee did
not accept the invitation.)
INTRODUCTION2Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The panel chairman wrote to the nominees and invited them to draft
personal and informal accounts of their specific projects. The authors received an

outline that detailed the common elements that they were to include in their

accounts. Those authors who committed to writing a case study then participated

in one of three writing workshops that took place in July and August 1995 in

Harare, Nairobi, and Accra. Authors came to these workshops with all the
background materials they needed to write their chapters. In a collegial
atmosphere, far from the pressures of their offices, they worked hard to produce

first drafts of their studies. These drafts were reviewed by the subcommittee and

the authors have had the opportunity to submit revised versions of their case

studies.The title of this volume, 
Bridge Builders: African Experiences with
Information and Communication Technology
, is meant to describe the active role
these authors have played in introducing new information technologies into their

institutions. Their personal accounts will illustrate the steps they are taking to

bridge the gap between the ''information haves" and the "information have-nots"

and to build bridges between their countries and the worldwide movements

related to the global information infrastructure (GII). Step-by-step they are
contributing in a major way to the development of Africa's information culture.
THE INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY (ICT) SCENE IN AFRICA
The pace and complexity of modern research have greatly increased the
information and communication needs of researchers, scientists, engineers, and

their institutions. Research and development relies heavily on the ability to gather

reliable data; have access to widely dispersed data and information; collaborate

on projects; hold discussions and conferences; and disseminate the results.

Information and communication technologies can help the scientist at each step

of his or her research endeavor.
Taken together, this collection of case studies reflects a changing ICT scene
in Africa. In 1989, the Nairobi workshop participants were concerned about

which information technologies would be most suited to their situations. By
1995, project managers had proven just how successful the introduction of ICT

could be in order to support science and research.
The problems are a long way from being solved. In some areas, the paucity
of software written in local languages hinders adoption of information

technologies. In other areas, basic information-processing tools are still in short

supply. Computer equipment is expensive and hard to maintain. Consumables,

such as paper, ink, toner, and other necessities of the computer age, almost

always have to be imported and are thus terribly expensive. Regular contact

among colleagues or experts in the field is still difficult. Many times, it is just as

difficult to communicate with scientists within a country as it is to communicate

with scientists abroad. African scientists and engineers still face isolation because

of poor or expensive communication channels and
INTRODUCTION3Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.because of a chronic shortage of funds, particularly hard currency, for purchasing
books, periodicals, and subscriptions to international sources of information.
In 1989, the Advisory Panel sensed that policy-makers and donors were not
well focused on these problems. Now, six years later, project managers,

government ministers, donors, and scientists seem more prepared to recognize

that developments in the fields of information and communications services and

technologies offer vast opportunities to make real progress. The pace at which the

price of communications and information systems has fallen has undermined the

previously rigid link between a nation's wealth and its information richness.
Through the efforts of individuals such as the ones featured in this volume, more
and more people recognize that informatics (the merger of communication and

information technologies) plays a fundamental role in the development of a

science culture and the building of a scientific infrastructure in developing

countries.There have been several highly-visible initiatives since the 1989 meeting in
Nairobi. In March 1994, Vice President Gore of the United States advanced the

concept of a Global Information Infrastructure (GII) in a speech to the

International Telecommunications Union's World Telecommunication

Development Conference in Buenos Aires, Argentina. He proposed that the GII

be composed of local, national, and regional networks. As a "network of

networks," the GII should facilitate the global sharing of information,
interconnection and communication
Šcreating a global information marketplace.
The prominent support of the GII, or the information superhighway, has
served to focus unprecedented attention (and much hype) on the importance of

information and communication technologies. In the last few years, Africa has

taken several important steps to be a part of the GII.
First, in April 1995, the Economic Commission of Africa (ECA) hosted the
African Regional Symposium on Telematics for Development. Shortly after that,

the Conference of African Ministers responsible for Economic and Social

Development and Planning passed a resolution entitled 
Building Africa's
Information Highway, 
which called for the establishment of a high-level working
group on information technologies and communications in Africa made up of

African technical experts.
Under the leadership of the Pan African Development Information System
(PADIS), this group has met twice. It is studying the economic and social and the

scientific and technological implications of the information highway for Africa.

It will advise the Executive Secretary of the ECA and African governments on

policies and strategies that will assist in confronting and taking full advantage of

this global phenomenon. In May 1996, there will be meeting of the ECA
Conference of Ministers in Addis Ababa at which the high-level working group
will issue a paper called "An African Information and Communication Initiative

to Accelerate SocioEconomic Development."
INTRODUCTION4Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In addition, the South African government is organizing a Ministerial
Conference on the Information Society and Developing Countries, also in May

1996. This meeting, which is inspired by the 1995 G-7 meeting on the same

topic, might further advance the international consensus on the fundamental

principles underlying the development of the Global Information Infrastructure.
Finally, of special interest to Africa, is the authorization of the Leland
Initiative, or the Africa Global Information Infrastructure Gateway Project. This

is a $ 15 million cross-cutting project managed by the U.S. Agency for

International Development (USAID). Its primary purpose is to disseminate the

benefits of the Internet and other GII technologies to people in 20 countries in

sub-Saharan Africa in which USAID works. Those countries closest to attaining

connectivity will receive benefits from the initial phases of the project.
So, while the promises of the information age may be something less than
the media attention would have us believe, there is no question that people are

paying increased attention to the potential of information and communication

technologies in support of science and development.
LESSONS LEARNED IN THE CASE STUDIES
The sixteen case study authors whose stories appear in this volume represent
important stepping stones in the development of Africa's information highway. In

many ways, they are pioneers
Šintroducing new technologies before they have
achieved widespread acceptance. They have paved the way for others because

they have proven that, with enough perseverance and personal energy, the
technologies can work and can improve information services to the scientific
community. Nothing is more basic to scientific institutions than the tools needed

to conduct research, engage in discussions with other scientists, and publish the

results of research in a form accessible to all. The case studies include

descriptions of how ICT can help support and build capacity for all of these

functions.CD-ROMThe first three studies, written by John Newa, Regina Shakakata, and Helga
Patrikios, describe the introduction of CD-ROM into university libraries. At the

1989 Nairobi conference, the participants expressed great excitement over the

potential of this technology. Since then, CD-ROM has achieved widespread

recognition as a highly cost-effective and locally viable medium for accessing

international databases. It also has potential for delivering full text documents to
areas where the source documents are hard to obtain. Its qualities of speed,
power, and, above all, user-friendliness in information retrieval, and its value as a

training medium for online searching are detailed in these three studies.
INTRODUCTION5Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Here are some of the lessons learned by these case study authors:
   High-level support of the projects has been critical to their success. Such
support often allows for the provision of local funding and helps to

publicize the service.
   The selection of the right vendors, not only for the equipment but for the
databases, is extremely important. The products vary in content, user

friendliness, and search capability and some are more suited to the

equipment found in Africa than others.
   Planners must face and meet the costs associated with maintaining the
equipment and subscribing to the databases. The one-time provision of set-

up costs is not sufficient.
   CD-ROM projects can have side benefits. Two of the case studies discuss
the authors' roles in supplying records for the African Index Medicus

Project (described on pages 45
Œ46).   Document delivery is still a problem. Many CD-ROM databases help
researchers identify articles that they cannot obtain locally. Detailed

abstracts are very helpful, as are full text CD-ROMs containing, perhaps,

documents in the public domain.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING
The next four studies are written by Xavier Carelse, Albina Kasango, Agnes
Katama, and Alex Tindimubona. Desktop publishing (or DTP) is the product of

technological advances in personal computing, print graphics, and computer-

generated typography. DTP can be used to design and produce anything that can

be printed: newspapers, books, posters, catalogs, journals, articles, or annual

reports.Each of these case studies emphasizes a slightly different aspect of
publishing. Xavier Carelse discusses the equipment needed and lays out a logical

progression for upgrades; Albina Kasango talks about training and personal

commitment; Agnes Katama discusses the steps taken to create a sustainable DTP

unit and gives some creative examples of internship, or attachment, programs;

and Alex Tindimubona discusses peer review systems and other aspects of a

high-quality, scientific press.
Some of the lessons learned by the desktop publishing authors include:
   Training of the DTP operator took unexpected time and resources.
   It is important to select equipment that is compatible with what the
institution is using. Buying the most popular or the easiest-to-use

equipment is not always the best course.
   DTP takes more than the basic computer: peripherals such as scanners,
printers, and photocopiers are also essential.
INTRODUCTION6Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   DTP should not be confused with simple typesetting or design on a
computer. A DTP operation should be organized as much like a

professional press as possible. Project managers need to pay attention to

deadlines, peer review, organization, and cost recovery.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING
The GII
Šand its system of interconnected network
Šhas dramatic
implications for broadening the knowledge base in most scientific fields. It is

becoming more important than ever for African scientists to be 
electronically 
connected to colleagues, information, and literature in order to keep up with

advances in their field, exchange ideas and information, and communicate the
results of their research. Easier communication and more readily available
channels for information exchange create new opportunities for international

cooperation. Scientists can: collaborate more easily; develop problem-solving

models; tap the information resources of other scientists and institutions; and

discuss important issues without the need for expensive or time-consuming

travel. Systems operators and scientists can also benefit from remote systems in

order to share software and gain access to computing resources. Indeed, access to

networks and digital libraries may well be as important to economic and social

well-being in the Information Age as access to trade routes and natural resources

was in the Agricultural and Industrial Ages.
2Building and sustaining electronic networks in Africa has been challenging
but, as the next five case study authors prove, it is possible. Lishan Adam,

Moussa Fall, Charles Musisi, Paulos Nyirenda, and Neil Robinson describe their

efforts to bring electronic networks and, eventually, the Internet to their

institutions or countries.
The lessons they have learned include:
   Training is the main aspect of infrastructure development and should not be
under-played.   Building local networks first helps develop a user base that will be willing
to sustain international connections and more sophisticated applications.
   Good network management, which includes marketing, accounting, and
statistical analysis, is important, no matter how small the network.
   Network start-up takes considerable time and energy. Often users are
unsure of the technology and require extra support in order to get started.
   Certain hardware is more suitable to poor telecommunication lines and
harsh environmental conditions than others. It pays to study what has

worked well for others.
   Software written in local languages helps users adapt faster to computer-
based communications.INTRODUCTION7Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The transition from subsidized to fee-based email services can be difficult
and controversial; while subsidies might be critical in introducing

networking technologies, they can contribute to a climate in which users

demand free information services.
COLLECTION, MANAGEMENT, AND DISSEMINATION OF
LOCAL INFORMATION RESOURCES
The final four case study authors focus less on a specific technology and
more on developing local information resources and services for a specific group

of people. Ermias Dagne describes how a group of scientists interested in natural

products research has formed its own network in order to convene professional

meetings, sponsor special training opportunities, and publish journals and

conference proceedings. Stella Monageng discusses her activities in creating and

managing a specialized database for Botswana's socioeconomic development
information. James Muttunga writes about his efforts to introduce computer
technology and information management systems at the Kenyan Medical

Research Institute. John Villars describes a national information network that his

institution has developed for Ghana.
The lessons learned by these four authors are broad-ranging but include:
   Too little attention is paid to collecting locally-produced information. What
is available is often not distributed to those who could use it most.
   Funding for these types of projects is extremely difficult to come by and
virtually impossible if support for the project does not come from the

highest levels of the institution.
   Equipment purchase, maintenance, and repair can be difficult. It is hard to
get reliable and unbiased information about technology resources.
   Training must be an essential component of the project.
   If the project is to be implemented in phases, then it is best to install
equipment first in those units that have an existing and specific need for

automation; otherwise, the equipment may go unused and this will cause

frustration all around.
   Network programs thrive on a give-and-take basis. All members must be
willing to shoulder some of the burden.
CONCLUSIONInformation and communication technologies over the past few years have
changed the way in which we work and communicate with each other and these

case studies demonstrate in a very personal way just how much has changed in

the way science is learned, communicated, and disseminated. These changes are

so vast that the authors demonstrate that they, and the scientists and researchers

theyINTRODUCTION8Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.serve, need to learn an entirely new set of skills related to the current ways of
conducting, writing about, and disseminating scientific research to policy makers

and the public.These case study authors have made very specific and measurable
contributions to their institutions. They have also made contributions that are less

obvious. They are, for example, contributing to 
information literacy
, or the ability
to access, evaluate, and use information from a variety of sources. They are

teaching the scientists and researchers they serve to use computers and other

information technologies competently, to work with others productively, and to
access and use information resources. The authors also address how important it
is for them to promote policy changes within their institutions and countries that

favor the gathering and sharing of information.
These case studies provide valuable insights into project management and
design. While they might describe very specific situations, the experience of these

authors should prove helpful to anyone implementing projects in these areas:
   national STI network building;
   electronic network development;
   library collection or services development;
   document delivery schemes;
   cooperative database development;
   standardization efforts;
   marketing of information services;
   implementing cost-recovery schemes;
   operating STI projects on a sustainable basis;
   training programs for information technologies and services;
   introduction or application of information technologies;
   collection and description of locally-produced information; or
   scientific communication or publishing.
By examining the lessons learned by these authors and the impacts their
projects have had, policy makers will see how important it is to become engaged

in the effort to give equitable information access to all Africans. In addition,

governments, foundations, development assistance agencies, and other members

of the donor community can look at these lessons to develop a new generation of

projects that are based on a firm and educated comprehension of what is already

in place. Finally, project managers in Africa can use these case studies to learn
how to implement necessary linkages among their institutions so that national
STI networks can be developed. Many others who have been reluctant to begin

projects in this field should be inspired to follow these leaders and to design

activities that will help multiply the positive impact of information and

communication technologies for everyone.
INTRODUCTION9Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES1. National Research Council, Board on Science and Technology for International Development
(1989) 
Science and Technology Information Systems and Services in Africa: Report of a
Workshop Held in Nairobi, April 19
Œ22, 1989
. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
2. Peters, Paul Evan (1995) Networked intellectual property: brain-ache of the decade. 
EducomReview 
30 (3).
INTRODUCTION10
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Case Studies on the Introduction of CD-
ROM to University Libraries
CD-ROM (
Compact 
Disc, 
Read-Only 
Memory) is a high density storage
medium on which electronic data are etched by laser onto a compact disc master.

A single CD-ROM can hold still images, motion video, audio, and digital data.

With its vast storage capacity (a single CD-ROM can store as much data as 1,500

floppy disks or 200,000 printed pages of text), ease of mailing, and tolerance of

harsh environmental conditions, CD-ROM offers a practical solution to the

information isolation experienced by researchers, information professionals, and

scientists in many developing countries.
These case study authors live in areas where high costs and technical
difficulties deter online access and searching. They demonstrate that CD-ROM

can bring the following gains:
   user-friendly, interactive online searching of databases by library staff and
end-users;   current citations, with abstracts that often provide sufficient information to
negate the need for source documents;
   selected citations and abstracts that can be used for national digests of
relevant material;
   an enhanced image of library staff due to their dramatically improved ability
to deliver current information and to demonstrate computer skills; and
   demystification of microcomputer technology for staff and end-users.
11Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CD-ROM has proven appropriate to these authors because it reduces the
need for online links and it operates under difficult conditions, such as heat,

humidity, dust, and unstable power supply. The authors did find, however, that

while there is a relatively low capital cost for the equipment, the cost of

sustaining the subscriptions to the databases is still a problem.
These case study authors demonstrate how they have used CD-ROM as a
powerful tool to develop local computer literacy by providing the opportunity for

hands-on use of a sophisticated system. They also describe how CD-ROM has

been used to develop both local and pan-African databases and digests of

relevant information.
12Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The CD-ROM Service for the University of
Dar es Salaam
by John M. Newa
Dr. John Newa is Director of Library Services at the
University of Dar es Salaam. He has worked on the promotion

and development of information centers in Tanzania. Since

1990, he has been concerned with the introduction and

application of information technologies in libraries
. 
 
 BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
The University of Dar es Salaam was the first university for Tanzania. The
United Republic of Tanzania was the outcome of the political union in 1964

between the former British Protectorates of Tanganyika (independent in 1961)

and Zanzibar (independent in 1964 following a bloody revolt against the Arab

Sultan). It is located on the Indian Ocean between Kenya and Uganda in the

north, Burundi, Rwanda and Zaire in the west, Zambia and Mozambique in the

south. The country has a population of about 27 million and is growing at the rate

of 3.1 percent (1991).
1 People use Kiswahili as the national language. English is a
second language and the language used in institutions of higher learning.
Tanzania is ranked second from the bottom worldwide in terms of its gross
domestic product and its economy is mainly agricultural-based. It was reportedly

growing at the rate of 3.6 percent in 1992. The industrial sector is increasing and

accounts for 40 percent of the national economy. Through the International

Monetary Fund's policies of structural adjustment, the economy is said to be

improving, although the man on the street says life is getting more difficult.
The country recorded a literacy rate of over 80 percent in the late 1980s. The
policy of Universal Primary Education
Šintroduced in the early 1970s and calling
for all girls and boys to have a basic seven years of primary education
Šis in
place.THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM13
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Yet the total number of children enrolled in secondary schools is less than 10
percent of primary school graduates, and the number of those who struggle and

make it to the universities hardly reaches 0.05 percent. In recent years deliberate

efforts have been made to increase the amount of science and technology in the

curriculum at all levels of education.
Scientific and technological training is given more emphasis in the Teachers
and Technical Colleges, as well as in the several vocational institutes spread all

over the country. The government, through the Ministry of Science, Technology

and Higher Education, is making deliberate efforts to prepare the country for the

21st century when scientific and technological information developments will be
critical for national socioeconomic development.
At the national level, the Commission for Science and Technology
(COSTECH) is responsible for the adoption, development, and dissemination of

scientific and technological information. The target of the Ministry of Science,

Technology and Higher Education is to raise the national expenditure on research

and development (R&D) from the present 0.2 percent to 1 percent by the year

2000. Besides creating the scientific and technological infrastructure in R&D

institutions, COSTECH is in the process of creating three databases: a directory
of scientists and technologists; a directory of scientific and technological
institutions; and an inventory of scientific and technological equipment.
The need for adequate scientific and technological information (STI) is felt
in the research institutes of all sectors, including agriculture, forestry, health,

industry, wildlife, and fisheries. However, I feel that the greatest need for the

provision of STI is in the institutions of higher learning, especially the

universities that are expected to support teaching, research, and consultancy

activities.When the CD-ROM project was first being prepared in 1991, the STI
infrastructure at the University of Dar es Salaam (UDSM) and throughout the

country was still underdeveloped. There were only a few international vendor

agencies for STI hardware and software in the country: among them, IBM,

International Computers Limited (ICL) and Wang. There were two electronic

mail nodes: one at the Medical Library in connection with the HealthNet Project

and another at COSTECH. At the UDSM, besides the University Computer
Centre, there were personal computers in only some departments. The library had
two computers. There was also a ground station for communication using a low-

earth orbiting (LEO) satellite connection between the Department of Electrical

Engineering and Essex University, in England. As far as CD-ROM services are

concerned there was one CD-ROM workstation each at the United States

Information Center Library (for the Books in Print database), at the British

Council Library (for the British Books in Print database), at the Demographic

Unit of the University of Dar es Salaam (for the POPLINE database), and in the

Department of Crop Science at the Sokoine University of Agriculture (for a few

databases from the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux).
THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM14
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.As the CD-ROM Service project was getting under way in 1993, an
electronic mail node was installed at the University Computer Centre, with

connections to various departments of the University. For a variety of reasons,

including the lack of email technicians and the need for a secure location to place

the equipment, the library did not get its email connection until May 1995. Until

then the University Library used the Medical Library and Computer Centre email
nodes for sending and receiving messages. The University Computer Centre
expected to install an Internet connection via leased line to South Africa in

November 1995; however that proved too expensive and the Computer Centre is

currently waiting for the arrival a satellite dish that they will use to connect to the

Internet.At this point the University of Dar es Salaam is in the process of adopting a
technology information policy that will encompass the various university

operations, including administration, student administration, finance, and the

automation of the library.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONThe University of Dar es Salaam academic community was facing the
problem of availability of and access to current information for its teaching,

learning, and research activities. Our scholars and researchers were isolated from

their colleagues in the region and overseas. Limited resources made it difficult to

acquire and provide current information resources, including the maintenance of

adequate periodical subscriptions. The lack of information technology resources
and the poor telecommunication infrastructure ruled out online connections with
information databases in the region and abroad.
For all of these reasons, we decided to introduce CD-ROM service to the
University. We had heard about the successful introduction of CD-ROM at the

medical library in Zimbabwe and wanted to provide our own library users with

the same benefits: especially convenient and relatively inexpensive access to

current scientific, technological, and socioeconomic information.
The financial support provided by the Carnegie Corporation of New York
allowed for the purchase of two CD-ROM workstations, their accessories, a laser

printer, and initial subscriptions to two CD-ROM databases. The Institute of

Scientific Information's (ISI) 
Science Citation Index 
and the 
Social Science
Citation Index 
were selected for their breadth in providing for the teaching,
learning, and research needs of a large section of the university academic

community. We hoped that this broad appeal would give the new service good

publicity.The CD-ROM service started operation with two donated engineering
databases provided by American Association for the Advancement of Science

(AAAS)ŠEngineering Index Page One and Compendex Plus
Šand the Distance
Education Database from the International Centre for Distance Learning (ICDL),

donated by the Commonwealth Association for Distance Education. The Library

also decidedTHE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM15
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to acquire two additional databases, ERIC and TROPAG, which we believed to
be of more general interest to the larger section of the academic and research

community at the university and in other R&D institutions in the country.
Within its interlibrary loan program, the library had provision for document
delivery through coupons purchased from the British Library Lending Division in

Boston Spa. This provision enabled the Library to provide a modest document

delivery service emanating from the CD-ROM database searches. In order to

cope with the increasing demand from the CD-ROM service, the document

delivery financial allocation had to be more than doubled.
The library was also maintaining a total of about 800 current journal
subscriptions, 40 percent of which came through the assistance of the Swedish

Agency for Research and Economic Cooperation (SAREC), 20 percent through

AAAS's support within the sub-Saharan Africa program, and 40 percent from the

library's own resources. The photocopying service of the library was also

improved by the purchase of additional heavy-duty machines. The photocopying
machines had been purchased with funds from SAREC within its Library
Support to Tanzania Libraries Programme.
As originally intended, the CD-ROM service has provided the academic and
research community at the university, in particular, and in Tanzania, in general,

access to current information and has relieved the isolation of scholars and

scientists in the region and abroad. In brief, the service provides scholars and

researchers with the capacity of 15 different and updated CD-ROM databases in

their subjects of interest and provides document delivery to most items requested.

The databases include subjects in Science and Applied Technology, Social
Science and the Humanities, and Law. Document requests from database
searches were met by services from the British Lending Library and recently from

the Massachusetts Institute of Technology through the AAAS. Our assessment is

that the document delivery service, in terms of documents requested and time it

takes to get the documents, has not been found satisfactory by our CD-ROM

service users.When we acquired the CD-ROM service, the only other operational service I
knew about was at the Medical Library, which was part of the HealthNet project.

My visit to the Department of Crop Science at the Sokoine University of

Agriculture in the company of a team of experts from BOSTID indicated that the

facility was not being used. I am also informed that about 1993 a CD-ROM

facility was introduced at the Uyole Ministry of Agriculture, Research and
Training Institute. It is not known which databases were donated to the Institute
but I guess these might be products of the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux.

Again the state of its functionality and extent of use is not known.
COSTECH acquired one CD-ROM workstation about 1993, which became
operational in the same year, using patent databases from the U.S. Patent and

Trademark Office and the European Patent Application Bibliography. When I

visited the facility recently, the CD-ROM drive was out of order. The Ministry of

Trade and Industry Registry Office is also reported to have one CD-ROM

workstation.THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM16
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 THE ART OF PROPOSAL WRITING
The personal contacts who gave us information on the technology 
Šandwhere and how to get it
Š made a large difference in the quality of the proposal.
The lobrary had earlier contacted Dr. Patricia Rosenfield at the Carnegie

Corporation of New York. She suggested that we meet with Wendy White of the
U.S. National Research Council, who was scheduled to visit Tanzania in 1991
as a guest of COSTECH. The project proposal for the CD-ROM service was

revised with her help and expertise before we submitted it to Carnegie. When
you are new to proposal writing like we were, it is very helpful to have someone
come along and help you compose answers to the reviewers' criticisms! Foe

example, we thought that we had to address the reviewers' comments by
changing our proposal to agree with them. We didn't know that we could
challenge 
 the reviewer by giving our justification for why we proposed to do
things a certain way or to use a certain product vendor.
The Office has also received a wide range of patent CD-ROM databases.
However the facility is not yet operational awaiting the training of staff. So as far
as the general academic and research community is concerned, the CD-ROM at

the University Library was the first facility with a reasonable degree of usage.
Since our CD-ROM facility has been operational, there has been keen
interest to spread the technology to other institutions in the country. As seen

above the CD-ROM service has since been introduced in other information

institutions in the country. The UDSM Library service has built upon the library's

and the university's interest to acquire more personal computers. Since then the

Library has acquired six computers, which are used in a variety of operations,

including the creation of three local databases, in education, environment, and

biodiversity. Under the UDSM Library's coordinating role for the SAREC Library

Support Programme to Tanzania, we have also acquired four personal computers

for other universities and research institutes. As will be seen below, the tempo

generated is now helping us make a credible case for the library's partial or

complete automation.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Correct decisions concerning how to go about writing an acceptable and
externally-funded project proposal, the handling of the grant, and the acquisition

of hardware, software, and databases have been critical to the effective and

efficient operation of the CD-ROM service. The story of how we learned about

the technology, what it could do for us, and how and from whom to acquire it has

been given above and in 
Box 1. Because we had little expertise and experience at
the UDSM Library on appropriate equipment and databases, contacts with other

African librarians
THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM17
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in the region and individuals abroad at meetings organized by the AAAS and the
U.S. National Research Council were very helpful. Still, our lack of experience

resulted in heavy reliance on vendor recommendations for hardware and software

and little control over the versions and price paid.
We decided to use the ICL local agent as a vendor for the hardware and
software, so as to ensure the availability of spare parts, service, and consumables.

Lengthy and cumbersome customs procedures were avoided by asking the

Carnegie Corporation to make direct purchases from the vendor's parent company

in London. A two-year service contract with the local vendor at the time of
purchase solved the problem of installation and maintenance. The local back-up
service has proved to be critical to the smooth operation of the service. Yet I have

heard criticism from the Director, AAAS Library Program for sub-Saharan

Africa, that the price paid for the UDSM's CD-ROM hardware was the highest in

Africa. I swear that it was not caused by the Library Director's demand for kick-

backs! It could be a factor of international and local vendors' price mark-ups, or a

result of the country's customs duty structure for computer products imported into

the country. The first two CD-ROM workstations were actually bought directly

by the donor from ICL London and sent to the UDSM Library.
We faced a number of problems before the service got under way. First, the
cost of the entire package from the local vendor was comparatively high. Then,

the installation of the facility took longer than our donor could understand. We

had peculiar local problems of security and high humidity. It took about six

months for the Estates Department of the University to fix security grills and

provide air conditioning for the CD-ROM facility. That was to ensure that the
equipment was safe from possible theft and could not be damaged by the high
Dar es Salaam humidity. So, although it took us longer than expected to become

operational, we have had no serious problems in the safety and operation of the

facility.The purchase of CD-ROM database subscriptions has also been problematic
from the outset. First of all, the CD-ROM databases selected were very expensive

by our standards. In addition, financial transactions with database dealers

overseas were long and difficult to execute, partly because of financial

regulations at home and partly because of some irksome conditions set by the
vendors. For example, the vendors required that we sign lease agreements before
purchase and delivery. The database vendors contacted would not accept

UNESCO coupons. Because of that initial experience, we have in subsequent

years paid our database subscriptions through a London-based book agent who

accepts payment in UNESCO coupons. We also learned that, in some cases, the

CD-ROM databases actually belong to the publisher and were only being 
leased 
to us: we would have to return one disc before an update would be issued or if we

had to cancel the subscription at a future date. 
2From the beginning we realized that it was our responsibility to have a few
database subscriptions that were rather popular, rather than rely completely on the

grant. We chose a department with high visibility
ŠReferenceŠto house the
CD-ROM service. This department was fortunately headed by a very able,
effective, and efficient
THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM18
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.scholar and professional who had great personal drive. This has proved to be an
asset to the service.
BOX 2 THE BENEFITS OF CD-ROM
''Now that we have an efficient CD-ROM Service in the Library, there is no
valid excuse for one not to register for a Ph.D. locally nor to produce scholarly
publications, or go overseas for literature review."
Chairperson, Appointments Committee for Academic Staff at the UDSM,
June 1993
.Effective March 1994, we formed a CD-ROM Service committee whose
membership includes two end-users (people of senior academic ranks in the

faculties of Engineering and Science) and four library professionals (the

Director, and the Heads of the Reference, Periodicals, and Readers Services

departments).In a concrete way, the university teaching and research community have
reacted very positively to the project. (See 
Box 2
.) Since the CD-ROM service
became operational more and more users have turned up. The CD-ROM service

is now the most important part of the library for teaching staff and postgraduate

students and researchers. The library's 1994/95 Annual Report indicates that there

has been an average of 53 searches per month and a total of 1,540 since the

service started in October 1993.
The image of the library staff has also been significantly boosted among
university professors, students, and committees. The CD-ROM service has

frequently been cited by the Higher Degrees Committee as reason for academic

staff and postgraduate students to enroll in the university. Since the CD-ROM

service became operational, the Appointments Committee for Academic Staff no

longer accepts complaints about lack of access to scholarly publications.

Everyone on campus is expected to use the new service to improve their own

scholarship.PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY FOR THE CD-ROM SERVICES
We widely publicized the CD-ROM service within the university community
and outside. We initially announced the service in various university committees,

including faculty boards and the Senate. We sent circular letters to all heads of

departments within the university and to all academic staff members, and we

posted notices on all bulletin boards. We sent similar letters announcing and

explaining the service to other universities and research institutes. We prepared

special publicity leaflets and spread them all over the campus and outside. The

1993/94 Library Guide and University Prospectus and subsequent annual editions

have included a sizable section on the CD-ROM service.
Word of mouth still plays a very important part in African communication
channels. Since the 1993/94 academic year the service has featured prominently

in all freshman and postgraduate orientation programs. I have spoken about the

service in various forums, including the Senate, the Committee of Deans, Faculty

Boards, andTHE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM19
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.other academic gatherings to both announce and explain the service and its
benefit for teaching, learning, and research.
The Library CD-ROM Committee took part in a number of departmental
seminars as well as in postgraduate research seminar programs. So far the library

has organized two Exposition Days for the CD-ROM service that were very well

attended by both the university and external community. We organized the first

Exposition Day when the service was just getting under way. We held the second

Exposition Day during the university's Silver Jubilee week in July 1995; it was

officiated by the former President and Chancellor of the University, Mwalimu
J.K. Nyerere. The mass media, including newspapers and television, widely
covered the event. Recently we decided to place one of the three CD-ROM

workstations in the public area near the public catalog. The visibility of the

facility may attract more users. We trust that these marketing and promotional

efforts will improve and increase the use of the CD-ROM service.
OUTREACH ACTIVITIES
In fact we are already providing outreach service to users in sister
universities and research institutes. We have given access to a number of external

users. In connection with other Library Current Awareness Services, we provide

searches for users from outside the University. We have desktop publishing

equipment on order that will allow us to produce and disseminate an information

bulletin to users in the university and outside. The major limitation that we are

facing now is poor and slow communication with institutions that do not have
email or other telecommunication facilities. Thus in addition to providing
traditional library products and services, such as bibliographies and newsletters,

we plan to use the CD-ROM service as a launching pad for direct and aggressive

services, directed at answering specific needs of S&T practitioners and

researchers. This will include SDI (selective dissemination of information),

retrospective searches, assistance in question formulation, bibliographies on

demand, question and answer services, referral, photocopying, and citation

tracing. These are in addition to the document delivery service.
RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
We put a monitoring system in place when the service was launched. We
keep records for users and their particulars, as well as records of searches. We are

in the process of installing a system that can do that automatically. Currently all

is done on daily record sheets which are cumulated weekly, monthly and yearly.

Table 1
 shows usage according to the broad categories of staff, postgraduate and
undergraduate students, and others. 
Table 2
 shows the number of searches
requested according to the database.
THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM20
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 1 Usage Statistics, 1993
Œ1995
StaffPostgraduateUndergraduate
OthersTotal199318422567
199419540412627752

199510433825128721Since May 1995, the library has embarked on a project to evaluate the CD-
ROM service, particularly the various CD-ROM databases held by the library.

We identified senior academics and postgraduate students who had used the
service and asked them to evaluate the databases in their various aspects,
including the amount of information and its usefulness, relevance, currency, and

coverage of the Africa region. From this evaluation and others to be conducted in

the future, we will determine whether or not the CD-ROM service is having the

desired effect. Unfortunately because of a change of the Librarian in charge of the

CD-ROM service in the Library, this important report is not yet out.
We are bearing in mind Erick Baard's injunction that: "A correct assessment
of an information technology innovation should include an examination of its

requirements as regards physical and social infrastructure, its possible effects on
new environments, and finally the nature of the limitations to information
utilization which it is designed to alleviate."
3TABLE 2 Searches by Database
Database199319941995Compendex Plus32154199
Social Science Citation Index9154199

Science Citation Index86551

Tropag and Rural Economy84121

Educational Resources Information Center49351

Agecond64616

Arts and Humanities-11

International Centre for Distance Learning-6

Public Affairs Information services-3312

Life Sciences-4756

Social Science Index-20

POPLINE-1035

Applied Sciences-2212

Current Citation--4

Current Contents--4

Biotechnology--5
TOTAL67702721THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM21
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TrainingWe have also taken serious steps to take care of the training aspect for both
library staff and users. We expect staff to have basic computer skills and some

ability in trouble-shooting, in case of minor operating problems. In order to

undertake database searches effectively, CD-ROM operators need knowledge and

experience in information retrieval techniques. So far all this has been only

partially accomplished because, although professional staff had some exposure in
their professional training, the rest of it, especially for the support staff, has been
done on the job. Many academic staff members have had some database

searching experience during their studies overseas. The bigger problem is with

those who trained locally. The training of this group, together with that of

students, is done by the library staff during their early database search sessions.

The library has persuaded some teaching staff to have demonstrations in their

classes or during seminars. The problem has always been whether to take the

equipment to the class or to bring the group to the library CD-ROM facility. We

have also used the Exposition Days as an opportunity to train both teaching and

research staff and students in conducting database searches. We are still

struggling to get training in trouble-shooting for our staff, but opportunities in the

region and abroad have not presented themselves.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
In hindsight we can say what went right:
   It was critical to have a good and acceptable CD-ROM project proposal and
we were lucky that somebody happened to be there at the right time.
   We consulted and got the support of the university authorities before we
sent out our project proposal. That support has been very critical in a

number of ways, including provision of adequate local funding, and in

publicizing the service.
   The decision to choose that particular vendor for the purchase of the
equipment was also right. Back-up service has been very critical and the

local ICL agent has generally not let us down.
There is no doubt that the CD-ROM service technology has done a
wonderful job in alleviating our problems of availability of and access to current

information. It is definitely a technology that we can afford. In implementing the

technological innovation at the Dar es Salaam University, we did our level best to

make the right decisions, and some of the problems are beyond our control.
So far our user statistics are still low. We should have made the CD-ROM
service accessible to undergraduate students. That should have boosted our user

statistics to an optimal level. We are discussing that issue in the CD-ROM

ServiceTHE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM22
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee and the idea is likely to be accepted and adopted. We are also
experimenting with various ways of making the document delivery service easier

and cheaper for users.There is little that we can do about the high cost of hardware and the ISI
database products. We wished we had started with cheaper products. We could

also have shortened the period of waiting for the purchase and the delivery of the

equipment. That might have required us to use the services of another local

agent, other than the ICL agent. But then that might have meant compromising on

the back-up service. Unfortunately practically all hardware and software has to be
ordered from overseas, and not locally or in the region. We had to resort to using
personal contacts in the region and abroad from the beginning to the

implementation stage of the project in order to obtain all the equipment and

programs we needed.
At this point we have managed to convince our major CD-ROM database
dealers, ISI and Silver Platter, to accept payment in UNESCO coupons. By this

method, we have managed to bypass the cumbersome bank transfer procedures.
The application of information and communication technology (ICT),
however, raises some old problems: if not used properly, ICT could perpetuate

the dependency syndrome of the poorer African countries on the western

countries. Of course this is a controversial issue like "appropriate technology" or

"aid" in both the North and the South. As other case studies have shown,
however, the technology can also be used to Africa's advantage. For instance,
cataloging and capturing locally-produced material for distribution on CD-ROM

will be of great benefit to Africa. Dissemination of local information databases to

the North can provide a give and take situation between the South and the North.
The sustainability issue is very critical. The donor agency and the university
have raised it on numerous occasions. The library and the university must have

the necessary resources to carry on the project, when the donor's project period

comes to an end. Here the need to make provision for local resources is critical.

The local contribution is actually important throughout the functional operation
of the project.
We have made significant efforts to cultivate individuals, departments, and
research institutes inside and outside the university to contribute to the

sustainability of the CD-ROM service. We have indicated that all users of the

service must contribute to the cost of the service in one way or another. During

the initial and launching period everything has been provided free-of-charge;
however, as the service becomes critical to users, the users will be requested to
pay at least a nominal cost for printing. We also ask users to pay for photocopies

of documents delivered. We charge outside users a small user fee.
Teaching departments of the university are requested to consider subscribing
to CD-ROM databases in their respective subjects within their link agreements

with overseas universities or include the databases within their documentation

components when presenting proposals to donor agencies. The faculties of

Education and Engineering, for example, will take up subscriptions to ERIC and

EngineeringTHE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM23
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Index, respectively, should the Library fail to pay for those subscriptions. The
Faculty of Science will take up databases in the sciences. Recently the Faculty of

Law consulted the Library on the acquisition of hardware and software, including

databases in law. Some departments also have arrangements to pay for the cost of

document delivery for their staff and postgraduate students.
It is also important to think about twinning arrangements with other projects
going on in the Library. This ensures the successful implementation and mutual

support of the projects. For the University of Dar es Salaam Library this has

included project support from SAREC, the AAAS Journal Donation Program, and

the UNO/RAF/006/GEF Biodiversity Project. One project seems to have a

multiplier effect on others. It is after you have one project running smoothly that

you attract other, related information technology projects. Since we started the
CD-ROM service project in 1993, we have had two other local database creation
projects.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The introduction of the CD-ROM service technology has solved a critical
information problem for the UDSM and Tanzania. But there are several

challenges, beyond the issue of sustainability. Recognizing that the UDSM

Library cannot afford to ignore the CD-ROM technology
Šfor fear of being left
further behind
Šwe have some concerns about whether the CD-ROM technology
can be technically maintained. Do we have enough local expertise to repair and

replace the technology, for example? So far we have depended on back-up
service from the vendor. So the problem of maintenance is not difficult in the
country, but it could be cheaper and faster if we had the qualified personnel at the

University or in the Library.
The CD-ROM databases we have from overseas cannot meet all of our STI
needs. For development purposes, Tanzania's scientists need to have access to

local and regional information resources, as well. There is considerable

information in the form of grey literature
Šunpublished or unindexed reports,
studies, and surveys by government and R&D institutions. A start has been made

by the UDSM Library to create databases of local literature on environment,
education, and biodiversity. The next important step is to create regional and
continent-wide databases. This effort should be coupled with a campaign to

convince scholars, scientists and practitioners to publish locally. Although the

UDSM Library is one of the African University Libraries participating in the

evaluation of international databases, the outcome of that evaluation is not yet

complete at our University, and results from other African universities are not yet

out.As stated above, CD-ROM database information providers and vendors set
conditions that are difficult to meet in developing countries. Should we, for

example, cancel subscriptions to print indexes and rely on their compact disc

equivalents? If we do, what will happen if we cancel the CD-ROM subscription

and we are asked to return the discs?
THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM24
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This technological innovation also gives STI workers in the Third World an
opportunity to think seriously about the development of appropriate STI

technologies in the South and the adaptation of STI technologies from the North.

It is our hope that our friends in the North will support this noble endeavor.
It is important to operate a project in accordance with the agreement and
expectations of the donor agency. We tried as much as possible to keep to these

conditions. We are convinced that because of this, besides the growing user

demand for the service, the Carnegie Corporation accepted our application for the

extension of the project by supplying an additional CD-ROM workstation and
two CD-ROM database subscriptions, a desk-top publishing facility, and support
to outreach activities.
NOTES1. Statistical data in this report is taken from Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania. Hotuba ya
Waziri wa Nchi katika Ofisi ya Rais na Makamu Mwenyekiti wa Tume ya Mipango, Mh.
S.A.Kibona (Mbunge) wakati akiwakilisha Bungeni Taarifa ya Uchumi wa Taifa ya Mwaka 1992
na Mapendekezo ya Mpango wa Bajeti (Rolling Plan and Forward Budget) kwa kipindi cha

1993/94Œ1995/96, tarehe 17 Julai, 1993. Dar es Salaam: Government Printer, 1993.
2. We have since learned that this is a problem faced around the world
Šin both developed and
developing countries.3. Baard, Erick (1982) Appropriate Information Technology: A Cross-Cultural Perspective,
UJISLAA, 4(4):263
Œ268.THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM25
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CD-ROM SERVICE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM26
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CD-ROM for Health Information in
Zimbabweby Helga Patrikios
Helga Patrikios went to school in New York and Belfast, and
to university at Trinity College Dublin, where she read

French and Italian language and literature. She worked as a

TV documentaries researcher, teacher and editor until her

marriage to a Rhodesian brought her to Harare (then

Salisbury) in 1972. She took a Higher Diploma in Library

Science by correspondence with the University of South

Africa in 1978, and has worked ever since at the Library of

the University of Zimbabwe. She has been Medical Librarian
since 1985, and has published and presented many papers on her work there. She

was appointed Deputy University Librarian in 1994.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
In recent decades, throughout sub-Saharan Africa, academics, scientists and
researchers have seen the decline of once flourishing institutes and universities as

economic conditions worsened, and inflation and devaluation of local currencies

exacerbated the chronic shortage of hard currencies. The deficiencies in

traditional information sources, arising from economic, geographical and cultural

factors, have worsened perceptibly in the past two decades. And while the

information explosion in the North is fuelled by dramatic developments in

information technologies, the South must watch the gap between its own

information sources and those available in the industrialized countries grow ever

wider. Can that gap be narrowed or even bridged, or will the poorer countries be

further marginalized in terms of technology and information access?
Fortunately, in many African countries, the advent of the personal computer
has enabled libraries to leapfrog two decades of development in information
technology, and move straight into effective and appropriate solutions to some of

the problems of information storage and retrieval. Institutions and private

companies which had never seen a mainframe or minicomputer began in the

mid-1980s to
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE27
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.acquire microcomputers
Šoften initially only for word processing, but
increasingly for compiling databases and other specific applications.
In Zimbabwe, at the Medical Library of the University of Zimbabwe
(UZML), the process began with CD-ROM. This case study will describe how

and why that process was set in motion, and its immediate and longer-term

effects on the services of the library and on its staff and users.
Zimbabwe has a population of 11 million people, 70 percent of whom are
based in the rural areas. Independence from the illegal white minority rule of Ian

Smith's Rhodesia was achieved in 1980; by 1990 Zimbabwe's development

programs were well advanced, particularly in the fields of education and the

health services.
The colonial legacy included a centralized health service, with a
concentration of sophisticated curative services for a minority in the urban

centers. (See Box 1
.) The goal of the new Ministry of Health was to create an
extensive network of primary health care outlets in the rural areas, reallocating

existing resource to establish new clinics and upgrade general and district

hospitals. The success of their policies was seen in a steady improvement in

health status indicators during the middle and late 1980s, including maternal and
child morbidity and mortality; nutritional status; and expanded immunization
programs.Harare, the capital, is the home of the University of Zimbabwe, established
in 1958, which includes the country's only Medical School
Šadded in 1963. As
well as the 500 medical students, the Faculty has departments of Nursing

Science, Pharmacy and Rehabilitation, and the School is a regional center for

postgraduate programs in the medical specialties. The present total of students

approaches 1,000, and student intakes continue to grow.
The Medical Library was well planned from the outset, with a good
collection of journals and textbooks, and a current awareness service for

academics. As the country's only medical library it was in principle accessible to

members of the health professions outside the University; but since it was situated

in the main University Library on the campus in an outlying suburb, it was little

used other than by staff and students of the Faculty. In 1978 the library moved to

the spacious premises of the new medical school and teaching hospital close to
the city center, where more non-university health workers began to make use of
it.BOX 1 PRE-INDEPENDENCE HEALTH SERVICES
Pre-Independence health services had neglected information support;
medical and nursing education were historically centralized, and the only other
sources of information and educational material lay in the small collections at the
nursing schools. The library at the Ministry was a dusty storeroom piled high
with government reports. The achievement of Independence made rapid growth

and change possible not only for the health services but for health information
too.CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE28
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In 1983, following recommendations from a World Health Organization-
sponsored workshop in Tanzania, the UZML, as the only major medical library in

Zimbabwe, was designated National Focal Point for Health Sciences Information

Services, by both the Ministry and the University. An outreach librarian was

appointed to deliver services to health workers in provincial and rural hospitals

and health centers. In 1984, we carried out a survey of their information needs
and priorities.1Anecdotal evidence from rural health professionals of a dire lack of access to
informationŠan absence of current textbooks and journals, or indeed any
considerable hospital library
Šhad prompted the survey, which had a 74 percent
response rate; this evidence was emphatically confirmed by the 63 doctors and 10

senior nurses who responded. Their expressed priorities were to have core
collections of books and journals at their workplaces, and 90 percent considered
the lack of current medical information to be a serious difficulty or disadvantage.
Some of these needs were addressed by a Joint Health Information
Committee, which we established with the Ministry of Health for this purpose
Šcore collections of 40 textbooks and 13 manuals were provided by a Scandinavian

donor for all hospitals and clinics. Adequate journal collections could not be
provided to all hospitals, so we compiled instead a digest of MEDLINE abstracts
on Zimbabwe's health issues, 
Current Health Information Zimbabwe (CHIZ)
, afree update for all Zimbabwe's health professionals. The abstracts were provided

for us by the World Health Organization (WHO) in Geneva, who sent us the

monthly MEDLINE printouts produced by the Swiss host Datastar. Datastar ran

searches using a profile of Zimbabwe's major health problems, compiled with

advice from former district medical officers.
We tried, in the mid-1980s, to gain access to the online databases of the
U.S. National Library of Medicine and to MEDLINE in particular
Šthe index,
with abstracts, to over 3,700 of the world's major biomedical journals, with over 8

million records. The obstacles
Šhigh and unpredictable costs in scarce foreign
currency (for passwords, telecommunications, connect time and printouts)
Šweretoo great. A further disincentive were the complex command syntaxes of the
databases, and the need for considerable familiarity with the medical

terminology.A less demanding more user-friendly medium was needed to access
MEDLINE. In 1988, while visiting a London medical school library, we saw it
Šin the shape of CD-ROM, in full-color action
Ša technology based on laser discs
that was just then beginning to penetrate European markets. The advantages of

CD-ROM were immediately obvious: the powerful laser discs, used in

conjunction with an ultra-friendly search engine, mounted in the homely personal
computer, bringing international bibliographic databases into the most remote
centersŠand at a predictable cost. Unlimited online searching and training time,
unlimited information retrieval, unlimited access to the almost mythical databases

of the world's most advanced scientific institutions
Šthese were suddenly within
our reach.CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE29
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROJECT DESCRIPTIONIn mid-1988, a project proposal went off to the Carnegie Corporation of New
YorkŠfor the acquisition of CD-ROM equipment with a subscription to the
MEDLINE database. The general objective of the project was to improve the

health information service at the UZML, with the specific objective of providing

users in the Medical School and throughout Zimbabwe with MEDLINE literature

searches.The Medical Library had three professional (graduate) staff, three
diplomates, and adequate secretarial and other support staff. The reference

librarian had nursing training behind her, as well as her library qualifications.

Most of her working hours hitherto were spent scanning the latest journal issues

for individuals requiring current awareness updates
Ša Selective Dissemination
of Information (SDI) service. We did not yet know that this task could be reduced
to some minutes a month. All of us were excited by the prospect of introducing a
computerized service into the Library at last.
Neither I nor any of my colleagues had ever laid hands on a computer. No
one in the University Library had computer skills. Many of us were conscious of

being left behind while libraries in the North were forging ahead with newer and

better computer applications for information storage and retrieval, and library

housekeeping systems. Among the major benefits of the project would be the

familiarization of library staff with microcomputer technology.
We also counted on providing our own MEDLINE searches for 
CHIZ, andrelieving WHO's Library in Geneva of that expensive burden. We could also

revise our search strategy at will without incurring further expense or trouble for

WHO.The response from Carnegie was rapid and positive
Šwe received a
discretionary grant for a feasibility study of a MEDLINE on CD-ROM search

service. The grant also enabled us to buy a personal computer, the two drives

needed to search the current five-year MEDLINE file, and two-year subscription

to the MEDLINE database.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
What were our problems, errors, and successes in implementing the three
phases of our project?
HardwareOur initial choice of hardware was poor. Since we did not even know which
questions to ask, we were guided by earlier advice from another donor's program

officer, which stressed the importance of securing reliable local (IBM)

maintenance. We ordered the smallest cheapest IBM: a PS2 Model 30. We were

guided by excessive thrift, rather than by criteria of power and speed, of which

we thenCD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE30
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.knew nothing except what we learned from the conflicting advice given by local
computer experts. They in turn knew nothing of the rapidly growing exigencies

of CD-ROM
Šan unknown technology in Zimbabwe in 1988.
In reality the Harare private sector offered more than enough microcomputer
support to go round; furthermore, a snippet of local lore that we absorbed has

proved to be well founded: in Harare's temperate and relatively dust-free climatic

conditions microcomputers, even the cheaper IBM clones, generally give little

trouble. We rightly did not budget or contract for an expensive maintenance

agreement with the local IBM agents
Ša hefty 10 percent of the equipment's cost
per year, the local standard charge. (The high cost of equipment in Africa shocks
buyers in the North
Šthe addition of transport and duties almost double prices of
any imported goods.)Instead we allowed in our budget for (lower) maintenance costs and have
always spent less than was budgeted on hardware and software problems. A piece

of late news: recent extensive building operations next to our library have created a

reddish-grey dust
Šclay and cement
Šwhich now thickly coats the edges and
insides of our drives. They are giving occasional trouble now.
The pioneer personal computer, within three years of purchase, was unable
to process the burgeoning MEDLINE database. We ran out of space on the 20

megabyte hard disk before the end of the first phase of the project
Šthere was
barely room for MEDLINE software (13 megabyte) and word processing

software, and ultimately everything but MEDLINE had to be deleted. When

MEDLINE needed 28 megabytes of disk space and at least one megabyte of

RAM, and we found the machine's hard disk and RAM could not be upgraded, it
was relegated to word processing use.
Clearly, as novices, we should have sought and found more expert advice
outside Zimbabwe before deciding what to buy. (See 
Box 2
.) It was a colleague in
New York who discovered that the drives we had ordered were incompatible with

the personal computer
Šjust in time to prevent their shipment; it took several
months to rectify that error; and when the equipment was all finally assembled,

we found that the driver extension software was superseded, so that more weeks

passed while we awaited the current version.
BOX 2 RELATIVE SPEED OF EQUIPMENT
When, before ordering, I contacted the MEDLINE vendors in New York to
ask whether our choice of equipment was appropriate for their database

software, they said it would be fine, but warned that its performance would be a
bit sluggish. I responded, quite seriously, that was just fine, since we too were
sluggish–. It turned out that we could go off and brew tea during some of the
lengthier search processes, and still find the search in progress on our return.
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE31
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Professional advice provided by Carnegie, and first-hand experience, helped
us in making better decisions on equipment in later phases of the project. Four

years later, for instance, we were encouraged by a local supplier
Šand were very
temptedŠto network existing and new personal computers so that all
workstations in the library could access all CD-ROMs. We learned, though, that

not only would the proprietary networking costs of our database vendors have
been beyond our long-term means, but also the absence of expertise in the library
system needed to maintain the network would have left me with that

responsibility. We knew that neither I nor my colleagues could muster the time or

skills needed.As time passed our local suppliers learned much more about CD-ROM; we
too learned, as personal computers became cheaper, faster and more powerful in

terms of clock speed, disk and memory size, that we needed to allow for rapid

growth in the number and size of databases, for much more RAM, for Windows

software for the databases which would, before long, be available only in
Windows; for anti-virus packages to check the diskettes on which our users
increasingly needed to download their search results.
Our initial choice of a vendor for the MEDLINE database (from a product
range of eight competing companies) was based on advice from a large medical

library in Milwaukee, which had closely examined all the options, and on journal

articles which rigorously evaluated the search features of the different versions.
Our chosen vendor, Ovid Technologies (formerly CD Plus), has prospered,
multiplied and improved its products, and supported us with discounts. CD Plus

responded, though not always promptly, to the software difficulties that arose

from time to time as new features were developed. We learned to correct some of

them by the simple expedient of reinstalling the software. Other software failures

needed input from our suppliers. The only personal computer in which we failed

to install the recent much larger DOS version of Ovid's MEDLINE is an IBM PS2

Model 70; it accepts only the Windows version of MEDLINE.
DelaysOur greatest frustrations came from the delays that held up the first phase by
one year. There were delays in obtaining the correct drives and software; it took

more time to cajole duty free certificates and import permits from the State's then

ponderous bureaucratic machinery. The wasted year, 1988
Œ1989, nonetheless saw
a degree of progress in STI at UZML. We learned word processing on the
personal computer, which was delivered within only a few months. Once the

library had at least one functioning workstation (and by the second phase of

support we had three) and could keep our search service going, we could tolerate

subsequent delays. The cliff-hanging saga of the supplier who held us up in the

third phase of the project by converting funds for equipment to his own use must

be documented elsewhere; he delivered our goods in the end, but a year later than

planned.CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE32
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESULTS, IMPACTS, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
What have CD-ROM technology and the microcomputer
Šthe availabilityof in-house biomedical and health databases
Šbrought to the library, to the
Medical School, its staff and students, and to the country's health workers? Who

uses MEDLINE most? Why do they want MEDLINE searches? The data

gathered from our search request forms give some answers.

Numbers of MEDLINE Searches Made
The average number of searches rose from 80 searches per month (1989
Š1990) to 450 per month in 1995 (November). (See 
Figure 1.) In March 1995 a
record 700 individual searches and monthly updates(SDIs) were recorded.

Categories of Search Requesters
Undergraduate and postgraduate students represented 36 percent and 15
percent, respectively, of all searchers in a 6-month sample of 1,660 search

request forms in 1994. (The 58 monthly SDIs that are automatically generated as

updates for individuals were not categorized.) Other searchers were academic

staff, non-academic staff, or government workers, or from NGOs, parastatals, or

the private sector. (See 
Figure 2.)Purpose of Searches
In the same six-month period, research and assignments (in which there may
be overlap) accounted for 41 percent and 13 percent, respectively; teaching 4

percent; updates and SDIs 20 percent; patient care 8 percent; publications 2

percent; in 12 percent no purpose was given. (n = 2008 searches including SDIs.)
FIGURE 1
 Monthly average of CD-ROM searches conducted, January 1990 to
November 1995.
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE33
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 2
 MEDLINE searches by user categories.
Survey on the Use of MEDLINE and Its Abstracts
In March 1995 we carried out a survey on the use of MEDLINE by staff and
students of the Medical Faculty.
2 A questionnaire sent to 252 staff and
undergraduates sought to gain information on:
   numbers of MEDLINE users and non-users;
   frequency of use;
   the value of searches and of abstracts;
   the number of end users and the need for training in end user searching; and
   reasons for non-use of MEDLINE.
We had a response rate of 50 percent (n = 252). Of 122 academic staff to
whom we sent questionnaires, 49 responded. Of the 130 final-year students to

whom we sent questionnaires, 67 responded. Of the total 126 respondents, 119
used MEDLINE and only seven had never used MEDLINE. (See 
Table 1.)We can surmise that those who have used MEDLINE are much more likely
to respond to a questionnaire on its use than those who have not used it; thus a
much greater proportion of the 50 percent who did not respond may have been
non-users. The reasons given by respondents who had never used the service

were lack of knowledge about it and lack of time to use it. Additional survey

results are given in Tables 
2Š5.CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE34
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 1 MEDLINE Users/Non-users
AcademicsFinal-year StudentsMEDLINE Users(n = 54)
92%(n = 65)97%MEDLINE Non-users(n = 5)8%(n = 2)3%TABLE 2 Frequency of Use of MEDLINE
Use of MEDLINE per month
(n = 114)
%Use it often (5 times or more)1211
Use it regularly (2
Œ3 times)2421
Use it occasionally (once)4136

Use it rarely (less than once)
3732TABLE 3 Value of Search Results
Search results satisfactory
(n = 117)%Usually7867
Sometimes3227

Rarely76

Never00TABLE 4 Usefulness of Abstracts
Abstracts as a source of information
(n = 116)%Very useful7464
Moderately useful4135

Not useful11CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE35
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 5 Completeness of Information in Abstracts
Abstracts provide information complete in itself:
(n = 117)%Usually2320
Sometimes6253

Rarely2320

Never97Training in MEDLINE Searching
The library has periodically offered training in MEDLINE searching to
users: 49 percent of respondents had received some training. Most of these were

students: only 17 (31 percent) academic staff had received training.
The survey showed that most staff and students did searches assisted by a
librarian; only 25 percent of respondents (n = 29) were able or willing to do their

own searches, although half had received some training. Training was thus

deficient in some way for half the participants. Ninety percent (n = 87) were
interested in receiving training from library staff and/or the MEDLINE tutorial
program.It is important that we enable more end users to make searches
independently of library staff. Because few of our staff have a strong grasp of

medical terminology we are concerned that the quality of more complex searches

may be uneven. The more end users with search skills, the higher the potential
relevance of search results, and the more staff time saved.
Availability of Full-text Articles
MEDLINE citations carry a note if the journal cited is held by our library,
and most users reported making some effort, sometimes, to locate such journal

articles. But less than half of our users attempt to obtain articles through the

Library's Inter-Library Loans (ILL) service. There had been a boom in ILL

requests, almost matching the growth in the numbers of searches, from 1990 to
mid-1994. The service then declined sharply when ILL funds ran out.
Users have little confidence in the library's runs of journals, which are
broken by frequent temporary or permanent stoppages of subscriptions; they are

unwilling, too, to depend on the unreliable and very slow ILL service. When its

funds run out we are dependent on the goodwill of two or three South African

libraries, which cannot, of course, meet all our needs. In response to the library's
attempts to improve ILL services, the University has recently approved, in
principle, the introduction of realistic (almost full cost-recovery) charges, as

opposed to highly subsidized minimal charges for ILL documents. While students

will continue to be subsidized to some extent, researchers (academic staff) will be

expected to pay for ILL services.
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE36
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Immediate and Long-term Outcomes of the Service: Products
and SpinoffsSearchesMEDLINE now produces over 380 individual searches each month, as well
as 58 monthly updates for individual researchers and clinicians; it also produces

the monthly printouts of abstracts for our national digest 
Current Health
Information Zimbabwe (CHIZ)
.Journal SelectionCD-ROM (used with the bibliographic database management program
Papyrus) enables us to use MEDLINE in bibliometric studies to identify those

journals which most frequently publish articles of relevance to Zimbabwe's health

problemsŠthe citations selected for 
CHIZ and those selected for printing out by
our users. The most frequently cited titles are included in a revised core collection

of most-needed journal titles.
The Bradford's Law of Scatter (illustrated in many studies including one at
the National Library of Medicine, where it was found that only 300 titles of its

22,000 periodicals satisfied 70 percent of all requests
3 ) reinforces the benefits of
accessing journals through a document delivery service, rather than ''owning"

expensive subscriptions to little-used journals. The "ownership versus access"

algorithm we have developed
4 can be brought to bear on the selection process now
that lists of most frequently cited titles can be built on objective criteria rather
than relying solely on manual analyses of inter-library loans, or on the possibly

idiosyncratic or unrepresentative demands of often transient specialists and other

academics.AbstractsThe survey demonstrates the dissatisfaction of users with our journal
collection and inter-library loans service, and a considerable
Šand certainly
lamentableŠdependence on abstracts rather than on full-text articles, with 73
percent "usually" or "sometimes" making do with abstracts alone. How valuable

can abstracts be, how complete the information they contain? No clinician,
researcher, or librarian would advocate total dependence on abstracts. Many of
them do not accurately reflect the main findings or conclusions of their full

papers, and rarely (except in terms of the unassailable reputation of the source

publication) enable a critical evaluation of a paper's real worth in terms of

methodology and other criteria. A recent study on the reliability of reviews of

abstracts for scientific meetings found that reviewers disagreed substantially

when evaluating the same abstracts and that structured review criteria were

needed.5 The proportion of structured abstracts in the medical literature is
increasing, however, and enhances the value and usefulness
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE37
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of bibliographic databases. (See 
Box 3.)BOX 3 THE IMPORTANCE OF ABSTRACTS
We have learned anecdotally too that our users find that abstracts can and
do provide critical information in a crisis
Šour Drug and Toxicology Information
Service, for example, inevitably has to rely on abstracts in emergencies.
Abstracts inform policy and assist planning. They have had to satisfy our users

for information on management of diseases and poisoning cases for decisions
on drug prescribing and dosages, for literature reviews, for preparing lectures,
for updating practical knowledge and skills
Šbecause the back-up of full texts is
not available quickly enough. It may be deplorable but it is also true that in many
contexts, including our own, the back-up texts will never be available, or will

arrive too late. It must be recognized that in the poorer countries of the world an
abstract is likely to be all the reader will ever see of journal articles.
Outcomes for Health Professionals, Patients?
While published data demonstrate the impact of MEDLINE on patient
outcomes in the USA
6,7,8 we are not able in Zimbabwe to quantify what the direct
and indirect benefits of CD-ROM databases and their abstracts are, in terms of

improved efficacy of health professionals, or improved health status indicators,

for instance. There were considerable gains in the health status indicators of

Zimbabwe's people after the country won its Independence in 1980, but these are

now being rapidly eroded by the combined effects of the AIDS pandemic, and of

the economic structural adjustment programs being implemented in recent years

in many African countries.
In a 1993 snap survey of opinions of senior academic staff on MEDLINE's
effects the following were among their comments: "its comprehensiveness and

currency [make it] revolutionary"; "it makes life so easy 
– very helpful for
research and teaching"; "it plays a very important role in teaching Med students

enabling them to keep up with the latest information 
– is invaluable for their
clinical presentations"; "it helps me keep up with appropriate management of

clinical problems''; "it is indispensable for research protocols and write ups of

research projects"; "in the recent meningitis epidemic it provided essential

epidemiological and serotyping data for appropriate measures for prevention,
control and management"; "it plays a major role for me as a consultant teaching
juniors."Some examples (from the 1995 survey) of respondents' reactions to a
question on the effects on their work of NOT having access to MEDLINE:

"dramaticŠmy research and teaching capability would collapse without it"; one
urologist declared he "would scream"; others spoke of "catastrophic",

"devastating" and "drastic" effects, and "the end of the road."
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE38
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Promotion of the CD-ROM Literature Search Service
We promoted the service initially only to Medical School staff and not to
students, anticipating an unmanageable demand on our single workstation. Only

two members of staff (out of over 100 in 21 departments to whose chairmen we

sent promotional circulars) appeared at our MEDLINE open day. We assume that

initially news of MEDLINE and POPLINE spread largely by word of mouth,

since there was a steady increase in use after the first few weeks.
After a formal presentation of the first workstation, involving the United
States Information Service (USIS), the small paragraph on the event which

appeared in the daily paper showed a total lack of understanding of the

technology on the part of the reporter. Our handout about CD-ROM was beyond

his comprehension 
Š we realized how important it is to recognize the
impenetrability of new technologies to those who have no experience of them,
and to learn how to communicate their capabilities in the simplest possible way.
We reinforced our initial low-key circulars and notices only when we had
acquired two more workstations in the second phase of the project, by

promotional demonstrations of MEDLINE (using a Datashow projector we

acquired in the second phase of the project) at professional meetings of interest

groups (such as pharmacists, physiotherapists, primary care physicians). To
provide these demonstrations our reference librarian, with help sometimes from
me or another colleague, had to load her car with a personal computer, four

drives and a printer, drive to the meeting venue and reassemble the workstation

thereŠa considerable undertaking. From follow-up visits and search requests
from those sectors we knew the demonstrations made an impact
Šseeing is
believing. (Recently staff in our Main Library took CD-ROM to individual

faculties, and they too found that an immediate increase in use of the databases

resulted.)Demonstrations of CD-ROM searches get the most attention in our library
orientation sessions for students; postgraduate students are given a longer

introduction than undergraduates, and are strongly encouraged to read database

tutorials and take the training which is always available from our staff. However,
offers to academic staff and students of training for individuals or small groups
have had little response thus far. The lack of interest in our offers of training is

not surprising
Švery few students and staff have had the opportunity to acquire
computer skills, and most still have no access to any computer other than ours.

They will have to start by learning basic computer skills, and only then attempt to

use the (relatively user-friendly) interface software.
Training is more likely to be accepted if it is informally given, by way of
explanations to a search requestor as he helps a librarian make his search. Our

understanding of the problem of low uptake of training is that, unless users
practice and enlarge on newly acquired search skills on a regular basis, they
forget them between visits and have to start again. Many of our users have very

little spare time for acquiring new skills outside their daily work schedule.
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE39
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 4 THE AFRICAN INDEX MEDICUS PROJECT
Our database, 
Utano (the Shona word for Health), provides records for us
to contribute to WHO's recent database initiative, the African Index Medicus
(AIM). The innovative AIM project assembles (at WHO headquarters in

Brazzaville) abstracts of mainly unpublished "grey" literature collected from a
growing number of African countries. WHO produces and circulates regular
printed updates to libraries in Africa, and to subscribers in African institutes

throughout the United States and Europe.
The Medical School is constructing a new Health Sciences building and
plans to incorporate considerable computer-aided learning facilities in the
building. Easy access to computers will then no longer be limited to the library's

CD-ROM facilities.
Other Uses of Microcomputers in the Medical Library
A Database of Local Health Literature
This project to create and compile a database of local unpublished health
literature was funded by IDRC and implemented in 1991
Œ1992, concurrently with
our expanding CD-ROM service. (See 
Box 4
.) The contract staff, the training in
database use (UNESCO's Micro CDS/ISIS) and the hardware brought to the

library by the project reinforced our understanding and appreciation of the

potential and value of computerization, and has since offered continuing

opportunities to all our professional staff to widen their computer skills. The

database, after the expiry of the contracts of project staff, has continued its slow

but steady growth, as two of our staff members gradually master the complexities

of the ISIS software.
Email: Local and International Access to Information
Email now enables health workers outside the capital to get access to
MEDLINE searches and other material from the Harare library and beyond. In

our third year of reliable email access, we now operate through Zimbabwe's

upgraded telephone system, through SatelLife's local HealthNet node in Harare,

which links us with other major international email networks as well as with the

HealthNet users in provincial medical directorates and many of the district

offices. The number of MEDLINE search requests emailed to our outreach

librarian from the provinces doubled last year. We download and return search

results to users by email, and can at last scan and email photocopies of articles in

the library instead of mailing photocopies (which may take a week to deliver).
The main limiting factor
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE40
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in the use of email is the still small number of health professionals with easy
access to and familiarity with personal computers; but the time taken to scan and

run an Optical Character Recognition program against the copy is also something

of a deterrent.
Moves to bring us online into the Internet may bear fruit in the next year or
two. Meanwhile email and the Grateful Med search interface give us easy and

low-cost access to the MEDLARS databases of the National Library of

Medicine, through the BITNIS program,
9 which enables a turn-around time of 24
Œ48 hours. The costs of our email services are modest: each of our two stations
costs about $7.00 per month, less than the cost of one five-page fax.
The Impact of Microcomputer Technologies on Library Staff
Many libraries in Africa, including our own, have become shelters for
dwindling and aging printed resources. The effects on library staff of acquiring

computer skills and delivering computerized and very current information are all

the more positive in this context. The image of traditionally low-status

professionals has been subtly but unquestionably enhanced by their new
capabilitiesŠdoctors and nurses now request appointments for searches with
library staff 
– who have something valuable to offer at last. This empowerment
of librarians increases their morale at a time when economic forces have a

contrary effect on the work force; computers make the job more fun for the

majority of staff who enthusiastically embrace the new technologies.
The growing use of personal computers in our library imposes on us the need
to re-examine our management structure; lines of authority have to be redefined.

There is need for greater flexibility in job descriptions and responsibilities, need

for recognition and monitoring by senior management of any radical increases or
reductions in workloads brought about by automation, need for rewarding
exceptional skills and providing opportunities for the development of those skills

to those who show aptitude. If sustained progress in use of the new technologies

is to be made, the old rigid and hierarchical structures of libraries must bend and

expand to allow for new patterns and areas of growth. The application of

performance indicators to services and processes is one obvious method of

planning and managing the changes which automation inevitably brings in its

wake.ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Unquestionably CD-ROM databases, MEDLINE in particular, have brought
about a radical change in the information seeking behavior of our users:

unprecedented rapid and easy access to current and archival journal literature; and

an increased awareness and documented increased use of the journal literature.
10We believe, however, that the most significant and valuable outcome of this

service has been the growing awareness in its users of a range, literally a world of

otherwiseCD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE41
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.unknown information sources. It has been by far the greatest force for progress in
information access that our users have experienced.
However, while the advent of CD-ROM has been a dramatic success in our
library, and while email is the cheapest known method, 
pro rata 
, for the speedy
transmission of data, there are funding and technical issues that cannot be

ignored. We have learned
Špainlessly so far, thanks to the generosity and
flexibility of our donors
Šthat one-time set-up costs are not a reality.
Planners must face and meet the costs of maintaining and updating
expensive hardware to keep pace with changes in database sizes and interfaces;

they must have access to expert and unbiased information on the new

technologies to avoid costly mistakes in purchasing inappropriate equipment.

They must allow for the relentless growth of RAM requirements; the need for

multiple workstations when multiple users want access to databases; the need for

the more expensive laser printers when printing out images from full-text CD-

ROMs or other electronic sources such as World Wide Web. The Internet has
come to neighboring countries and is likely to reach us too before very long, with
further implications for hardware, training and other costs. Growth and

development in the technologies are inevitable and expensive. Institutional

support and involvement become increasingly vital if the technologies are to

survive and prosper in the long term in Africa.
The lack of concern of institutional planners for information supply may be
attributable to negative experiences and low expectations in the libraries they

have known, as much as to the failure of educational systems to include

information retrieval skills in their curricula. We expect MEDLINE to break that

cycle in Zimbabwe, by sensitizing students
Šthe planners of the future
Što the
existence of vast and formerly unknown resources. The cost of introducing and

maintaining a MEDLINE search service, represented as a proportion of the
budget of a Medical School or a Health Ministry, would be insignificant. That
cost calculated as a percentage of the salary of each health professional in

government service would be negligible; its cost effectiveness in terms of the

development of human resources and services would be obvious.
Our survey, made after five years of use of MEDLINE, shows that this
database has become essential to the work of many of our academic staff: eighty

per cent of respondents stated that they would elect that the library cancel ten

journal subscriptions rather than the MEDLINE subscription. We are likely to

have to make just such a substitute in the near future. As a first step it is essential

to expose present and future generations of planners, teachers and practitioners to

these databases. The fact that the library has been able to offer four or five

workstations providing MEDLINE and other databases to all comers has meant
quick, easy, and free access to vast quantities of medical literature, which would
otherwise be inaccessible.
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE42
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
We have realized to a considerable extent the potential of CD-ROM
technology at the UZML. The primary effects of the medium have been a vastly

increased access to and use of current health information sources, whether in the

form of abstracts or full-text journal articles or segments from constantly updated

textbooks; and along with this increase there have been very significant changes

in the information seeking behavior of large proportions of academic staff and
students in the Medical Faculty and of health professionals in government service
and the private sector. There is evidence elsewhere, and we must to a great extent

assume, that the increased use of the literature and the resulting increased

knowledge base of health professionals must produce the secondary and most

important benefits of improved health services in general and better patient care

in particular.Our experiences in providing CD-ROM literature search services suggest
that increased and more effective use would be made of the databases, and of

other computer technologies such as email and eventually the Internet, if more of

our present and potential users had been previously exposed to computers, or had

some computer training. Economic circumstances in Zimbabwe have hitherto

prevented all but the most privileged sections of our present and potential user
community from owning or having easy access to computers. However, the rate
of growth in the computer industry, and growing awareness among members of

the health care community of the immeasurable benefits of personal computers
Što which our project has made a major contribution
Šsuggest that a critical mass
of computer users will have been reached in the longer term.
Once this critical mass has been achieved, the question of sustainability will
cease to be such a worrisome issue. Institutions, health services, and individuals

will have their own strong motivation to supply the material and human resources

necessary to exploit and develop the new technologies.
NOTES1. Patrikios, H.M. (1985) Socioeconomic changes in developing countries: the concern of the
medical librarian? In: 
Medical Libraries, One World: Resources, Cooperation, Services.
Proceedings of the Fifth International Congress on Medical Librarianship
. Tokyo: Keio
University Medical Library.
2. Patrikios, M.M. (1995) Effects of MEDLINE abstracts on information use in an African
medical Library. Paper presented at 7
th 
International Congress on Medical Librarianship: Health
Information for the Global Village, Washington, D.C.
3. Warren, K. (1987) The evolution of selective biomedical libraries and their use in the
developing world. Journal of the American Medical Association 
257(19):2628Œ9.4. Patrikios, H.M. (1994, 1996) A minimal acquisitions policy for journals at the University of
Zimbabwe Medical Library. In: 
Survival strategies in African university libraries
. American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
5. Rubin, H.R. et al. (1993) How reliable is peer review of scientific abstracts? Looking back at
the 1991 Annual Meeting of the Society of General Internal Medicine. 
Journal of General
Internal Medicine 
 8(5)255
Œ8.CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE43
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6. Lindberg, D.A., et al (1993) Use of MEDLINE by physicians for clinical problem solving.
Journal of the American Medical Association 
 269(24):3129.
7. Wilson, S.R., et al. (1989) 
Use of the Critical Incident Technique to evaluate the impact of
MEDLINE: Final report
. Palo Alto, CA: American Institutes for Research.
8. Klein, M.S. et al. (1994) Effect of on-line literature searching on length of stay and patient care
costs. Academic Medicine 
69(6)489Œ95.9. Search costs are currently being funded by SatelLife, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

10. Patrikios, H.M. (1993) A minimal acquisitions policy for journals at the University of
Zimbabwe Medical Library. In: 
Survival Strategies in African University Libraries: New
Technologies in the Service of Information
. American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Washington, D.C., p. 96.
CD-ROM FOR HEALTH INFORMATION IN ZIMBABWE44
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Background Summary The African Index
Medicus (AIM) Project
The need for improved access to bibliographic and other information related
to health issues of African countries has long been felt by researchers,
development agents, health administrators, and planners both inside and outside
the continent. Very few African health and biomedical information sources are

included in the world's leading bibliographic databases. Thus, access to

information on health and medical research in the region is inadequate and,

unless researchers publish in non-African journals, their work may be overlooked

or duplicated. Further, there is a wealth of untapped information in books, reports

and studies from international development agencies, non-governmental

organizations and local institutions.
The 
African Index Medicus (AIM) 
was initiated by the Association for
Health Information and Libraries in Africa (AHILA) to provide improved access
to health information published in or related to Africa. At its consultative meeting

in January 1993, in Accra, Ghana, AHILA members made decisions regarding

contents, standard data-input format, methods of exchange of database records,

and training needs. Participants at this meeting included AHILA committee

members, potential pilot-site librarians from Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Zambia, and

Zimbabwe, and technical support staff from the World Health Organization. With

sponsorship from the Health Foundation (New York), WHO has recently

completed training of librarians in Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria,

Tanzania, and Uganda.
With technical assistance from the World Health Organization (WHO) and
support in the form of training and equipment from the Health Foundation and
other agencies, the project is steadily growing with the motivation and hard work
BACKGROUND SUMMARY THE AFRICAN INDEX MEDICUS (AIM) PROJECT45
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the African health librarians. Indeed, Regina Shakakata, one of the
contributors to 
AIM, calls the project "the pride of Africa because it developed
with the efforts of AHILA members." Ms. Shakakata says that, in Zambia, the

AIM project means that the local literature created by health professionals is
indexed and disseminated widely using the printed media intra-nationally and the

Internet gophers internationally. As a spin-off service, her Medical Library
collects the full text articles of the indexed items and integrates them into the
University of Zambia Medical Library collection.
The project is a decentralized one that gives participating institutions greater
bibliographic control of their national health information materials. Databases of

bibliographic records of local health materials are created at the national level,

using CDS-ISIS software. They are then merged with records relating to health in

Africa emanating from other international databases, such as WHO's WHOLIS,

POPLINE, and others. The bibliographic database is only one of the components

of the project. AIM also intends to create files on health-related research, health
information experts, and health information resources and services. Seven issues
of 
AIM have appeared. Input centers are in anglophone and lusophone countries
and francophone countries have been encouraged to join in the project.
A sample file from the database is available on the Internet from the WHO
gopher (gopher.who.ch) in order to give visibility to the project in developed

countries. Through increased visibility, WHO and the AIM participants hope to

garner support for AHILA's efforts by encouraging people and institutions to

become affiliated members in order to receive the latest print version of AIM.

AHILA's existence depends on its membership. Many of the AIM participants
have pointed out the difficulty of getting such a project off the ground with little
or no funding. They encourage other African countries to join the AIM project

and welcome partnerships with bilateral agencies and others interested in this

unique grassroots, south-south project.
The success of the 
African Index Medicus Project 
is due, in large part, to the
efforts of Dr. Deborah Avriel, who joined WHO in 1984 and was Chief Librarian

from 1987 until her death in June 1995. Dr. Avriel's global vision consistently

emphasized the importance of library and information services for health

professionals in the developing world. Her enthusiasm and commitment to the
cause of health information in the poorer countries motivated and encouraged her
colleagues even at a distance. As a vocal supporter and untiring friend of Africa,

she gave vigorous backing to the launching of the 
AIM 
Project.BACKGROUND SUMMARY THE AFRICAN INDEX MEDICUS (AIM) PROJECT46
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications for Better Health Project
in Zambiaby Regina Shakakata
  
 
Regina Shakakata is Medical Librarian at the University of

Zambia Medical Library. She is Coordinator for the

Communications for Better Health project and the National

Coordinator for Healthnet. She has managed the Medical

Library since 1986.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
About ZambiaZambia has an area of 752,600 square kilometers and a population of 8.09
million people (1990 census). It has a national average density of 10.8 per square

kilometer. Children under 15 years and women of child bearing age (15
Œ49)constitute almost 75 percent of the population in any given year.
The country has a fairly good health service infrastructure and a reasonable
cadre of health professionals, at least by standards of the developing world. The

health system is heavily biased in favor of curative services rather than in

preventive medicine and, even then, it favors urban population over rural

populations.Health resources and status are influenced by the economic development of
the country. The consequences of the economic crisis in Zambia include among

others the following:
   Erosion of the health infrastructure;
   A decline in the quantity and quality of access to health services;
   An increase in the cases of malnutrition;
   An inadequate supply of drugs;
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA47
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   An unsatisfactory rate of infant mortality;
   Poor staff morale due to unfavorable working conditions; and
   The neglect of health information provision in national programs.
The University of Zambia (UNZA)
The link between the University of Zambia and the Ministry of Health
(MOH) is the School of Medicine. When the School of Medicine was established

in 1970, it had a book collection which was housed at the then Oppenheimer

College of Social Services. The years that followed the establishment of the

Medical Library saw a steady growth of health information at the library, with a

book stock of 25,000 volumes of books and 781 periodical titles on the current
subscriptions list in 1985 (Stock-taking report, 1985). Although the proportion of
the books and periodicals budget which was given to the Medical Library was

not rationally divided, the Medical Library was able to purchase all the

recommended books and to pay for the periodicals on the current subscriptions

list in any given year. (See 
Box 1.)The Medical Library collection was supplemented by generous donations
from friends of the University of Zambia, mainly from abroad and through gifts

and exchange programs within and outside Africa. The only technology that was

available at the Medical library was an audio/visual collection, which was

composed of slides, microfiche, microfilm, filmstrips, reel-to-reel tapes, and

texts. This collection was not easily accessible because the library did not have,

and still does not have, the hardware with which to view the collection. The
collection was and is still only usable with the help of the equipment from the
UNZA Medical Illustrations Unit of the School of Medicine.
The Medical library struggled to survive through all the economic turmoil
that Zambia faced from 1985 to 1990. Health information provision at the

Medical Library suffered much since 1985. The last regular subscriptions to

periodicals was in 1984. The book budgets were last fulfilled at about the same

time. ThereBOX 1 THE UNZA MEDICAL LIBRARY
The economic conditions that prevailed in the country due to extensive
mining activities at the time of the inception of the Medical Library made it
possible for the UNZA to be very well supported financially. The UNZA in turn
gave 5 percent of its budget to the UNZA Library. As the local book industry was

not developed and is still not developed, all required medical books and
periodicals were obtained from either the United Kingdom or the United States,
with less than 5 percent coming from Africa and other parts of the world (annual

reports, 1970
Œ1985).COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA48
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.was near total dependency on donor support to acquire current health literature.
The World Health Organization (WHO) played a major role to sustain

subscriptions to critical journal titles in the Medical Library. Initially, the total

number of periodicals subscribed to by WHO was 50, which was reduced to 15 in

1987 and which has remained at that level to date. The book collections were

slowly becoming redundant as new acquisitions diminished in number year after
year. The academic and research programs were dependent upon the ingenuity of
the medical librarians and the goodwill of their partners outside the country. The

host institution did not have the funding required to support the library services.
In this situation of real information poverty, genuine financial support was
sought to try and alleviate or reduce the lack of information to less destructive

levels. It was not possible to seek assistance in-country because the entire nation

existed in an information poverty trap. Neighboring states were in no better

situation either, except in the case of the University of Zimbabwe Medical

Library, which survived the scourge of the rash economies of developing
countries due to late independence.
The Carnegie Corporation of New York, the International Development
Research Centre of Canada (IDRC), the Commonwealth of Learning, WHO, the

Ford Foundation, and others have, at one time or another, sponsored meetings

that brought together African medical librarians and persons working in the area

of science and technology information systems and communication technologies
to discuss access to information and other professional developments. Other
groups also provided expert assistance and moral support. These include the

American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), The Health

Foundation of New York (THF), SatelLife of Cambridge, Office of International

Affairs of the U.S. National Research Council, and the African Regional Centre

for Technology (ARCT). Most important of all resources, however, are the

individuals and groups of people who initiated moves to organize these meetings.
Zambia, like any other developing country, has no time to walk
Šit must run
to keep up with the developments of industrialized countries in all fields. In

health information provision in particular, the need to focus on the 1978

Declaration of Alma-Alta, which stated that primary health care was the key to

attaining health-for-all and the recognition that health-for-all could not be attained
without a well coordinated health information system, became critical to
Zambia's aspirations to improve health information provision.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONThe AHILA conferences (see 
Box 2) provided the platform for Zambia to
review its performance in the provision of health information. The result was that

when the first partners offered to help to solve the problems, the Medical Library
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA49
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.took the opportunity and worked to use the resources that were extended to it to
increase health information provision. There have been six major developments

since 1991 offering solutions aimed at getting Zambia out of the information

poverty trap:
BOX 2 THE VALUE OF PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
In certain instances, limitations to accessing health information from
neighboring countries were caused by uncompromising political policies that
were put in place by the nation towards the pre-independent Zimbabwe and
South Africa. What were solvable health information problems became

entangled in factors beyond the librarians' boundaries. This situation could
easily have lead to professional skills redundancy had it not been checked by
the existence of professional meetings at Africa regional level under the
Association for Health Information and Libraries in Africa (AHILA) and the
Medical Library Association (MLA).
   Installation of a HealthNet ground station at the UNZA Computer Centre in
April 1991 by SatelLife and the subsequent installation of a Fidonet email

point at the Medical Library.
   Installation of the CD-ROM technology by the Health Foundation in 1992.
   Establishment of a Zambia national and Africa regional African Index
Medicus (AIM) data base in 1993.
   Initiation of a quarterly publication called the 
Zambia Health Information
Digest (ZHID)
.   Installation of an Internet connection at the UNZA Computer Centre and
the subsequent installation of an Internet point at the Medical Library in

January 1995.   Formation of a National Aids Resource Centre (NARC) in February 1995
(see Box 4).All the initiatives tell one story: that Zambia wanted to solve her health
information poverty problems which dated back to the 1964 pre-independence

era. While I have been involved in some way in all of these initiatives and while I

see them as very synergistic, for the purpose of this case study I will focus on the

Communications for Better Health program, which encompasses the CD-ROM
and the ZHID 
 projects.One initiative listed above, the 
African Index Medicus
, is important to both
me and Helga Patrikios and it has been described in detail on page 45 of this

volume. Another initiative, that of bringing Internet connectivity to Zambia, is

covered in detail in Neil Robinson's case study on page 191 of this volume.
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA50
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
CD-ROM Databases
In 1992, we made major progress in the delivery of health information by
installing CD-ROM technologies. The library received a total of 12 CD-ROM

databases from THF and AAAS, some of which have full text articles, on such

subjects as AIDS. One CD-ROM database, called Popline, is a donation from the

John Hopkins University, whereas the Infectious Diseases database was installed
by the CAB International. The usage of the databases is illustrated in Tables 
1 and
2.Please note that even though the AIM and Infectious Diseases databases are
not CD-ROM databases, their statistics have been included because they are

searchable databases. The Popline database was first received after the first

quarter of 1995, hence the low statistics. The statistics on the Infectious Diseases
database were lower than expected because the contents of the database
overlapped with those of the databases that have existed longer in the Library.

The database comes with coupons for full text articles donated by the CAB

International. Some of the databases were a one-time donation, whereas those

that continued to be received periodically were MEDLINE, Popline and AIDS.

We update the AIM database regularly.
The University of Florida Health Sciences Center Library continued to
provide photocopies of full text articles. Tables 
4Œ8 provide some statistics of the
reprints that have been provided with help from THF since the project started in
1992. The statistics are disaggregated by type of request, subject, distribution by
TABLE 1 Literature Search Statistics (1994)
DatabaseYearly Total
MEDLINE273
British Medical Journal21

Lancet15

New England Journal of Medicine21

AIDS30

Paediatrics17

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report1

Viral Hepatitis2

Year Books1

American Journal of Public Health12

Family Physician2

AIM5

TOTAL ANNUAL STATISTICS
400COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA51
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 2 Literature Search Statistics (January
ŒJune 1995)
Database6 Months Statistics
MEDLINE714
British Medical Journal88

Lancet69

New England Journal of Medicine7

AIDS95

Paediatrics13

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report12

Viral Hepatitis45

Year Books11

American Journal of Public Health34

Family Physician26

AIM67

POPLINE36

Infectious Diseases
48TABLE 3 Categories of Reprints for Medical Library (September 1992
ŒApril 1995)
Category of Reprints
Number of Reprints
Topic requests from UNZA Med. Lib.66
Special requests from UNZA Med. Lib.159

Clinical information file, UNZA Med. Lib.
947TABLE 4 Reprints by Broad Subject Category
SubjectNumber of Reprints
Cancer66
Cholera62

Diabetes53

Diarrhea82

Hepatitis63

HIV/AIDS35

Hypertension91

Malaria36

Maternal & child health/nutrition43

Measles85

Meningitis52

Ophthalmology42

Sexually transmitted diseases53

Trauma/wounds39

Tuberculosis92COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA52
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 5 Distribution of Reprints
User category
Number of ReprintsUniversity of Zambia586
University Teaching Hospital703

Health practitioners
762TABLE 6 Percentage Distribution of Reprints
User category
Percentage distribution
University of Zambia50%
University Teaching Hospital60%

Health practitioners
65%TABLE 7 Health Practitioners Distribution of Reprints
Geographical location
Number of reprints
Within Lusaka410
Outside Lusaka352TABLE 8 Method of Reprint Distribution outside of Lusaka
MethodNumber of reprints
Print176
Email176COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA53
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.numbers, distribution by percentage, distribution by geographical location,
and method of distribution. The total number of reprints received by the Medical

Library by April 1995 was 1,172. Another 234 reprints were received in May

1995, bringing the total to 1,406 reprints. In terms of distribution of reprints, there

were times when they were distributed multiple times, thereby pushing the

statistics high.The email provided an avenue to request and transmit literature search
requests. Furthermore, both the email and post were used to distribute reprints to

users outside Lusaka. Our vision is to provide access to the CD-ROM databases

to health care workers outside the university by using a leased line. The greatest

need for this service is at the periphery health facilities and yet most, if not all, of

the databases cannot be networked over a wide area because of the copyright
rules that govern them. Serious thought should be given to waiving some
copyright regulations to third world countries if information is to be shared

equally among all health care workers.
Zambia Health Information Digest (ZHID)
The 
ZHID 
is a creation of the Medical Library and the Ministry of Health
(MOH), with a grant from THF and IBM International Foundation. It is an

offspring of the CD-ROM technology component of the Communications for

Better Health Project. The first issue was launched on 1 February 1995 at a

ceremony held at the Medical Library. Its contents include appropriate and

relevant health information designed for all levels of health care workers
(presented in the form of abstracts culled from the Ovid MEDLINE and AIM
databases), articles on the management of common medical conditions, feature

articles on other medical conditions, and institutional profiles.
The digest is produced quarterly and circulated to 1200 health facilities and
institutions throughout the country. The MOH plays an important role in the

distribution of the digest. The digest is also distributed on the Internet using the

ZAMNET gopher. It is our intention to distribute it locally using the local

Fidonet email system as well. The launching issue of the digest attracted positive

comments from the local readers and from as far away places as Brazzaville,
Columbia University, and Geneva. The hardware on which the digest is being
produced came from a cooperative grant between THF and IBM International

Foundation. The launching attracted dignitaries from Zambia, the United States,

the Republic of South Africa and received positive media attention.
The University of Florida Health Sciences Center Library provides full text
articles of the Ovid MEDLINE abstracts that are included in each issue of the

digest. The provision of the full text articles by the University of Florida is a

continuation of the aid which is being given to the UNZA Medical Library.
The CD-ROM project did not start in a vacuum; rather, it built upon the
HealthNet project that had just been introduced to the UNZA Medical Library.

Part of the technology
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA54
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(a 286 Olystar Computer) had already been installed by SatelLife. THF added on a
CD-ROM player, providing one work station for CD-ROM activities. This took

place in July, 1992. The pressure on the one computer, which was used for both

email and CD-ROM activities, mounted as more and more people became aware

of the improved health information services being provided by the UNZA

Medical Library.Efforts to get more equipment from donors met with some hitches as we
failed to provide convincing justification for the acquisition of additional

equipment. This did not surprise us because statistics maintenance was poor at

that time. After a lengthy two years of negotiating with donors, THF working in

collaboration with the IBM International Foundation, donated two 486 IBM file

servers, each with a 540 megabyte hard disk; one laser printer; one dot matrix
printer and color monitors.With the availability of this equipment, we ventured into publishing the
ZHID. This project went on smoothly because all that was required to be done
was a few lessons in the use of Wordperfect 6.0 and how to use the graphics, both

programs that we had acquired with the arrival of the file servers. The project

proved a great success and is still running strong. The cooperation from the
Ministry of Health, THF, and the IBM International Foundation motivated us to
such an extent that we aimed to do everything as correctly as possible.
THE RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
The reaction of the clientele to both the CD-ROM and the 
ZHID 
projectswas amazing. Initially the Library staff took advantage of the visit of Dr. Leonard

Rhine, Medical Librarian at the University of Florida Health Sciences Center

Library1, to market the CD-ROM services. In October 1992, he conducted three
half-day seminars on 
Automated literature searching 
at the Library. The
participants in the seminars were drawn from among medical students, the

University Teaching Hospital (UTH) health care workers, and research and

teaching staff from both the School of Medicine and the University's Great East

Campus. The UNZA Medical Library and Main Library staff were also active

participants in the seminars.
The publicity leaflets for the seminars were put up before the arrival of Dr.
Rhine. From that time onwards, most of the Medical Library clientele became

aware of the new technology in the library. They were booked for thirty minutes
each to do literature searches, but they complained that time was too short. The
time allocation provided for a maximum of 15 searches a day. Some requests for

literature searches arrived by email from the periphery hospitals
Ševen though
the technology was not adequately marketed outside of Lusaka. However, my

involvement in the evaluation of the HealthNet project provided an opportunity to

introduce the CD-ROM activities in the Southern Province of Zambia.
The comments from the readers of the digest both from the printed copy and
from the Internet were full of praise for the initiative taken and for the quality and
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA55
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.usefulness of the publication in promoting health information provision. (See
Box 3
.) Some comments were made against the UNZA Medical Library for
excluding some departments of the MOH and other health institutions. Another

indicator of the success of the digest was reflected by the number of local and

international researchers who brought their reports to be published in the digest.

The impact of the digest on the Medical Journal of Zambia is that the editors have
been motivated by the progress made on the digest to such an extent that they
have regrouped and are working out new strategies for reactivating the

publication.BOX 3 SOME COMMENTS ON THE INAUGURAL ISSUE OF
ZHIDThe introduction of the 
ZHID is highly welcome and commended in that it
will not only keep health workers abreast with new developments in health but
will also instill the spirit to do some research. (Clinical Officer in Kasama)
I was so impressed with your educative material, especially for health
workers in remote health centers of the country. Please keep it up.

(Environmental Health Technician, Nakonde)
I wish to congratulate you for the introduction of 
ZHID. Surely it will go a
long way in changing some attitudes and methods in the manner clients are
treated and thereby improve the health standards of Zambian citizens. (Health
worker in Samfya)
I wish to congratulate you most warmly on the first issue of 
ZHID. It is most
impressive and I particularly like the variety of information included: the
institutional profile is an excellent idea, which I hope will be picked up by other
countries. (WHO Librarian,Geneva)
Publicity of the 
ZHID 
was done in grand style with the Deputy Minister of
Health, Dr. Katele Kalumba, officiating at the launching ceremony of the digest.

The occasion attracted media coverage that lasted more than one week. The

launching was followed by a workshop on Problem Solving For Better Health
(PSBH), which took place in Ndola, the Copperbelt Provincial capital. The
participants in the workshop came from all over the country, thereby giving an

opportunity for the digest to be introduced across the country. The method of

disseminating the digest to all health facilities, using the MOH, provided yet

another form of publicity. In short, the digest was self-selling.
It has not been easy to measure the impact of the CD-ROM services in the
absence of carrying out an impact assessment survey addressed from the point of

view of the student performance from the time of the introduction of the service.

The other way of measuring impact would be to find out the increase in medical
research and publishing activities among health care professionals in the School
of Medicine and the UTH. However, the Post Basic Nursing student projects have
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA56
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.greatly improved in quality in the past two years. The 1994 projects were even
applauded by the Research and Ethics Committee of the School of Medicine after a

seminar at which they were presented to the School. As the UNZA Medical

Librarian, I give yearly lectures to the Post Basic Nursing students on library

services and literature search strategies. Recently, I started to do the same for the

School of Nursing students at the UTH.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
The main constraints we faced in implementing the project were the poor
staffing levels at the professional ranks and the lack of appropriately trained

persons to manage the projects. I, as coordinator of the project, had to learn

computer skills as a matter of urgency in order to get going with the activities. In

addition, the support staff were requested to work with me to move the projects

forward. This on-the-job training worked for our library but I would suggest that
it is better to start with the training before implementing the projects.
One lesson learned from this experience is that it pays to include support
staff in traditionally professional projects. We found that many of the medical

library staff had a natural instinct for the technology. For instance, the fastest

learner we had was a library attendant. Once this person was trained, she then

went on to train others, including the library users, to do their own CD-ROM
searches.If I were to start this project again, I would probably not do it much
differently. The idea that intrigued me most was the need to be able to build on

the existing projects instead of re-inventing the wheel. (See 
Box 4.) The other
thing that I found useful was the use of relatively low budgets in implementing

all the projects. In some cases, the projects were parasitic in the sense that they
had no budgets at all, but relied totally on the existence of the other projects. An
example of this is the AIM project which has no budget of its own and is

dependent on the CD-ROM project for sustainability.
BOX 4 NATIONAL AIDS RESOURCE CENTRE (NARC)
This latest project is still in its infancy. In spite of the fact that the proposal is
still under consideration by donors, some local HIV/AIDS literature was pulled
from the UNZA Medical Library and UNICEF databases and put on the ZAMNET

gopher. The Tropical Disease Research Centre (TDRC) Library has also
prepared some abstracts that are still to be installed. The NARC coordinating
center is the UNZA Medical Library and the TDRC Library is a satellite center.
The participating centers are the HIV/AIDS information producing institutions
which are on the email. Data collection will be done by email, whereas the AIDS

database will be resident at the UNZA Medical Library. The ZAMNET gopher
will be updated regularly.
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA57
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.We were also able to build on the electronic communications initiatives of
the University's Computer Center. In 1991, through the Computer Centre, we got

hooked to a Fidonet system and installed a HealthNet satellite ground station. We

started using electronic communications for the following purposes:
Library Partnership ProgramThe first use we made of email was to request literature searches. To do this,
we found a partner in the United States 
Šthe University of Florida Health
Sciences Center Library
Što carry out the searches on our behalf. SatelLife
facilitated the partnership. In June 1991, the first request (for information on

meningitis) was sent to Florida late one afternoon. By the following morning, we
had received a long list of citations, complete with abstracts. Dean Kopano
Mukelabai of the School of Medicine at the University of Zambia acknowledged

this giant break-through in the provision of health information by inviting me to

address a meeting of the Eastern and Southern African Chairmen of Paediatrics

Departments, in August 1991.
HealthNet News
SatelLife introduced an electronic newsletter that we disseminated to health
care workers linked to the Fidonet system. A snap survey on the impact of the

HealthNet News 
in 1993 showed that it was not widely read by users largely
because of the busy schedules of the health care workers at whom the publication
was targeted.Literature Searches
We used the HealthNet communication system to receive and transmit
literature search requests from the health care workers within the country. This

aspect of SatelLife's information services was slow to be fully used because the

health care workers were not fully aware of the information facilities that were at

the Library. By 1994, SatelLife paid for a Grateful Med account to the National
Library of Medicine with access to Toxinet, Cancerlit, AIDS, and Alert.
The HealthNet Communication Service
At the national level, the Library was linked to the Fidonet system but, at
global level, communication was limited by Healthsat to those collaborators who

were hooked to the HealthNet communications system. Most of the

communication was centered on literature searches and to a lesser extent on other

non-specific consultations with health care workers and medical librarians.
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA58
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In January 1995, we received an Internet account from ZAMNET (see Neil
Robinson's case study in this volume.) This development further enhanced access

to and provision of our health information services. Some of the things we are

able to do with the Internet are listed below:
Access to Health Information Databases
Through the Internet, the Library can access many unrestricted databases,
such as the WHO Library database in Geneva. Because a subscription is needed

to access some databases, the Medical Library still needs some assistance to

support these charges.Access to the ZAMNET Gopher
We have installed the 
AIDS Bibliography on the ZAMNET gopher. A
pointer to 
ZHID 
was opened on the Zambia's Worldwide Web homepage in
November 1995, and it is accessible to all Internet users around the world. We

have plans to have more health information on the Internet as more is generated.
Access to Other Databases
The world of information both related and unrelated to health opened to the
Medical Library users with the installation of our Internet node. We have access

to multidisciplinary information through the Internet.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Good programs have been brought to the Medical Library and implemented
to the best of our ability. What we have been doing is just the beginning of a long

road to providing health information for problem solving. Although HealthNet
became a household name in health information transmission, the project failed
because it failed to attract funding after the pilot phase. There is no more health

information being transmitted by Healthsat because the ground station was moved

from Zambia to a more needy site.
In another vein, the Fidonet system which spread all over the country is, in
some cases, being replaced by the interactive Internet. Progress and technology
are playing a major role in the development of a better health information
system. Neil Robinson's case study describes this progression from Fidonet to

Internet and explains how ZAMNET is providing service to all levels of users in

Zambia.Although CD-ROM usage statistics have shown a steady increase since
1992, the use of the databases outside Lusaka has not improved much. The most
frequently used databases continue to attract more and more users, while the less
popular databases continue to be underused. The Popline database is proving to

be very popular.
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA59
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The AIM database is regularly consulted, too. The collection of data outside
the School of Medicine and the UTH has proved to be slow because of the time

and personnel factors. The first NARC HIV/AIDS bibliographies were culled

from the AIM database. Since the database is accessible on the Internet, it has a

wide circulation, but we have not yet devised a method to monitor usage at the

national level. The only statistics available are collected from users who use the
database from the library. On average, there are eleven clients who use the AIM
database per week, and seven of these requests are made by readers of the digest.
Although only two issues of the digest have been released, the feedback from
the readers in form of comments and requests for full text articles has been good.

The usage and comments on the usefulness of the digest will be monitored

continuously through a feedback mechanism built into the publication.
The Medical Library will continue to need support from partners to develop
these programs that improve information provision to health care workers. The

devastating effects of the structural adjustment program on the development of

health information and literature can only be alleviated through the sort of

assistance we have received and hopefully will continue to receive until the

national economy strengthens. In view of the above concerns, I suggest the
following:   We need to network the CD-ROM for greater accessibility to databases by
health care workers who cannot easily come to the library.
   We need to subscribe to key CD-ROM databases not only for the Medical
Library clientele but for other health care workers who depend on us for

information services.
   There are eight other health sciences libraries in Zambia that should be
linked to Zambia's Internet service.
   We need to market CD-ROM databases and other health information
services outside Lusaka.
   We need to purchase a portable CD-ROM workstation that we can use for
demonstrations.   In order to confer on issues relating to health information provision,
Zambian medical librarians should meet at least once a year.
   We need to continue to improve the coverage and frequency of publication
of the 
ZHID.   We need to send medical librarians to all AHILA meetings where much of
the professional sharing takes place.
   We need to subscribe to more databases on the Internet, for example,
MEDLINE.COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA60
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The issues that haunt the UNZA Medical Library hinge on whether health
information and literature provision will develop at the same pace as health

provisionŠwhich is attracting reasonable funding from both the government and
donors. Or will these efforts collapse soon after the current crop of Library staff

disappear from the institution?
I would like to wrap up this story with the following: partnership, intelligent
use of available resources, marketing of health information, and willingness not to

give up are very important factors in the provision of health information. Better

health information leads to better health care. Lastly, our philosophy has been to

access information
Šnot to OWN it. Collaboration with others, regardless of
geographical or political boundaries, and acceptance of the charging information

and communication technologies is the way forward.
NOTE1. The Florida Health Sciences Library has a twinning arrangement with the University of
Zambia Medical Library.
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA61
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATIONS FOR BETTER HEALTH PROJECT IN ZAMBIA62
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Case Studies on Desktop Publishing
The concept of desktop publishing (DTP) synthesizes the capabilities of
typesetting, graphic design, book production, and platemaking in one integrated,

cost effective hardware and software configuration. It allows the computer user to

combine text and image files into a single document and then design a page that

looks like a page in a book or journal. The operator can select different typefaces

and type sizes, can format the text in several columns, or can run text around

graphic images. The page can then be sent to a laser printer for inexpensive page

proofs or to a typesetting device for final printing.
DTP can help to invigorate Africa's struggling publishing houses. Editors
and publishers can use DTP to convert manuscripts into final form and to locally

produce textbooks and journals. Scientific communities can use DTP to publish

and disseminate the results of their research.
As these authors show, the skills required to operate this software at a
professional level are not always easy to learn. The difficulties of obtaining good

design, typography, and layout are not at all diminished by desktop publishing

software. Further, the authors found they needed more than a basic personal

computer: they also needed high-resolution monitors; scanners for the input of

text and images; a mouse (which makes manipulation of the text and graphics

much easier); and laser printers. They also required special software for printing

chemical formulae and scientific figures.
   63
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Most importantly, they demonstrate that a DTP press needs to operate on the
same professional basis as a regular, commercial publisher. These authors

describe how they have instituted the peer review process, good accounting

practices, and high standards for timeliness and quality.
The authors have used DTP to publish newsletters and journals, scholarly
books and proceedings, and such materials as flyers, invitations, and

announcements. Thus have they increased publishing opportunities for African

scientists and created new and innovative means of disseminating scientific and

technological information to a broader audience.
   64
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Desktop Publishing at the University of
Zimbabweby Dr. Xavier F. Carelse
Xavier F. Carelse lectures in the Department of Physics,
University of Zimbabwe and is in charge of the Faculty of

Science DTP Facility. He is a graduate of Fort Hare, South

Africa, and has a special interest in the development of

science and technology education in Africa. He has written

two books that address problems relating to the construction

and improvisation of science equipment in secondary schools
in developing countries.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
Historical BackgroundAfter a period of settler rule that had lasted about 100 years, Zimbabwe
attained national independence and majority rule in 1980. Before that date only

40 percent of our children entered primary school and usually stayed at school for

only three years. Today 70 percent of our children stay at school for at least 11

years and graduate after completing the General Certificate of Education at the

Ordinary Level, the examinations for which are set in the United Kingdom.
Education in Zimbabwe
The increase in the secondary school population, rising over twelvefold from
74,000 in 1979 to 871,000 in 1989, is a particular indication of the heightened

aspirations of our citizens since independence. In that same period the primary

school enrollment rose from 819,000 to 2,103,000. The rate of transfer of children

from Grade 7 to Form One is now about 76 percent.
Over the same period the national expenditure on education has risen from
$200 million to $500 million. With the total population of Zimbabwe being

estimatedDESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE65
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as 12 million, 30 percent of our population are now pursuing full-time education.
With 25 percent of the national budget being spent on education, Zimbabwe is

becoming the country in Africa with the most highly educated population and the

demand for education is still growing. Education in Zimbabwe is therefore a

multi-million dollar growth industry. This captive market has served to support a

variety of services which have benefited from this growth. The largest growth has
been in the manufacture of school uniforms and in book sales.
Book Production in Zimbabwe
Another area of information transfer lies, of course, in the supply and
availability of information in the printed form. This includes not only textbooks,

but also the form of information transfer that deals with the updating of our

immediately available information. This is achieved through the publication of

newspapers, journals, magazines, from which the general public usually benefits.
Of equal importance in the academic world is the publication of bulletins and
newsletters targeting a specialist group and that disseminate information that has a

direct impact on our immediate professional knowledge.
Zimbabwe has a good publishing infrastructure and is able to produce good
quality books at a very low cost. With the formation of the Southern African

Development Conference (SADC), Zimbabwe was chosen to be the publishing

center of the group and has remained relatively unchallenged in this respect. An

appreciable number of books are being written and published for schools and are

usually directed at the local primary and lower secondary school syllabi and
curricula, that is, up to the 11-year-old age group.
A shortage of locally produced books continues to exist at the upper
secondary level with a pupil population of only about 20,000. The syllabi, at this

level, are drawn up by the Cambridge Examinations Board, for which a very

great number and variety of books are available overseas. But, because of

recurring devaluation of the Zimbabwe currency, these are becoming increasingly
expensive. In the last five years, the cost of imported textbooks have increased by a
factor of 5, while the cost of locally produced books have risen by a factor of 2.5.

There is, therefore, a good case for reducing our dependence on imported text-

books.The situation at university and polytechnic level is even more acute.
Virtually all undergraduate textbooks are imported and the cost of all such books

has increased seven or eight times in the same period. Although the University of

Zimbabwe Press (UZP) has been in existence for decades, very few textbooks are

produced in Zimbabwe. The publications they produce are usually extended
reports of research findings in the humanities and are adopted as textbooks for
specialized courses. In the science disciplines, the Department of Biochemistry

has produced some books that were published by the UZP.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE66
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology in Zimbabwe
In 1990, the Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (PTC) launched
ZimNet, which is based on the X.25 package switching protocol. Many financial

concerns, such as banks (including the Post Office Savings Bank), building

societies and insurance companies, are using it on a nationwide basis. In 1991,

the University of Zimbabwe acquired its first link with the Internet via the

UNINET gateway in Grahamstown, South Africa and, in 1992, a second link
under the host-name of MANGO, Microcomputer Access for Non-Government
Organizations, was established via ESANet, the Eastern and Southern African

Network. It is hoped that, before the end of 1995, the University would have

acquired our own gateway to the Internet. In fact, such a gateway already exists in

the commercial sector but is too expensive for most academic users.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONOrigin and History
The Information Systems Project at the University of Zimbabwe has two
phases. In the first phase, the Faculty of Science purchased desktop publishing

equipment because we believed it would be a sound investment that, in the long

run, would show benefits in two important areas: the local production of text

books and the establishment of a facility for publicizing, to the public, the

programs presented in the Faculty of Science. The second phase, for which funds
are now being sought, concerns the creation of a campus computer network.
In 1990, Professor C.J. Chetsanga, then the Dean of Science, and now
Director of the Scientific and Industrial Research and Development Center,

obtained a Carnegie Corporation grant with which he purchased for the Faculty

the basics of a powerful desktop publishing system. The purpose of this facility is

to encourage the publication of textbooks by the academic staff. The move was
seen as an attempt to address some of the problems outlined above.
Dr. N. Dune, Chairman of the Department of Computer Science, who
happened to be on sabbatical leave in the United States at that time, was asked to

make a suggestion for a suitable basic system for our DTP facility. He submitted a

list of Macintosh-based equipment. This system was deemed to be too expensive

and Mr. R. Braithwaite, the proprietor of Software Engineering, Portland,
Oregon, who had spent some time as a guest lecturer in the University's
Department of Computer Science, was invited to recommend an alternative

system. He presented us with an IBM system based on the Intel 80386

microprocessor. This provided us with DTP equipment at a remarkably low cost

and this allowed us to acquire some accessories such as a tape streamer, the full-

page scanner, a surge protector, mathematics and graphics software, and other

facilities without exceeding our budget. (See 
Box 1.)DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE67
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 IBM VERSUS MACINTOSH
In addition to the advantage of having a lower cost, the IBM-system was
preferred because, in 1989, a decision had been made at the University to
standardize all purchases of computer equipment. It was decided that the

university's Computer Resource Committee should only authorize the purchase
of IBM-compatible computers, including clones, and also the BBC Micro,
because of the impact the latter was making on the educational market at that

time. The BBC Micro was a 6502-based computer commissioned by the British
Broadcasting Corporation for use in a computer education series for television.
It had a number of input-output ports which made it unique as an educational

tool. This decision was taken to avoid the proliferation of too great a variety of
computers at U.Z. as great difficulty was being experienced in servicing the wide
range of computers that were appearing. Thus, at the time that the DTP system
was being considered, the Macintosh was not considered to be a possible
option. As almost all purchases of new computers already complied with this

decision, the Mac would not have been very useful to the Faculty.
General and Particular Objectives
The main purpose of the new equipment was to assist the academic staff to
produce textbooks or, alternatively, to compile their lecture notes in a form which

could serve as a textbook. Over the last five years, a number of lecturers have

used this facility for either one or the other purpose. The present Dean of

Science, a mathematician, was one of the first to produce a textbook using the

Faculty of Science DTP Facility.
A second objective was to produce a newsletter to publicize some of the
activities of the Faculty such as the research interests of the staff, new degree

programs that were being offered, the announcement of conferences, workshops

and seminars that were of general or specific interest, and many others. This was

the first aspect of DTP that was implemented and that eventually served to

popularize the service that the facility offered.
The DTP equipment has been in use since January 1992, when a newsletter,
entitled Integrator, was launched, under an editorial board appointed by the
Board of the Faculty of Science. I was invited to be member of this board because

of my previous experience in computerized type-setting and publishing. A DTP

operator was also appointed and designated for training.
The chief success of the program has been in the production of textbooks.
Although little was accomplished in the first year
Šmainly because of lack of
familiarity with the use of the facilities
Šan article that appeared in 
Integrator,Volume 1, No. 2, alerted the faculty to its potential. Since then, a number of

publications have been produced using the equipment. Though these were

compilations of lecture notes, a few are already in the process of being rewritten

into textbooks.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE68
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Products, Technologies, and Services Delivered
The HardwareThe system was specified and delivered in 1991 and reflects, in a modest
way, the status of personal computers at that time. The heart of the system is a 30

MHz 80386-based computer, with 8 megabytes of RAM, installed in a tower

case. It has four disk drives, as follows:
   Drive A is a 1.2 megabyte 5-inch floppy drive;
   Drive B is a 360 kilobyte 5-inch floppy drive;
   Drive C is a 1.4 megabyte 3-inch floppy drive; and
   Drive D is an 80 megabyte hard drive.
We felt that two floppy drives, one high density and one double density,
were needed to allow for the fact that many university departments do not have

computers with high-density drives and an occasional incompatibility occurred.

With the present trend towards the exclusive use of high density media, this is no

longer a problem. Data security is supported with a tape unit for backing-up the
contents of the hard disk. Total back-up is not usually necessary as it is seldom
that user files will be stored on the hard disk. Application files can normally be

reloaded if necessary.
The user input-output devices include a visual display unit (VDU) that is a
14-inch (35-cm) video graphics array (VGA) color monitor with the high

resolution essential for desktop publishing. A Dexxa serial mouse and an

enhanced keyboard were also included.
The semi-commercial, heavy-duty Hewlett-Packard LaserJet Series III
printer prints at the rate of eight pages per minute. It is equipped with Hewlett-

Packard's resolution enhancement feature which gives high quality, professionally

acceptable typeset-quality printing of text and graphics. It has 5 megabyte of

installed memory, built-in PostScript features but, more importantly, it also has
built-in a wide range of mathematical and Greek symbols used by many
scientists, especially physicists, mathematicians and engineers.
The scanning of documents and photographs is undertaken with the Chinon
Model N-207 DS-3000 overhead scanner that is capable of digitizing an A4 size

page of text and graphics by using a charge-coupled device (CCD) image sensor

with a camera-type flat surface scanning method. It is used for scanning the
photographs and line graphics used in the newsletter.
The SoftwareThe original operating system was MS-DOS, version 4, but this has now
been upgraded to version 6. The main environment is Microsoft's Windows 3.1,

which is a very popular GUI (graphics user interface) and is rapidly becoming the

industry standard environmental software for IBM-compatible computers.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE69
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Microsoft's Word for Windows, originally version 1.1, and now upgraded to
version 2, was probably the most powerful word processor for the personal

computer and dwarfed that of almost all dedicated word-processing machines. Its

capabilities overlapped considerably with some of the sophisticated DTP

programs and inclined us to the view that it would be more than sufficient for the

purpose of producing our newsletter. This program was able to handle tables,
graphics and mathematical formulae. It was a simple matter to insert these into
the document file and to position them relative to the text.
A fonts software package, Adobe Type Manager, increases the range of
fonts and symbols available under Windows 3. To broaden the scope of

mathematical typesetting, we have several auxiliary programs such as MathEdit

(described below) and Hewlett-Packard's Type Director to assist the esoteric

user.The scanner is operated through a graphics program called Paintbrush. The
operation is done at various resolutions
Š300, 200, 150 or 75 dots per inch
Šandproduces files with the .PCX extension. A single resolution on the printer is

adopted for printing the graphic. For example, 300 dots per inch (dpi) scanned

files will print out a picture that is the exact size of the original while,

correspondingly, a 200 dpi scan would print out with two-thirds of the linear

dimensions. We are using the latter in the newsletter. In almost all cases we have

found that this resolution is suitable for our purposes and so avoids the need for
shrinking the picture before printing.
Graphics files consume large amounts of storage space. Typically, a 200 mm
by 150 mm photograph will, at 200 dpi resolution, produce a .PCX (a graphics

file format) file of 400 kilobytes. Because of this large size, these files are

normally stored on the hard disk only, although back-ups of the .PCX files are

kept on 1.2 megabyte floppy disks for our archives. Word for Windows requires

graphics in the tagged image file format (TIFF). The .PCX files produced by

Paintbrush therefore have to be converted to .TIF files before they can be loaded

into the newsletter. The above .PCX file would be converted to a .TIF file of 800
kilobytes. The latter are not normally stored on floppy disks. They are invoked
when an image of the picture is to be displayed on the screen or when the

document is to be printed with the picture in place.
When a TIFF graphic is inserted into a Word for Windows file, only
references to the graphic are actually inserted. The Word file, containing

references, such as the dimensions, clipping and scaling information of a 600

kilobyte TIFF file may therefore only occupy 20 kilobyte when saved on disk.

The disk holding the TIFF file itself must be inserted in the drive if it is necessary

to inspect the graphic on-screen or to print a document containing the references.
The desktop publishing equipment includes a variety of quite sophisticated
software accessories specifically directed to the needs of the academic staff of the

Faculty of Science. A brief description of the facilities is enough to engage the

interest and respect of a serious scientific author.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE70
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PageMakerThis package was rated by 
BYTE, 
the computer magazine, to be the best of
the crop of DTP programs that appeared in 1991. It is considerably more

powerful as a DTP tool than Word-for-Windows, which is, first and foremost, a

word processor. PageMaker is a tool for preparing a newspaper and has facilities

far beyond what we require for a newsletter.
MathEditAs a formula-editing utility this program is heaven-sent for mathematicians.
It incorporates a selection of 220 mathematical symbols and is essential for our

DTP support. Word-for-Windows handles about 120 mathematical and Greek

symbols, which may be enough for some but hopelessly inadequate for others.

Like Word, it displays WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get). This is a

major advance over other type-setting programs such as PC-TEX. It produces

TIFF files that can be imported into Word.
DERIVE, Version 2Described as a Mathematical Assistant, DERIVE is used for simplifying,
solving, and plotting mathematical expressions. It is capable of handling

derivatives, integrals, vectors, and matrices, as well as algebraic tasks such as

factorization and expansion of expressions.
FractoolThe inexpensive but powerful program generates splendid fractals that can
be used for enhancing presentations.
CSSThis is a time-series program module that contains a wide range of
descriptive, modeling, and forecasting methods for both time and frequency

domain models. Besides incorporating transformations, modeling, and plotting

program, it also includes ARIMA, the Autoregressive Moving Average Model

for estimating seasonal and non-seasonal parameters for the autoregressive and

moving average process and for forecasting.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Through Integrator, the DTP has had an impact that was not originally
envisaged. Although it is only produced at six-monthly intervals, each issue

contains important information on the working and development of the Faculty of

Science.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE71
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In most developing countries, the Faculty is often underrated as being only a
means of producing science teachers. The articles on careers in science and on the

roles of scientists as consultants to industry, to parastatals and to the government

are used to publicize the Faculty and have served to create a new image that is

not often seen in other developing countries.
The NewsletterThe first Editorial Committee was appointed by the Dean, Professor
Chetsanga. The Editorial Committee chose the title 
Integrator for the newsletter.
They felt that it had a scientific nuance and, at the same time, reflected the spirit

of unity within the Faculty. The formulation of the contents of the 
Integrator makes an interesting story:
Without specifying the type of articles required, the editorial committee
invited the departments to submit one article, relevant to each, that they would

like to see published in the first edition of the faculty newsletter. A somewhat

disjointed collection of articles was presented to the committee. There was an

article on each of the following:
   the research interests of the chemists;
   a new research venture by the geologists;
   a new M.Sc. program by the biochemists;
   a report on a recent colloquium from the biologists;
   an essay on careers for physicists; and
   a report on the launching of the new Department of Statistics.
After reading the articles, I realized that the departments had unknowingly
laid down the structure of the newsletter. A newsletter is a continuing exercise

with regular features as well as special one-off features. The collection of articles

that we had received reflected the needs that the departments wished to express

and so could be used to reflect the needs of the faculty. It was therefore

appropriate that we should use this as a starting point from which to decide the

nature of the articles that we would request in each regular or special feature.
The editorial board agreed that the following regular features would be
requested from each department in sequence:
   Meet the 
–. A description of the research interests of individuals in a
chosen department and of the consultancy services they could offer to

industry or to the parastatals.
   Master of Science in 
–. A description of a postgraduate program offered by
the featured department.
   Careers in 
–. An article directed at high school pupils and describing the
career opportunities existing in the featured department.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE72
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Announcements. An announcement of conferences, workshops and
seminars due to be held in the Faculty of Science.
   Student Science Societies. Reports from the students on the science
societies that they operate.
Special features that any individual, not necessarily from within the Faculty,
could produce include:
   New research ventures in the Faculty;
   New resources and developments in the Faculty;
   Reports on conferences held in the Faculty;
   Reports on international conferences that have a bearing on the Faculty and
the University; and
   Reports of donor agencies and sources of funds from which the Faculty
could benefit.The DTP Software
A general purpose WYSIWYG word processor operating in a GUI (graphic
user interface) is, in our opinion, highly recommended for a small DTP facility. In

addition to Word-for-Windows, most typists in Zimbabwe are familiar with

WordPerfect 5.0 or 5.1. Such word processing programs may not be very useful

for the production of newspapers or other materials with more than four columns,

but for the purpose of producing textbooks and newsletters, it cannot be excelled

by any of the more advanced DTP programs such as PageMaker or Ventura.
Efforts to master PageMaker, which we had also acquired, were abandoned very
early in this program. It was found that a great deal of time was required for the

training of the operator and other users.
The decision to use Word-for-Windows Version 1.1 almost exclusively for
our DTP activity was found to be an excellent choice because of the following

reasons:1. The ease of use once the general Windows environment was
understood.2. The power and versatility of this program.

3. The ability to handle and manipulate the graphics images produced
by the scanner, without any additional software.
We acquired it in 1993 and it has been the only program that we had used
for the production of the 
Integrator. Other workers preferred WordPerfect
Version 5.1, which was also installed, and since then WordPerfect Version 6 has

appeared and seems to have become a strong rival to Word-for-Windows.

Nevertheless, it is my opinion that the even newer Word-for-Windows Version 6
would prove to an excellent successor to Version 2 and I cannot envisage any
foreseeable intention of moving
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE73
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.away from this word processor. In truth, there is much evidence that use of
Word-for-Windows is increasing world-wide while the use of WordPerfect may

have reached a plateau.
The Layout of the Newsletter
After a series of experimental sessions during the training of the DTP
operator, the present layout was chosen as being the most presentable while

keeping the cost of production down to a minimum. The newsletter consists of 16

A4 pages and is printed on A3 paper. The presentation is in three columns,

except for the last page which carries the table of contents. For ease of reading

8-point Helvetica print is used but all headlines are in Times font of various
sizes. The use of Microsoft Word Art, which comes packaged with Word-for-
Windows Version 2 has been used extensively in Volume 3 to enhance the

presentation.The Scanner
In spite of its low cost, this scanner produces quite adequate copies and has
served very well for the production of the first volumes of 
Integrator. It has also
been used by lecturers and research students to reproduce graphs and diagrams

for insertion into their papers. It is still serving us well but, since its purchase,

many new scanners have appeared at a reasonable price and with more facilities.

We believe that the time has come to upgrade the scanner. For Volume 3,
published in 1994, we used an Apple flatbed scanner belonging to the University
Publications Office. This scanner allowed very smooth sizing of the graphics

without a change in resolution.
The Reprographic Facility
The Hewlett Packard Laserjet III has proved to be an excellent choice for a
printer of the master copies. The fact that the printer was made easily accessible

to all users may have been a mistake because it has led to considerable abuse and

overuse and the expense of excessive replacement of toner cartridges. Many

would have preferred that its use was strictly monitored and a nominal charge

levied for use, but in retrospect there is evidence that the ''free use" policy played a
principal role in the instant acceptance of the DTP Facility.
During the first year of production of 
Integrator, the masters were submitted
to the University of Zimbabwe Reprographic Unit. After that initial period, it was

felt that the production could be streamlined if we had our own reprographic

facility. In 1992 we successfully applied to Carnegie Corporation of New York

for funds for a heavy duty photocopier that could be used for the relatively low
bulk production of the 
Integrator. A Konica photocopier was purchased and this
has made the faculty completely independent of the University's Reprographic

Unit and so has reduced the cost of production. Volume 2, No 1, January 1993,

andDESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE74
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.subsequent editions of 
Integrator, were produced in this way.
BOX 2 BENEFITS OF THE INTEGRATOR
The publicity that we have received through 
Integrator and through the
M.Sc. in Applied Physics program has opened the door to a number of
consultancy projects for the lecturers and has served to enhance the reputation
of the department in the industrial sector.
RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Once the DTP facility was in place, the early launching of the 
Integrator 
was very well conceived. The very first issue contained an article on the DTP

project and the equipment that was available for prospective authors. Without the

Integrator, it is unlikely that DTP would have been accepted so soon by the
Faculty.There can be no doubt that the original purpose of the DTP facility, namely,
the production of compiled lecture notes and textbooks, has been realized.

Compilations of lecture notes have been produced in the Departments of Physics,

Chemistry, Biochemistry and Mathematics. This reflects a general trend in the

University and has been confirmed by the Director of the University of

Zimbabwe Press, where a plan to produce more textbooks is already under way,

with three books having been approved for publication in July 1995 alone.
The DTP facility may be used in the production of masters that can be
submitted to the University Reprographic Unit for printing. The advantage of this

is gained through the ability of the Reprographic Unit to use cheaper paper for

their printing process and also being able to produce large quantities without

imposing a strain on their equipment. They have a copy printer and other standard

printing equipment. As they are able to produce color layouts, they may be

invited to produce our front and rear pages in color at a later stage in our
development.BenefitsThe increase in publicity that was generated by the 
Integrator for the Faculty
of Science cannot be overstated. (See 
Box 2.) It had an effect among both
students and staff. A few examples relating to the Department of Physics will

suffice to illustrate this point.
In the period 1986 to 1989, the intake into the Department of Physics
dropped progressively from 132 in 1986 to 77 in 1989. This was partly due to the

launching of the B. Tech. program that was heavily science-oriented and, among

others, offered two new areas into which school-leavers with physics grades

could be absorbed, namely, Applied Physics and Electrical Technology. The

article on Careers in Physics that appeared in the first issue of 
Integrator created a
new interest in mainstream physics and our intake has reached and stayed at
about 100 students since then.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE75
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The publication of the questionnaire on the proposed Master of Science in
Applied Physics program created a new interest in physics. The response from

industry and from the graduates was gratifying. In our first year (1993), we

received over 30 applicants but were only able to accept 8. Although we had

intended to accept candidates only in alternate years, we decided to admit 8 new

students again in 1994. This Masters program required candidates to spend 6
months attached to an industrial firm in order to become acquainted with
industrial practice in Zimbabwe. After this period, the students are required to

work on a research project. We invite the firm to suggest a suitable project that

can be completed with the firm and that will allow the student to continue

working with them. In every case where the firm was approached, a project was

found.Many of the courses that were offered in this program were newly conceived
and it was difficult to find suitable textbooks. One of the first products was

derived from lecture notes on Atmospheric Physics. The present Dean of

Science, a mathematician, was one of the first to produce a textbook using the

Faculty of Science DTP Facility. Textbooks on Microprocessor Applications and

a Laboratory Manual are being planned.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Training of DTP Operator
In 1990, a typist with computer experience was appointed specifically for
training as a DTP operator. At that time such typists were a rare commodity in

Zimbabwe and the DTP operator acquired a rather special status. Within a year

she was promoted to the level of a senior secretary and was attached to the Dean's

office. Although ostensibly she was still the DTP operator for the 
Integrator, shefound it increasingly difficult to fulfill all the tasks required of her.
Meanwhile, with her limited assistance, I found myself almost solely
responsible for the publication of the newsletter. With hindsight, it is clear to see

now that there should have been more than just one person trained for operating

the typesetting facility and to produce the 
Integrator. That I did not do so was due
to the fact that I had been appointed Chairman of the Department of Physics in
1989 and had very little opportunity to run such a training program. It was, in
fact, easier for me to browbeat other chairpersons into producing the soft copy

and, with the assistance of the DTP operator and my own departmental typists, to

devote one week of intensive work to the production of the newsletter. What is

learned from this experience is that the publisher of the newsletter must be

someone with clout and who has clerical help beyond what was officially

designated to the editorial board. I was able to extract information and

cooperation from important agencies such as the Information Office, the

Reprographic Unit, the Publications Office and the Dean's Office that may have

been more difficult for others to obtain.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE76
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computers became more plentiful soon after 1993 when ESAP, the
economic structural adjustment program, allowed the relatively free importation

of such seemingly luxury items. More typists are now familiar with the use of

computers and this has allowed more departments to benefit from the Facility.

The typists can produce the manuscripts to disks and these can be quickly typeset

and included in the newsletter. A training program for at least one typist per
department would now be indicated. In this way the articles could have been
near-"camera-ready" without much intervention by the DTP operator. The

departments themselves would have benefited through the typists' improved

ability to prepare highly attractive documents and manuscripts and also to assist

the research programs in the preparation of camera-ready copy for professional

journals.Training of Academic Users
The DTP Facility proved to be quite popular with the academics who wished
to produce books or compile lecture notes, and with research students who were

preparing their theses or dissertations. The enhanced presentation of graphical

material was particularly favored. Within this framework, these users were able to

receive assistance from myself or from the DTP operator. But, on the whole, they

tended to acquire the rudiments of typesetting without any difficulty. (See
Box 3.)The HardwareWhen the search for a suitable system for DTP was first launched, there
were two choices: use an IBM-compatible system or adopt the more user-friendly

Macintosh systems. The most important consideration is cost. We can concede

that the Macintosh is seductively user-friendly but this comes at a cost that is not

only financial but also found in its restrictiveness
Šin most cases only software
specific to the Mac may be used.
Although all Mac machines today are capable of running DOS-type
applications, this additional capability costs extra money. It is significant that

Mac users wish to use DOS applications but IBM users do not wish to use Mac

applications on their machines. We were able to purchase an IBM clone for less

than half the
BOX 3 NEED FOR A TRAINING PROGRAM
The consequence of the deficiency of trained persons was vividly illustrated
this year when a new publication coordinator was appointed while I was on

sabbatical leave. As he did not specify that copy had to be received on disk in
the recommended formats, he received hard copy and had to retype everything
himself. This seriously hindered the continuity of publication of the 
Integrator.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE77
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.price of an equivalent Macintosh. The savings enabled us to purchase accessories
such as the scanner, additional supplies of toner cartridges, and a wide selection

of software for scientific typesetting which we would not otherwise have been

able to afford. Recently the price of Macintosh computers has come down but

accessories are still expensive because of the lack of cheaper clone products. For

users in poor countries low cost must take precedence over user-friendliness.
For us, the wisdom of purchasing a Macintosh was questionable and we are
pleased with the decision to use an IBM-compatible computer. Indeed, there

were, at that time, dozens of IBM clones in use on the campus and only one

Macintosh. Our purchase of the latter would have disadvantaged almost everyone

on the campus and thus would have seriously delayed the acceptance, and

undermined the usefulness, of the DTP Facility.
When it was purchased it was, because of its specifications, the most
powerful computer in the Faculty at that time and many wished to use it. Today

there is a proliferation of much more powerful computers in all departments and,

sadly, the 80836 computer has become nearly obsolete. If the system was

purchased today, a 32-bit computer with an Intel 486i or a Pentium

microprocessor would be at top of the shopping list. There are many advantages
of having such powerful computers, the most important of which is the
remarkable versatility of graphics and other applications software that is

associated with them. Software supported by Windows 3.1 or Windows 95 now

offers a degree of sophistication that demands such high quality graphics and it is

well worth the investment.
The purchase of a CD-ROM drive is also recommended because of the
low-cost of the software available on it and of the high capacity and reliability of

this storage medium. The average CD-ROM holds 600 megabytes of data, the

equivalent of over 400 high density 3.5-inch disks. Quite impressive clip-art and

fonts are now available on CD-ROM and this will greatly enhance the appearance

of documents and books.
The Need for a Network
The day-to-day use of the DTP Facility is restricted by the fact that is only
accessible to one person at a time. If we want it to be more widely used, we must

incorporate networking, which today is the single most important hardware-

related advantage in computer usage. This will give all DTP users access to all

the desirable components of the network without the need to leave the office.

This includes access to the laser printer, the clip-art, the word processor, graphic

packages and the typesetting packages.
The would-be author could stay in the office, surrounded by personal texts
and references and, if connection to the Internet with World Wide Web is

available, to the wealth of information that is now almost freely accessible on this

medium. The DTP Facility then becomes one of the other services available on

the network and using it becomes less dependent on special trips to the Faculty of

Science DTP room where you may find that someone has already beaten you to
the computer.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE78
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Laser Printer
One of the principal attractions of the DTP Facility was the fact that the
laser printer was used at no charge. There are arguments for and against such free

use of an expensive piece of equipment but a levy on the use of the laser printer

would have discouraged the use of the DTP equipment as a whole. Fortunately,

sufficient funds were available to purchase a considerable stock of cartridges.

Some savings were made by the purchase of recycled cartridges. Because of the
now heavy use of the printer, it may now be advisable to impose a levy to offset
the running costs.The administration of the Facility then becomes a task which has to be added
to the other tasks of those guarding it. It was decided in 1992 that the running

costs of the Facility should be shared by the departments in the Faculty and that

the Dean, before allocating funds to the "Consumable" account of the

departments, would withhold a levy for the use of the Facility. This was readily

agreed to by the departments. The use of the Facility thus continued to be "free"

to individual users.
Upgrading the printer facility has mainly taken the form of ensuring that
software drivers for the implementation of a laser printer were available for all

applications. Because of the relative isolation of Zimbabwe at that time, this was

not easy for some of the relatively more esoteric applications, but gradually the

goal was achieved. Nevertheless after four years of heavy use, it is now time to

consider replacing the printer. At the time of purchase, the Hewlett Packard
LaserJet III was at the top end of the DTP accessory market. Since then there
have been many improvements in the specifications of printers from which we

now have to choose.
Although laser printers are more reliable and still produce the best quality
output, we now have ink-jet printers which, simply by changing the ink

cartridges, produce hard copy in color. As they generally cost about half the price

of laser printers, it may be advantageous to keep an ink-jet printer as a stand-by

for special purposes such as the production of covers and brochures which are

best done in color. Textbooks are often produced in two colors
Šblack and a
second softer color, usually dark orange or dark blue. This improves the
readability of the text and has found wide acceptance in school and freshman

texts. This improvement is recommended for developing countries where the

medium of instruction is not necessarily the language of the home and readability

is important.
Flat Bed Scanner
Although the Chinon DS-3000 overhead scanner was relatively
unsophisticated at the time of purchase, it was, to the best of my knowledge, the

only full-page scanner available on the campus. The Computer Science

Department had a video frame-grabber which was jealously guarded and

unavailable to staff from other departments. This relatively inexpensive scanner

was useful for the insertion of photographs and hand-drawn graphics into the

documents and produced bitmappedDESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE79
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.files in a variety of formats. After the printer, it was the second most important
accessory to the DTP system and, though still serving well, it is starting to show

its age and limitations against the newer products which are now available at

affordable prices.
Today we would have purchased a flat-bed full-page scanner with an ability
to shrink and expand the graphics without undermining the resolution. Perhaps,

for economy, we would still select a black and white scanner, but for enhanced

presentation, a color scanner would be recommended. It would serve well for the

production of book covers, pamphlets, brochures, and posters. Many modern
scanners are packaged with OCR (optical character recognition) software with
various degrees of reliability and usefulness. The scanned image is converted by

the software to a binary file which can be imported into a text editor or a word

processor. This is very convenient for editing pre-printed matter.
Upgrading the Software
Although PageMaker was included in the original purchase and attempts
were made to bring it into use, it soon became clear that it was too powerful and

demanding for our purposes. Initially we did feel the need to use it but by 1992,

word-processors such as Word-for-Windows and WordPerfect had already

provided the power that made them more than adequate for the production of
newsletters and text books. Since the establishment of the Facility, we have used
only Word-for-Windows as the medium of typesetting. This has proved to be

quite sufficient for our needs.
Most of the Departments in the Faculty of Science have adopted the use of
this word-processor, although many are still using WordPerfect Version 5.1 or

ChiWriter Version 4.1 because of their ability to run directly under MS-DOS.

The Microsoft drawing program, PaintBrush, supplied with the original setup is

also popular and many use Lotus-123 for the production of graphs. There seems

to be a sizable lag in the use of more sophisticated programs, such as Excel in its
many versions.There is a need to have a continuous review of the software used for DTP.
The original Word-for-Windows has been upgraded from Version 1.1 to Version

2, and includes Word Art, a package used to enhance the presentation of the

Integrator. The effect of using this package may be seen by comparing the front
page of 
Integrator 
Vol. 1, No. 1, January 1992, with the front page of
Integrator Vol. 3, No. 2, July 1994. We are considering an upgrade to Version 6,
which has even more advanced features which are useful for DTP. WordPerfect

Version 6 is now also run in the Windows environment. It allows:
   Easy switching to full screen viewing of page. This is useful when wishing
to see the full effect of page presentation.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE80
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Autoformatting. This allows a set of styles associated with a template to be
assigned instantly to a document. Unformatted draft copy can be converted

to a new camera-ready from with a single command, instead of applying

each style paragraph by paragraph.
   The creation of unequally sized columns. This provide more flexibility in
layout design and more easily allows the incorporation of different sizes of

graphics.Reprographics by Copy Printer
The integrated system, consisting of the 30 MHz 386 with an 80 megabyte
hard drive, Chinon scanner, HP laser printer, and Konica photocopier, worked

very well till this year, 1995. The extent to which the facility is being used has

increased to a level that was not foreseen five years ago when it was first

conceived. The shortcomings of the system are now beginning to show. The
photocopier is emerging as the weak link in the chain mainly because of the
heavy usage to which it is being put, especially with regards to the lecture-notes

and other hand-outs. It is also being used as a stand-by when other photocopiers

in the Faculty have broken down.
Under normal circumstances, a photocopier would be expected to serve for
five years and, as the Konica was one of the most reliable and resilient of the

machines we had identified, we thought that this would be the case even with

heavy use. This has not been true and, in the last six months, it has begun to show

the strain. The officer in charge of the Faculty of Science Reprographic Room,
now feels that the time has come to move one step higher and to replace the
photocopier with a copy printer. He has identified a suitable machine: the

Risograph Digital Printer GR 3750. The machine is available in Zimbabwe

through an outlet in South Africa. We believe that the addition of this copy

printer to the system would greatly enhance its effectiveness.
Some time ago it was discovered that photocopiers need more frequent
servicing when a certain type of cheap paper is used. This paper is characterized

by the high degree of fluff (loose fibers) generated by the paper. These fibers clog

up the gears and other moving parts of the printer. It therefore became imperative
that we use only high quality bond paper for the photocopier and printer. The fact
that a copy printer can use cheaper paper for publication is a further incentive for

purchasing one.
The Photographic Library
A good newsletter must be well illustrated, preferably with a number of
photographs of the faculty staff, both academic and non-academic. The service of

the Reprographic Services photographer was used initially but was found to be
expensive and it was difficult for him to coordinate with the movements of the
subjectsDESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE81
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.he was to photograph. As publisher I knew quite well the type of photographs

that I required for each article. So after the first year of publication, I decided to

take my own photographs. During the short period that we have been in

existence, we have acquired a sizable photographic library and so it is generally

easy to find suitable pictures for use in the newsletter. The scanned images of the

photographs are kept on disk and may be used instantly when required.
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Conclusions and Plans for Future Development
There is no doubt that the DTP Facility is fulfilling a need in the Faculty of
Science. Its use has only been restricted by the fact that we do not have a network

with multi-user capability. It has served the purpose for which it was purchased,

namely, the production of compiled lecture notes and textbooks. A newsletter,

Integrator, is published at six monthly intervals. Our plans for future
developments include:   The placing of the DTP Facility at the disposal of all staff in a multi-user
environment such as a network. We have already made much headway on

the campus in this direction so we hope that this goal will be speedily

achieved.   The purchase of the following:
  Š a more powerful computer to host the DTP Facility;
  Š a high resolution flat-bed scanner possibly with the capability of scanning
in color;  Š an ink jet color printer; and
  Š a copy printer with the capability of sorting and collating large volumes.
RecommendationsThe following recommendations are made in relation to the acquisition of a
new facility.
The NewsletterFor any group who wishes to popularize its DTP facility, a well-produced
newsletter is a mandatory starting point. The readers are immediately made aware

of the facilities and possibilities available to the user. You should insist that all

articles for inclusion in the newsletter be submitted on disk with as little previous

formatting as is consistent with clarity and readability.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE82
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TrainingMany academics are able to master even the most complicated of the
computer processes quite quickly. This is less easy for clerical staff who certainly

need to attend a training program with at least 8 hours of hands-on practice. It is

recommended that a workshop be run annually during the long (summer) vacation

to train as many typists as possible in the use of the word-processor for

typesetting.Personnel for the Newsletter
The publications work force should consist of one publisher and an assistant
Šboth possessing sound computer experience. With practice, many are able to
master the art of laying out a newsletter if the intricacies of manipulating the text

are understood. They should not have to type any articles except their own. They

should be assisted by a good secretary who is thoroughly trained in the use of the

word-processor for typesetting applications. The secretary should be able to
produce accurate drafts that have been subjected to thorough spelling checks.
Planned and Regular Upgrading of Hardware and Software
There should be built into the proposal for a DTP Facility, plans for
regularly upgrading the hardware and software. Funds should be sought for the

replacement of outdated equipment and application programs well in advance of

their becoming obsolete. This includes the replacement and upgrading of the

word processor, graphics and clip-art, and the supplementation of the available
fonts.Printer and CollatorThe laser printer and the copy printer, if available, would incur almost all of
the running costs of the facility. It has been found that the free use of the laser

printer could lead to abuse but, in terms of the purpose for which the facility was

acquired, it is probably the best policy. The recurrent cost should be borne by the

Faculty of Science through levies imposed by the Dean. This levy becomes an
incentive for the departments to make full use of the facility. Attempts to exact
levies direct from individual users will be counter-productive and complicated to

administer and should be discouraged. The benefits to the students and to the

Faculty as a whole should always be considered foremost.
Color Presentations
The use of color may be considered to be a luxury
Šwhich it probably is
Šbut it has its advantages in terms of the quality of the work that would be

produced. If funds can be found, the acquisition of a color scanner and a color

printer is recommended.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE83
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NetworkingMany universities in developing countries are working towards the
establishment of a campus computer network. If this is available, the DTP

Facility should be made accessible to the network users. If necessary,

prohibitions could be made against users from outside the Faculty of Science, but

it is preferred that some financial arrangement could be made with such users.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZIMBABWE84
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Desktop Publishing at the Tanzania
Commission for Science and Technology
by Albina Kasango
When she wrote this case study, Albina Kasango was the
Scientific Editor at the Tanzania Commission for Science and

Technology (COSTECH), where she was also the assistant

editor of Tanzania S&T News. She is currently the Editor,

Publications and Publicity Officer for the Economic and

Social Research Foundation, an NGO that carries out

research on social and economic pssues and offers policy

options to the government, international organizations, and
the public. She is still actively involved in desktop publishing and in producing

works that contribute to scientific literacy.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
Background Information on Tanzania
Tanganyika (now Tanzania) attained its independence in 1961. It was then
that the efforts of ''Mwalimu" (Teacher) Julius Kambarage Nyerere at the United

Nations resulted in the granting of self rule. Before that, Tanzania had been a

British Protectorate and had been under German colonial rule before the second

World War. After two years of independence, on 26 April 1964, Tanganyika

formed a union with Zanzibar and became what we now know as Tanzania.

Accordingly, the President of Tanganyika became the President of the United

Republic of Tanzania and the President of Zanzibar became the Second Vice-

President and retained the Presidency of Zanzibar. The First Vice-President of

Tanzania was to come from mainland Tanzania.
Tanzania emberked on a Socialist path to development in 1976, with
President Nyerere's "Azimio la Arusha" (Arusha Declaration). This period saw

the nationalization of the major means of production. Banks, post and

telecommunication, and electricity-generating systems became public property.
The early 1990s brought great changes. Following the wave of
democratization around the world, the fall of the Eastern Bloc countries, and the

end of the
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY85Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cold War among the superpowers as the former Soviet Union collapsed, the

political climate changed and the Tanzania people felt they too were ready to take

the maturity test. The Constitution of the country was amended in 1992 to allow

multi-party politics. Today there are 13 registered political parties, with General

Elections due in October 1995.
Tanzania has an estimated population of 26 million, with people coming
from more than one hundred and twenty ethnic groups or tribes.
Institutional Information
The Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) was
established by Parliamentary Act No. 7 of 1986. It is a parastatal organization

whose parent Ministry is the Ministry for Science, Technology and Higher

Education (MSTHE). Being a service-oriented institution, it runs its activities by

Government subvention, which it receives through the MSTHE.
COSTECH deals with the popularization, promotion, and coordination of
science and technology activities in the country. The Director General of

COSTECH recently reiterated the principal functions of the Commission

(COSTECH) as stated in the enabling Act. These are to:
   formulate policy on the development of science and technology and
recommend its implementation by the government;
   monitor and coordinate all activities relating to scientific research and
technology development of all persons or body of persons concerned with

such activities;   acquire, store and disseminate scientific and technology information, and
for that purpose hold or sponsor conferences, symposia, meetings, seminars

or workshops or publish any newspaper, periodical or do any other act or

thing designed to promote interest in science and technology development;
   advise the government on:
  Š priorities in scientific research;
  Š the allocation and utilization of research funds according to priorities
referred to above;
  Š regional and international cooperation in scientific research and transfer
of technology;
  Š matters relating to the training and recruitment of research personnel;
  Š instruction on scientific subjects in educational institutions within the
United Republic;  Š the initiation, formulation and implementation of research policies and
programs;  Š the establishment and maintenance of national scientific standards; and
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND

TECHNOLOGY86Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Š science and technology policy.
   provide researchers with funds for conducting research in areas given
priority by the government upon the advice of the Research and

Development (R&D) Advisory Committees; and
   provide users with the information to make appropriate choices in the kind
of foreign technologies suitable for importation and assimilation.
COSTECH is governed by a Chairman (a Presidential appointee) and
Commissioners who are nominated by the Minister, with the Director General in

the capacity of Secretary to the Commission. The Director General is also a

Presidential appointee. COSTECH has four directorates: Information and

Documentation; Research Promotion and Coordination; Centre for the

Development and Transfer of Technology (CDTT); and Administration and

Finance.The CDTT provides the public with the information and expertise to make
the right, pertinent, or appropriate technological choices when, say, importing

machinery from abroad. The Centre, of course maintains close liaison with Trade

Attachés of diplomatic missions and other relevant personnel in the country and
international agencies abroad dealing with the same.
The Directorate of Information and Documentation
Šwhere I worked
Šisactively involved and committed to providing information to all members of

society. The Directorate of Information and Documentation COSTECH has

several sub-units as described below:
   The Documentation Centre includes a library collection in the fields of
science and technology that serves an indiscriminate group of clientele from

the Tanzanian public.   The Publications unit has the DTP facilities under its jurisdiction and
produces documents for publication.
   The Popularization Unit produces radio programs in conjunction with the
parent Ministry that are in Kiswahili and serves to popularize science and

technology at the grassroots level.
   The Training and Communications Unit organizes and holds training
courses for various groups of the Tanzanian community (women scientists,

technologists and researchers, librarians); provides electronic mail and fax

facilities to an increasing number of scientists; and also takes care of the

computer maintenance at the Commission.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONOrigin and History of DTP at COSTECH
The Desktop Publishing (DTP) unit is a new phenomenon: COSTECH's
initial plan was to have a Printing Press Unit, complete with all of the now-old

technologiesDESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY87Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that would have occupied an entire room. But, before we could proceed with this
plan, we were swept up in the printing revolution known as desktop publishing.

DTP software became available in COSTECH through the UNESCO-funded

database project that aimed at producing a directory of scientists. The DTP

equipment and software was "borrowed" from this project when it was not being

used to input data. This marked the beginning of the DTP Unit at COSTECH.
In 1990, COSTECH secured funds from the International Development
Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada to produce a directory of scientific personnel

in the country. The project, called the Tanzania National Information System on

Science and Technology (TANISSAT), was to be achieved with a database

management system that incorporated the use of DTP software, called

Pagemaker. At the same time, there was an urgent need for COSTECH to
produce a newsletter on science and technology in a bid to popularize the same
within the country.
Theophilus Mlaki, the Director for Information and Documentation, was
charged with this responsibility and, at first, he thought that WordPerfect 5.0

would suffice. It had all the facilities for producing camera-ready copy ready for

publication. The only snag was that WP 5.0 lacked the ability to "cut and paste"

photographs and other graphics (from programs other than WP)
Ša capabilityfound in more sophisticated software. This facility allows the user to use

photographs, emblems, or illustrations from other sources and to place them with
the text. The user can rotate, size, and edit the graphics involved. So COSTECH
decided to use PageMaker on the equipment that was provided by UNESCO. Of

course, this was to be done only when the computer was not being used for data

entry. Mr. Mlaki designed the first newsletter, selected the typefaces and fonts,

and wrote most of the articles.
Initially the DTP Unit produced one main publication: the 
Tanzania S&T
News, 
a newsletter aimed at popularizing science and technology in Tanzania.
Over the years, the number of publications has increased with the expansion of

the Commission and the activities it performs. Five years after its inception, the

DTP Unit has produced camera-ready copy for public lectures; the 
Proceedingsof the Annual Scientific Seminars; 
the Act of Parliament for COSTECH; three
annual reports; books of abstracts for the Medical Association of Tanzania, the
International Centre for Industrial Technology and Environmental Sciences, and
the National Fund for the Advancement of Science and Technology (in both

English and Swahili); and other smaller publications, such as birthday cards and

wedding and party invitations.General and Particular Objectives of DTP at COSTECH
The function of the DTP unit at COSTECH falls squarely under the division
that deals with the dissemination, popularization, and storage of scientific and

technological information. Specifically, the project's objectives are to:
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY88Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   produce articles for publication in the daily newspapers in a bid to
disseminate technologies or generate interest in the need to change

production processes where necessary;
   publish proceedings of the annual scientific Seminar and thus create a
means for our indigenous scientists to draw national and world attention to

their findings and get the acknowledgement they need;
   disseminate the latest news of national interest on pertinent science and
technology issues to members of the scientific communities, the National

Assembly, and government to enable them make pertinent choices/

decisions; and
   inform the scientific communities and the general public on the latest
developments in the activities of the Commission
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
When I first moved into COSTECH, I spent long hours sitting alongside Mr.
Mlaki and Mr. Andrew Dachi, COSTECH's Computer Specialist and the

typesetter. Together, we would work on producing what were the overdue back

issues of the newsletter. Because I was not well-versed in this new line of work, I

worked first as a "gopher." Mostly, I remember, I would be sent upstairs to

collect the original documents that I had used to compile the articles
Šas I
invariably did not have all the pertinent information incorporated into my text.
Slowly, though, I learned the trade and was even able to typeset the 1993 issue of

the Newsletter unaided
Šbut still under Mr. Dachi's supervision.
In 1993, COSTECH embarked on an ambitious project to popularize science
and technology by holding fora where scientists, technologists, industrialists and

members of the general public could meet to discuss pertinent issues in the realm

of science and technology. The first of these COSTECH Scientific Public Lecture

Series was given by Keto Elitabu Mshigeni, Professor of Botany at the University

of Dar es Salaam who is on attachment at the University of Namibia. His talk was
entitled "The Seaweed Farming Story along the Western Indian Coast: Past,
Present and Future." Using its DTP facilities, COSTECH has been able to

produce the camera ready version of the lecture.
In 1993, COSTECH also secured funds from UNESCO's Intergovernmental
Informatics Programme (IIP) to conduct a computer training course for Tanzanian

women scientists, technologists and researchers. This was undertaken in a bid to

empower women in the workplace and make them more competitive with their

male counterparts. Women graduates were indeed found to possess very few

computer skills. Out of the 250 course applicants, 42 percent of the women with
Masters Degrees had no computer knowledge! COSTECH provided the technical
aspect of the training with a few trainers coming from affiliated institutions. And

of course the "Course Manuals" were prepared using the DTP facilities. One such

manual is for the Advanced Computer Course.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY89Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 DEDICATION
Typesetting other smaller documents is not hard in itself. Most difficult
perhaps are the odd hours in which typesetting is not only required but becomes a
priority! An emergency invariably arises just as one is about to leave for the day

or, worse, for the weekend. Dedication and altruism are required for this job.
We have also produced posters, brochures, certificates, and other documents
to advertise the Tanzania Awards for Scientific and Technological Innovation

Achievement (TASTA). These are given to people and institutions who make

discoveries likely to promote and accelerate the social and economic progress of

Tanzania.On 1 July 1995, the National Fund for the Advancement of Science and
Technology (NFAST) was launched by the Honorable Dr. Salmin Amour, the

Second Vice-President of the United Republic of Tanzania and President of

Zanzibar. NFAST motivates inventors and innovators as well as the general

public. Through NFAST, we hope that Tanzania will make a quantum leap in its

ability to apply new technologies, especially in such frontier areas as

biotechnology, solar/biogas energy, new materials technology, and electronics.

The NFAST program, information brochure, invitation cards, and charity walk

cards were produced using the DTP facilities at COSTECH.
Perhaps our most important product (and the most time consuming!) is the
Tanzania S&T News
, a quarterly newsletter that is mailed to over 500 prominent
individuals and institutions worldwide. In Tanzania, the mailing list includes

ministers, heads of research and development institutions, and the private sector.

Internationally, the newsletter is mailed to UN bodies involved in the

development of science and technology, Tanzanian embassies abroad, the

American Library of Congress, and others.
Then there are the annual reports which represent the activities that have
been undertaken by the Commission each year. This report includes the audited

financial statements of the Commission. These are prepared up to the camera-

ready version using the DTP facilities available at COSTECH.
We also compile articles of interest to the Tanzanian science and technology
situation from the annual seminars, international newspapers, or other sources and

send them to the top leadership and the scientific community. Some of these

articles get published by the local newspapers. We have published over 30

newspaper articles under this program.
Finally, there are the "Greenwire" files that COSTECH produces from
electronic mail messages written by an international group of experts on

environmental concerns. COSTECH staff within the Directorate of Information

and Documentation scan these and select some for dissemination. This ideally

should be accomplished using email (with COSTECH as the node and other

institutions/ bodies being the points). However, due to the fact that not many

institutions and scientists are connected to email, these messages are first

downloaded onto a diskette, printed out, photocopied, and then compiled into
files that are mailed to
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY90Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.research and development institutions affiliated with COSTECH and other
interested parties known to us.
It may have been difficult but now I am reaping some of the fruits of that
hard labor. Besides, when I did the typesetting myself, at least I was sure that I

corrected all the mistakes that I noticed. There is still a need for proofreaders
Šthere will always be some mistakes if only one person is assigned to the entire

production cycle. Nevertheless, there is one publication that makes me very proud

Šthe Tanzania S&T News 
of December 1993 marked my d
ébut into typesetting.
(See Box 1.)THE RESULTS, IMPACTS, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
The project has received much positive feedback. Some of the comments we
have received include the following:
A prominent member of Parliament said that the 
Tanzania S&T News 
is"extremely informative and useful."
The Embassy of Tanzania in Stockholm wrote and said that it found the
"contents interesting and varied."
A medical doctor wrote to say how impressed he was with the quality of the
articles in the newsletter.
A university professor told me that he especially like the newsletter column on
scientific tidbits.
A secondary school teacher told us that he finds information that he can use to
teach and stimulate his class.
A number of local newspaper editors have printed some of our articles.
I can say that it is very gratifying when you receive requests from people
who want to be included on the mailing list. It is also very rewarding to hear that

news of the contents in the newsletter is getting around. For example, Mr. Sam

Baker, who worked for the Cooperative College in Moshi and is now a Computer

Consultant at Coopers and Lybrand, made a survey on information technology

with funding he received from COSTECH. As part of our usual news

compilation, we included a brief review of his findings in our September 1994

issue of 
Tanzania S&T News
. Later, we heard that he wanted a copy of that
Newsletter because "people had been telling him about it." So we are certain that

the news we write gets across even though we do not always get direct feedback

from the readers.
We usually send articles on a weekly basis to one of the local newspapers,
including the bi-weekly 
Express. Interestingly, when we are running against our
own deadlines and miss sending the articles, the 
Express  Editor notes our
absence and send a message to the effect of "Where is this week's article
–."Obviously, if the readers did not find our articles useful and worth reading, he

would not show such enthusiasm.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY91Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.More recently, we did an article on one of the prominent woman scientists
who, incidentally, was later nominated to be a member of the Commission of

COSTECH. As usual we sent her a single copy of the newsletter. We were happy

to get her request for a few more copies.
Authors of papers accepted for the annual scientific seminars have used our
products to obtain promotions in their workplace.
We are now certain that there are more readers who appreciate our efforts
than the actual number of letters of appreciation would imply. Also since we

attempt to write on issues that will interest the target group, we are optimistic

that, in the long run, the long weekends spent producing the newsletters,

newspaper articles, press releases proceedings and the like will produce positive

results.Scientific and technological awareness is slowly gaining a foothold
Šthrough the continued efforts of the Commission to keep information flowing to

the leadership of Tanzania. The launching of NFAST, mentioned above, is proof

of this progress. So far, 13 million Tanzanian shillings have been pledged to

NFAST. Other pledges and contributions are being collected and we hope to have a

total of 100 million Tanzanian shillings (US $ 166,666) by the end of December
1995.ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
The project has taught me several lessons. First, I know it is important to
have a synergistic group of people working together in DTP (as in any other

working group) for the best results. This group must be dedicated to the

improvement of the press as there are always long hours of concentration and

hard work required to complete a publication. Being able to do this kind of work
Šwriting, editing, proofreading, typesetting, mailing
Šnecessitates a supportive
supervisor who believes in the staff, gives it room to grow, and also guides it

through the various steps.
I have also learned that, for the best results, the basic tools and personnel are
needed. For instance, if I could start the project over again, I would hire a clerk to

assist in typing and addressing/mailing the newsletters so that I could concentrate

on the tasks of writing good articles.
I would also make sure that the DTP unit had the proper equipment available
to it on a full-time basis. This includes a dedicated 386 or 486 computer with a

laser printer and a scanner for more effective compilation of camera-ready copy

and for importation of graphics.
Finally, I would institute a proper training program for DTP staff. I think
that people with backgrounds in mass communications, publishing, or linguistics

might naturally have a better understanding of how a scientific press needs to

operate but, as we have seen in our project, the aptitude for editing, design, and
management can come from a variety of disciplines. Whatever the backgrounds,
however, special training in the use of the DTP hardware and software is

essential.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY92Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Seeing that information is the determinant of which nations succeed and
which do not, I think those African countries that see the importance of

cooperation should do all they can to elevate their scientific and technological

information (research and development) projects and activities to the highest

possible level. A network of STI systems in Tanzania, Africa, and indeed the

world should gradually be built through cooperative ventures (learning from each
other through other case study follow-up projects).
Jacques Delors, the former President of the European Union, has said that
without confidence, no people can be united to work for a common cause. So the

first objective should be to build people's confidence. And how does one do that

exactly? By helping people to help themselves so that they do not "live on

handouts" and by giving people a sound education and letting them make their
own (rational) decisions. This may take longer to achieve but gives the best
results in the long run.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSI am very grateful to Theophilus Mlaki for all his support and guidance
–and his demand for excellence! Also at COSTECH, I would like to thank Mr.

Yonazi, Senior Scientific Officer and the Desk Officer in charge of TANISSAT,

who has been very understanding when I use his equipment. I have worn his
patience rather thin as there are so many documents to produce.
I am also grateful to my husband and children for their understanding every
time I came home late or worked on Sundays.
DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY93Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE TANZANIA COMMISSION FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY94Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Environmental Publishing NetworkŠ
ENVIRONET at ICIPE Science Press
by Agnes Katama
Agnes Katama is Manager of ICIPE Science Press and
project leader of the Environmental Publishing Network

(ENVIRONET)Ša network linking seven institutions in the
Eastern Africa Region. She is also a volunteer lecturer for

women undergraduate students at the University of Nairobi,

where she coordinates programs for gender-equity. Her main

focus of research in book production is on market orientation

within the scholarly publishing world and on the search for
alternative human resource formulae to enhance cost efficiency. She is a

journalist by profession. She has been appointed Coordinator of the African

Forum for Children's Literacy in Science and Technology, an activity of the

Rockefeller Foundation.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
The International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) was
established in Kenya's capital, Nairobi, in 1970. It was given the twin mandate

to:a) undertake basic research in integrated control methodologies for
arthropod pest management and
b) to strengthen, through training and collaboration, the scientific and
technological capacities of developing countries.
In 1988, ICIPE created the ICIPE Science Press (ISP), as its own, internal
publishing house. I joined ISP in 1991 as the Marketing and Information

Executive; I am now the Manager of ISP. In March 1992, ICIPE undertook a

thorough study of the literature and realized that there was little or no

coordination of the development of self-sustaining and significant scholarly

publishing ventures in
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS95Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Africa. There was limited up-to-date information on establishing well-managed
subscription services or on the mailing and marketing of environment-related

publications.Also in 1992, I carried out a study for the Association of African
Universities in which I investigated the merits and the demerits of the

management and organization regarding the marketing of scholarly publishing

activities in Western and Central Africa. I recommended the creation of a

specialized sub-regional publishing network in order to meet local needs in a

coherent fashion.Since both studies identified such pressing needs for the publication and
marketing of scholarly works, the ISP decided to pool its resources with those of

other institutions to create the Environmental Publishing Network

(ENVIRONET).The purpose of ENVIRONET, which was founded in 1993, is to develop
means for the more efficient dissemination of research findings. For instance,

many scholarly works can be redesigned into effective university course work

material. ICIPE's own authorship had traditionally covered environment-related

issues and the enriching combination of publishable material from the
ENVIRONET participating institutions made it possible for us to launch other
publications in areas such as desertification, food security, and crop sciences.

ENVIRONET also facilitated the publishing of print-worthy material from peer

research institutions, the sharing of information resources, and the quest for

formulae to effectively commercialize the printed results according to market

rules.A key contributor to the design and implementation of the first phase of the
project was the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) in Canada.

IDRC has played a significant role in the development and strengthening of

scholarly publishing throughout the African region. Recently, in partnership with

the Association of African Universities, the Council for the Development of

Economic and Social Research in Africa (CODESRIA), and several research
institutions in the region, it created opportunities for inter-institutional
cooperation, the sharing of resources, and dissemination of vital information. It

also provided funding to establish ENVIRONET.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONI am the ENVIRONET Project Leader. ENVIRONET is housed at the ICIPE
Science Press offices in Nairobi. Since ISP had already proven to be a self-

financing publishing operation, ENVIRONET benefited from staff expertise in

this area and its location at ISP fostered cooperation between ENVIRONET and

ICIPE Science Press. There is a very symbiotic relationship between

ENVIRONET and ISP.The first phase of the project was initiated in June 1994 as an 18-month
experiment. Its main objectives are to create a credible, market-oriented, and

self-sustaining network for the provision of information on environmental

publishing activities and to train adequate human resources in the areas of book

production, management, and marketing. Specifically, the first phase of the

project was established in order to:
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS96Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Create a network of publishers and research institutions specialized in
environmental matters with an adequate institutional framework;
   Conduct a marketing study with the aim of garnering support for innovative
methods of self-sustaining scholarly publishing;
   Develop a database comprising an author and subject roster on
environmental materials published in the region. This will include the

development of linkages with other organizations pursuing similar goals;

and   Foster the capacity-building potential of participating institutions, especially
in the area of training and publications marketing.
Phase I has concentrated on establishing lasting self-sustaining methods of
managing the funds available for this activity. A key concern of the project is to

identify collaborating institutions and activities whose needs are similar enough

to seek common methods to ensure efficient production, distribution, and

marketing capabilities. Phase II, to be launched in June 1996, will focus on the

establishment of a well-managed and efficient Publishing and Information
Center.The establishment of a training program was a key accomplishment of Phase I
and this program is described in more detail later in this case study. The training

of ENVIRONET members benefited directly from the publishing systems and

services used by ICIPE Science Press. For example, ISP uses an Apple Macintosh

system for its desktop publishing (DTP). The software we use includes Aldus
Pagemaker, Microsoft Word, Adobe Illustrator, and Excel. These are the same
packages we use to train ENVIRONET members and the ones trainees will use on

their own work stations, which the Network provides.
Participating Institutions
ENVIRONET seeks to revitalize the authorship capability among a selected
number of research institutions in Eastern and Southern Africa, while stimulating

a healthy diversity of environment related publications. The participating

institutions are:
IDRCInternational Development Research Centre, Nairobi
ICIPEThe International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology, Nairobi
ACSSAfrican Crop Science Society, Kampala
OSSREAOrganization for Social Science Research in Eastern Africa, Addis Ababa
ICRAFInternational Centre for Research in Agroforestry, Nairobi
ELCIThe Environmental Liaison Centre International, Nairobi
ITFCThe Institute for Tropical Forestry Conservation, Mbarara University,
UgandaENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS97Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 FINDING A BUSINESS BALANCE
We still need to strike a fair balance between the purely business-driven
considerations on the one hand and, on the other, our academic commitment to
attaining the goals for which the Project was initially designed. We still need to

make environmental information readily and easily available and affordable to
our tertiary educative and research constituencies.
Our main source of publishable material is the research results obtained from
all collaborating, international, and regional organizations with related aims. ISP

was selected to host this experiment because of its current ability to self-finance

all its activities. Having achieved financial autonomy, the next logical step

forward is to present an up-market strategy to wean the publishing program off

the donor support needed at its inception. This will truly be the main

achievement of the project. (See 
Box 1
.)The self-sustainability of ISP has taken four years to design and implement.
Naturally, there were the real advantages in having beautiful premises on the

science campus of the University of Nairobi. Furthermore, the first Director of

ICIPE, Professor Thomas Odhiambo, allowed flexibility of cost recovery

mechanisms with the concerted support of the financial system of the whole

institution. He encouraged me to formulate and consolidate the measures needed

to allow ISP to recover costs and, ultimately, to break even.
The sale of our expertise has been the key element of our sustainability. ISP
has a policy of 10 percent returns on all consultancies
Šwhether in cash or in
timeŠand staff are encouraged to open out to the other institutions in the area.
Indeed, our first contacts with the other members of the Network have been as a

result of our help in starting up the publications unit. In the case of the African

Crop Science Society, ISP published the first issues and coordinated a colorful

launch of their journal in Kampala. These are assignments that are carefully

budgeted and afford ISP substantial benefit.
Another area of expertise has been the publishing of conference proceedings
on behalf of institutions in the region. A powerful marketing edge has been the

ability of ISP to see these important assignments to completion within the year.

Recently, ISP has been commissioned to edit (myself), design (ISP team), and

layout papers for a major meeting on Equity and Social Considerations Related to

Climate Change. With assignments such as these, ISP has been able to move into

high quality publishing for a consolidated group of institutional clients. Needless

to say, the possibility of having attachment students (described below) greatly

cuts down on the cost of initial start-up of the different assignments since these
need considerable negotiation, supply of information, and other staff-intensive
inputs.ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS98Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The marketability of the published material, as well as the services made
available at the start of the Project
Štraining, workshop coordination, high
technology computer graphics, and so on
Šare being used to generate
independent funding that can then be plowed back into publishing or related

activities. Interestingly, during this 18-month launch period, we have made the

best use of our new desktop publishing facilities by fulfilling donor-funded
assignments from collaborating institutions or by completing direct consultancies
from the donors themselves.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The project and its implementation schedule were beset with multiple
problems. The worst of these was the restructuring of ICIPE, the host institution,

which lasted a full six months. During this time I had neither the necessary

resources nor the time to dedicate to the project.
To analyze the positive and the negative points of our project
implementation after the first ten months, we made use of a management tool,

called SWOT. SWOT helps identify the 
Strengths, 
Weaknesses, 
Opportunities,and Threats facing a project. We placed particular emphasis on the DTP training
component since, to date, it is the only one that has been completed as proposed

at the outset.We used the information received from the SWOT analysis to evaluate
project's impact on the users, the host organization, and the collaborating

institutions. It also brought to light the aspects of the project that were not well

done or that could have been done better. It therefore gives us a basis for the

further development of the project. The results of the SWOT analysis are given

below.Strengths   ENVIRONET Phase 1 has established a training ground for future trainees.
Four professionals have been trained and this training has served as

valuable blue-print material to involve the trainable officers in important

information generating institutions.
   Local and international collaboration with scientific and environmental
organizations has provided a reference base from which ENVIRONET has

spread its initiative since it is getting recognition among interested and

upcoming projects.
   All staff and trainers have been encouraged and challenged through the
project to engage in administrative tasks. Computer knowledge and

exposure acquired by the trainees from different organizations serve as

gateways to promoting skills present at the project. This in itself has
boosted the credibility and name of ISP at both a local and an international
level.ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS99Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Weaknesses   Training
ŠThis four-month course included elements of theory classes and
practical computer training. We altered the course after the trainees had

arrived and fell short in properly formalizing the time tables outlining the

activities.   Trips and Visits
ŠWe should have foreseen the need to plan trips, social
activities, and talks by various guests.
   Evaluation
ŠWe should have conducted an ongoing activity evaluation to
keep track of the quality of the entire training component. For instance, we

could have sent questionnaires to trainees, the Board of Directors and

trainers before, after, and during the training.
   Finance / ICIPE Headquarters
ŠWe faced heavy bureaucratic constraints.
   Interaction
ŠThe Project Leader, trainees, and consultants faced limited and
difficult interaction and interpersonal communication due to external and

internal pressures surrounding the restructuring exercise.
   Trainees' had limited participation in and attendance at the training because
their publishing projects had not been discussed and distributed in advance.
   We should have documented complaints and disappointments to improve
inter-party communication for subsequent courses.
Opportunities   We could train trainers and colleagues from collaborating institutions in the
use of the DTP equipment. We can train ICIPE and other research staff at

the project premises through the help of a full time computer instructor.

Our existing expertise in scientific writing and editing can also be shared

with network members and others.
   Due to the gradual credibility status achieved by the project, an increasing
number of institutions wish to belong to and support the project.
   Increasing the number of trainees attending each subsequent DTP course
will increase the desired cost-efficiency level for each institution and will

help the project participants generate their own revenue.
   The greatest hindrance to the sale of scholarly titles is the relative lack of
information, reviews, and follow-up on behalf of individual and

institutional authors. We could formulate further courses on marketing,

pricing, and dissemination strategies.
   Email is promoting the status of ENVIRONET and in itself provides a base
for marketing various publications. Access to the Internet is desirable and

could help improve the flow of news about African scholarly activity. Of

particular interest are possible author/subject indices, book reviews, and

author profiles. Such guides will include the accomplishments of experts in

the areas of environment and natural science and would help libraries and

others keep current bibliographies of published and unpublished literature
written by Africans.ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS100Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Email has much potential as a method for curbing the costs associated with
editing, peer review, and author changes. Electronic publishing of journals,

proceedings of meetings, and bulletins is another possibility that we must

explore. The results we achieve in ENVIRONET can be replicated by ISP

to benefit other non-scientific institutions in the ISP 
Tertio program.1   ISP has initiated and finalized the work plans for 
Enviroburos 
which,though not a part of ENVIRONET, will be supervised by ISP as

commercially running document production centers at the service of the

environmental and conservation communities. To ensure financial

viability, we have increased our in-take capacity by the creation of these

bureaus. We are now carefully documenting the results of the pilot study

and will use this to rationalize the replication of these all over the
continent.Threats   The heavy dependence and linkage to the ICIPE headquarters slackens work
progress. Red tape and personal office set-ups are an obstacle to flexible

market-oriented responses necessary for the project's smooth running in the

financial and administrative spheres.
   Unless we undertake an organized evaluation, the Project may receive a
negative image leading to a reduction in regional supporters and

international collaborators.
THE RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
The main activities at ICIPE Science Press include discovering new
marketing angles for scholarly publishing, training publishing staff, and creating a

network of collaborators to the benefit of effective scholarly material being

produced. The ENVIRONET project is just over one-year old and I will discuss
some of the results in this section.
The experimental marketing of the books to be produced within the network
has not yet taken place because the member institutions do not yet have suitable

titles ready. The publishing of manuscripts supplied by ISP is now under way,

however. Some of the titles that have been discovered and whose authors are now

being guided include manuscripts ranging from conservation and biodiversity to
the keeping of commercial insects.
For the marketing of products and services, ENVIRONET has made use of
bookfairs and forums that bring together publishers as well as persons or

institutions involved in the development and distribution of environment related

literature.ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS101Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Several institutions have made inquiries on the possibility of collaborating in
this venture. I have been asked to speak at numerous symposia and conferences.
Benefits of the Project
The benefits of the project include:
a) enhanced project management as a service to ICIPE as well as to
several institutions with similar aims and objectives;
b) infrastructure enhancement for the publishing division of the ISP;
c) human resource development for both trainees and women university
students on attachment;d) training manuals for successive courses to be hosted for the DTP of
scientific manuscripts;
e) published material; and
f) email catalogs of grey literature to be accessed online.
The University Students Attachment Programme (USAP)
The USAP is in many ways an integral part of ENVIRONET because it has
helped contribute to its success. This program was first established as a means of

helping the ISP program break even. Since its inception, we have made the study

and consolidation of USAP and other innovative, up-marketing strategies a

priority aspect in management, time, and resources allocation. I will, thus, take
some time to describe the details of this attachment program. We plan to help
publishing houses in the region create similar programs to cut down on the

prohibitive overhead costs of running a publishing house.
The USAP is one of my ideas to make administrative work more cost-
effective. Some of ISP's services are only possible because of this attachment

program of university women. Yes, but why women? Women count for only one

of every six of the university population. Job seeking for women can be

agonizing, given the strict requirement of prior working experience. It was to

respond to this need in the student community that USAP was born. (See 
Box 2.)BOX 2 TRAINING PROGRAM FOR WOMEN
USAP is a Women Empowerment Project that I helped form in 1993 to
serve the dual purpose of training on the job while reducing the number of
permanent administrative staff of ISP. This program takes, for a duration rarely
exceeding six months, university students who are on vacation.
OperationWe select university students from diverse faculties who can contribute to
the general working of the press. They are then attached to the various ISP

departmentsENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS102Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.after intensive on-the-job training by the proceeding group of USAPers. The
students are involved in marketing, soliciting, distribution, production liaison,

mailing, and subscription activities. We have prepared comprehensive procedural

manuals to help smooth the flow of work. Students work free of any supervision,

although I am available for guidance. Weekly meetings allow feedback on tasks

assigned to each person.
Professional development classes are offered to all USAPers. USAP
organizes its own activities to help other students participate in professional

enrichment activities. So far, the major outlet has been to annual rural promotion

projects. They have proved to be very resourceful and often prepare the

educational material on their own.
USAP Benefits
There have been many benefits of the USAP. Women in Management
(WIM) and Women in Science (WIS) are two new projects geared toward the

professional promotion of undergraduates. Both projects fall under the USAP

umbrella. These grew out of the great diversity of training and orientation needs

of the various USAPers. We saw a clear need to help students develop in their

own fields of specialization. There exists an eagerness to attend extra-curricular

professional sessions since these always offer increased job prospects.
Women in Management was formed for students who hope to specialize in
commerce and business administration. Women in Science is for students looking

for careers in the sciences. In addition to university students, these projects also

target students in middle level colleges and young professionals.
The USAP Alumni
Every three months, there is a new USAP group at ISP. A total of over 60
women have benefited directly from the hands-on training program, while up to

250 have benefited from off-shoot activities. Bulletins and regular get-together of

the USAP Alumni are two major methods of exchanging ideas and giving new

information and feedback on tasks accomplished. Also since many women obtain
good jobs on completion of their undergraduate studies, there is the rewarding
opportunity of listening to their expectations and desire to excel.
Future Prospects: The USAP Resource Centre (URC)
The establishment of a URC will be a major step forward. We are
approaching donors to help equip a resource centre that will link women from

countries in the region. Given that these students are already trained and are

resourceful, such a center could help in the provision of support for this activity
as its popularity spreads among collaborating institutions. These activities include
the preparation of educational material for rural promotion projects, coordination

of USAP professional
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS103Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.classes, and planning the activities of WIM and WIS. We are fast forming links
with other university students in the world in order to facilitate better

communication. A first stop will be Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda

where a WIM program has already been simulated.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
I know that ICIPE itself has contributed to the success of ISP and the
ENVIRONET project. Unlike many international research institutions, ICIPE has

encouraged and permitted creative system design that stretches beyond ISP's

traditional mandate. Experimenting with different cost-recovery mechanisms and

being innovative in the use of staff has allowed ISP to attain self-sufficiency.
Beyond this broad lesson, we have learned a number of specific things.
For example, following their program, the trainees reported to the Board
members. The issues they raised in their joint report were also discussed at

ICIPE's own ENVIRONET training post-mortem meeting with ICIPE's senior-

most staff. The resolutions taken by ICIPE as a result are discussed below.
Training OrganizationThe administration of the training clearly demonstrated shortcomings. Most
of these emanated from a lack of foresight as to the viability of such an activity,

when both ISP and headquarters staff were working in a low efficiency mode. As

we discovered, training should never have started during the restructuring of the
host institution. In the future, any training carried out will be entrusted to the
training division of ICIPE, while all technical aspects will be the responsibility of

ISP. ICIPE's training division will then take charge of the preliminary notification

and will establish the training needs of all participants and the correct modus

operandi during the program. This will lead to a closer working relationship

between myself, the Head of Training at ICIPE, and the ENVIRONET Board

members.Finances, Trainee Per Diem, and Travel
The trainees should know, prior to the start of training, the details of their
travel arrangements, allowances, and the full nature of their program, including

time off, recreation, other travel opportunities, and so on. We are in the process

of circulating such rules and regulations to the Board for its approval.
OrganizationThe restructuring of ICIPE has moved ICIPE Science Press and all of its
various projects from the management to the research arm of the institution. This

will ensure that the project's own research content, objectives, and goals are being
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS104Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.evaluated as a research assignment and that they continue to fit within the
broader picture of ICIPE's research mandate and interests.
ENVIRONET - Training Objectives
The training program was overly ambitious and there existed a clear
mismatch between targeted achievement and real attainment. Smooth

communication was either difficult or less effective than desired. The resulting

working atmosphere was sometimes tense both between the institution and the

project, as well as among the project management and trainees.
AdvocacyA number of institutions and professionals in the relevant fields have shown
interest in participating in the project and in learning more about plans for

expanded collaboration and professional capacity building. Furthermore, the

professionals trained in the project will need additional monitoring, support, and

networking. A simple one sheet newsletter is being sent out to all interested

parties and collaborating institutions of the project. Emphasis on clarity of

reporting is paramount to establishing links as the project faces the challenges of

fund-raising for its successive phases.
Electronic Publishing
Electronic publishing is now the focus of my efforts as well as those of the
collaborating institutions. The links have now been set up. ENVIRONET will

have a dedicated telephone line and switchboard independent from the ISP main

lines. Email facilities are now available for trainees' needs. We have designed a

home page on the Internet via The University of Edinburgh and we have installed

systems for online publishing and documentation transfer. Start-up funding is a

real problem since the initial hooking up is the most costly in terms of design and

equipment.EvaluationThe project has been evaluated by an expert selected by IDRC with specific
terms of reference, as is critical within the framework of sustainability of the

proposed activities.
Author's Roster
An important component of the research in ENVIRONET is the compilation
of a marketing pool. This will consist of a database of two types:
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS105Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a. 
Books in press and in print
. In conjunction with the Library of
Congress, the African Publishers Network (APNET), and others, this

project will study ways to harmonize information on authors and

titles to meet a North-South online demand. This research is vital and

could be a great service to the region since most existing databases

are not online. I have started discussions with interested parties so as
to harmonize input from the beginning. I estimate that we will start
this project in about three months.
b. 
Grey literature
. ENVIRONET's mandate is to publicize existing grey
literature by the continent's specialized authors. Availability of

information about market, slant, and constituency are the mainstay of

the project and we are seeking funds for serious research of this sort.
PublicationsENVIRONET is to publish or cover the cost (including the marketing) of
five publications. Although originally to be prepared by the trainees while in the

training program, only two of the institutions had ready material. Also it was not

possible to complete these given the lack of time. Authors for the five

manuscripts are now being guided. The possibility of their marketing via the

online system is a critical aspect of the research component.
ENVIRONET Phase II
ENVIRONET will have to compete for scarce funding for its successive
stages and group financing of activities will be the foreseeable scenario. Despite

the difficult launch period during the restructuring of the host institution, there is

considerable interest within the region in the activities and the objectives of the

project. A number of institutions have asked to be affiliated with it particularly

given the specificity of its training. This clearly presents financial challenges.
Through considerable donor contact, I am now coordinating fund-raising for the
second phase.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
ENVIRONET Phase I now comes to a close to pave the way for
ENVIRONET Phase II. In Phase II we hope to seek funding for the expansion of

the Information and Publishing Center. Through the center, ISP will be able to

source work from various organizations in the region and publish it for them. We

will continue to publish material included within the broad paradigm of

environmental studies analysis.
The mainstay of the project will continue to be the satisfaction of
information related demands in the region. Via the ENVIRONET Information

Center, ISP will continue to assist in the marketing of scholarly publications and

to study the factors
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS106Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that continue to determine real publication development for the university and
other tertiary readers.Querying the information center will be possible via the email facilities of
the user nodes, even though providing connectivity and access is probably the

single most expensive activity that the project has identified. Quick access to

existing information on particular areas of interest could be a marketable service

to offer the Northern scholar at a differential costing and pricing. The profit will

then fall as a subsidy for the Southern researcher.
Training will be another important aspect of the second phase. A critical
mass of information providers will be built upon the already existing loose

network of the ENVIRONET family of institutions. By the end of 1997, 20 prime

research and development organizations will benefit from this training and will

thus become information disseminators in their own right.
The ENVIRONET hub will try to speed up the publication process. What is
now apparent is that the scholarly world will not publish in Africa unless there

evolves a real commitment to sharing the cost of the manuscript processing. We

are proposing that authors be able to submit manuscripts via the network to ISP

where general editors help assemble the document. Thus the usually frustrating

review process could be facilitated by putting the reviewers online with ISP.

Authors will only need to go to a network point to approve manuscripts. Likewise

the service of forwarding manuscripts to foreign journals could be handled for a
gradually growing constituency.
The USAP project, now officially featured in ICIPE's Annual Reports, has
no doubt presented exciting findings in the world of information packaging in the

region. We will properly quantify their role and the service they can market to

collaborating institutions. The importance of reducing overhead is critical to the

survival of a scholarly publishing press. To add to the exposure these students

will derive from their association with ISP, first as undergraduates and later as

colleagues in collaborating institutions, we now propose to set up exchange

programs where these women will gain personally from interaction with work
places and information packaging concerns in the more developed parts of the
world. These attachments will be coordinated by ENVIRONET to ensure that

undergraduates acquire relevant work experience to the region's needs. This

project is worthy of enhancing and its experience used as a pilot for gender equity

concerns, particularly regarding the concern of a greater female representation in

science and technology.ISP has often seen the need to expand its collection points within the region.
Thus we came up with the idea of the Enviroburos. The concept, which had to be

nurtured and promoted among the non-commercial environment that typifies the

scholarly publishing world, is now evolving. These will be market-oriented

information packaging units in strategic cities in the region. Their marketing and

procedures will derive from ISP's own rich experience in beating the cost-

efficiency crunch. They will be put under the care of the members of the

ENVIRONETENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS107Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Board. They will serve moreover as further arms for the publishing of worthy
grey literature.Today, we can consider the creation of an audiovisual laboratory because the
costs are falling so rapidly. Publishing in Africa must keep abreast of

technological advances elsewhere. We propose to create a pool of resources

available for the use of the collaborating institutions to enable the documentation

of research findings and events by video. A facility of this nature could easily

reside in ISP given its ample premises within the university campus. Also the

running of such a project is justifiable and easier to fund when the positive
impact will be felt by so many users.
ENVIRONET proposes to provide to a wide public the results of the
indexing of grey literature. The publishing of all material on CD-ROM is now an

eventuality that ISP would like to spearhead. Of particular interest is the archiving

of information on discs. This, though clearly important, will require careful

planning by a number of interested donors and partners, since the task calls for

substantial funding.
The launch of the project has had its own teething problems and the
challenge ahead entails parallel commitment from all. As regional initiatives

progress, the task is now at hand to safely conduct ENVIRONET past its infancy

into the dynamics of growth.
NOTE1. Tertio is a series that ISP launched in 1993 for non-scientific and technical readers
Šit includes
mostly social science monographs. One Tertio publication, entitled 
Africa Development's Last
Frontier, 
 by Sadig Rasheed, will have a considerable impact for the inter-disciplinary scholarly
publishing system continent-wide. One main title is being published under the Tertio program

every year.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSAs Project Leader, I would particularly wish to thank the four trainees in the
pioneer course, who mastered publication development skills offered by

ENVIRONET. Their final report will go a long way to help chart out a more

efficient plan for the successive training/orientation sessions the project may host

in the future. Special commendation from the senior management of ICIPE goes

to the IDRC Programme Officer, Dr. Habib Sy. Through his active and knowing

guidance the project has now become an experiment the positive results of which

are awaited by a significant number of future collaborators and information

facilitators the world over.
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLISHING NETWORK
ŠENVIRONET AT ICIPE SCIENCE
PRESS108Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovations in Desktop Publishing at the
African Academy of Sciences, 1989
Œ1992by Dr. Alex R. Tindimubona
Alex Tindimubona is now Chairman of ASTEX
Šthe African
Science and Technology Exchange
Šbased in Kampala,
Uganda. From 1989 to 1992, he was program officer and

associate editor at the African Academy of Sciences in

Nairobi. There, he was involved in introducing desktop

publishing in support of scientific communication. At ASTEX,

he continues to promote science and technology for

development and is now working on the networking of African
scientists. Dr. Tindimubona has a PhD in quantum chemistry and previously

taught at the University of Nairobi 
.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
This case study describes the introduction of desktop publishing (DTP) at
the African Academy of Sciences (AAS), which was a pioneer in using such

technology for scholarly publishing in Africa. The AAS is a continent-wide,

non-governmental organization of senior scientists, science managers, and policy

experts dedicated to the promotion of science and technology for development in

Africa. It is the brainchild of 22 leading African scientists who met in Trieste,

Italy in July 1985 at the Third World Academy of Sciences. A task force under

the chairmanship of Professor Thomas R. Odhiambo of Kenya presented the

constitution of the AAS within six months. In December 1985, it was ratified at a

second meeting in Trieste and the Academy was born with 33 Founding Fellows.

It began operation at its headquarters at the International Center for Insect
Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) in Nairobi, in June 1986.
The AAS is an honorific society that promotes excellence in science and
technology by recognizing outstanding individual accomplishments through

election to the membership (Fellowship) of the Academy. Admitting new Fellows

at the rate of about ten per year, the membership now stands at just over 100. It

has also developed a series of prizes to reward excellence, the most notable being

the AAS/Ciba-Geigy Prize for Agricultural Biosciences.
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992109Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 EXTERNAL LEADERSHIP OF AFRICAN SCIENCE
Until the founding of the AAS, the leadership for organization and
management of science in Africa lay in externally-based institutions such as the
United Nations family (UNESCO, UNECA, UNIDO, etc.) or in the former

colonial powers, which worked through African government bureaucracies, such
as the French ORSTOM; the British Commonwealth Science Council; or the
United States Agency for International Development. Thus, final decisions were

taken in Paris, London, or Washington, D.C. African scientists had not yet
organized themselves into a community that could articulate its potential and
needs, or its usefulness to society. Science was still marginalized.
From the beginning, the AAS decided to be an active, practical organization
whose members would address the daunting problems of the continent. For the

AAS was formed at a time of deep crisis for Africa: the continent faced major

famines, external debts, declining economies, social conflicts, and a growing

questioning of the political leadership. (See 
Box 1.)The AAS vowed to take the lead in reversing Africa's decline through
science-led development. It decided to tackle the problems that transcend

national and ideological boundaries: drought, desertification, and food deficit.

Finally, its members rallied around the theme of ''bridging the gap between the

scientists, industrialists, and policy makers in Africa." The AAS chose a core

program covering four areas:
   Mobilization and strengthening of the African scientific community;
   Publication and dissemination of scientific materials;
   Research, development, and public policy; and
   Capacity building in science and technology.
Early on, the AAS realized that publications would be a major instrument
for building the African scientific community, for making it aware of itself and

its mission, and for interaction with its constituency. This constituency was very

well defined: it included the scientific community itself, the policy makers, the

entrepreneurs, and the general public. The publication program thus started as

soon as the first staff member, Professor Peter Anyang' Nyong'o, came on board

in July 1987 as Head of Programs. Using outside typesetters, he immediately

started publishing 
Whydah, the quarterly newsletter of the AAS and working on
the first book, 
Hope Born Out of Despair
. He also helped develop the publication
strategy of AAS: they would publish a newsletter, a journal, books and
monographs, as well as other products. The publishing arm of the AAS was called

Academy Science Publishers, or ASP.
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992110Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROJECT DESCRIPTIONThe ASP initially took on desktop publishing to underpin the publication of
the AAS's 
Discovery and Innovation (D&I)
, which was a quarterly,
approximately 100 page per issue, peer-reviewed, multi-disciplinary journal of

research and policy discourse. The feasibility study performed prior to

establishing the journal involved over 80 scholars, scientists, and professional

consultants from Africa, Europe, and America and unearthed many problems
facing publishing in Africa. The study found that of the 70,000 or so journals
published worldwide, only about 150 were from Africa. Many of these were of

dubious quality, frequency, and duration. The main problems were prioritized as

lack of resources, but more significantly, there were managerial problems, such

as the:
   Low professional capacity in editing, typesetting, printing, marketing, and
distribution; and
   Management of the intellectual processes: peer review, content-quality
assurance, timeliness; and inclusion in the world's secondary (abstracting,

indexing, and citation) literature.
Many African scientists were worried about publishing their best work in an
"obscure journal" whose results might not be seen by their peers. This might

possibly result in duplication of research or, worse, competitors might claim they

got the results first. There were also doubts in some foreign quarters as to

whether Africa was doing enough high-calibre science to support such an

advanced journal. The leadership of the AAS, who had much experience on the

African scene, insisted that the time was ripe for such a journal. All in all, the

study came up with conflicting predictions that could only be tested in the field

through praxis.It is a tribute to the resilience, persistence, vision, and managerial acumen of
the leadership of the AAS that the journal not only started, but has survived and

has become a regular, well recognized beacon of scholarly publishing in Africa.

The tribute equally goes to the donors of the journal, particularly the Carnegie

Corporation of New York and the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of

Science. But thirdly, and significantly, the tribute must be shared by a

technological innovation
Šdesktop publishing
Šwhich is at the base of the
success of this journal and indeed of the AAS's entire program of publication and

dissemination of scientific materials.
In May 1988, Professor Turner T. Isoun arrived from Nigeria to take his
post as the Editor of 
Discovery and Innovation
, plus other AAS publications. On
assuming duty, he immediately took steps to ensure the acquisition of good

quality manuscripts for consideration for publication in the journal. He developed

and sent out announcements of the new journal, instructions to contributors, and

personal invitations to contribute articles to key scientists inside and outside

Africa (including all Fellows of AAS). He was rewarded with an encouraging

response to
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992111Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.his campaign. Over 100 scientists indicated a willingness to contribute articles
and, by the time he produced the first issue in March 1989, he already had over

60 papers undergoing the peer review process
Šenough to fill the first four issues
of 
D&I.PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The feasibility study had recommended the introduction of desktop
publishing for the journal. Accordingly, the AAS acquired a Macintosh IIci

computer, with a laser printer and back-up dot matrix printer. It had advanced

word processing (Microsoft Word) and DTP (Aldus Pagemaker) software. The

AAS already had three IBM-compatible personal computers with dot-matrix
printers that were used mainly for word processing. A database management
program (Dbase III) was used for the project on 
Profiles and Databank of African
Scientists and Scientific Institutions 
. The AAS newsletter, 
Whydah, had been
published since 1987, using outside typesetting service. Three books and other

several other products of the AAS had also been published using outside

services.The new equipment was ready when the next editorial staff member joined
in October 1988. Gillian Ngola had broad experience in publishing and quickly

became proficient on the equipment, mainly using her familiarity with the

printing terminology that had been incorporated into the DTP software (e.g.,

fonts and point sizes, bromides, camera-ready copy, etc.). Arriving in January

1989, as an Assistant Program Officer, I brought my experience as a physical
scientist familiar with computers, science writing, and publication generally. I
began to troubleshoot simple problems, conduct in-house training on computer

literacy, undertake technical editing of scientific articles, and plan for expansion

on the DTP path. I actively participated in the thrill and agony of putting together

the first issue of 
D&I. When it finally came out in its purple splendor in March
1989, we celebrated!
Two major issues were identified and dealt with at that time. One was the
whole area of typesetting mathematical expressions, which was extremely tedious

with the conventional programs then available. It was eventually solved to some

extent with the Expressionist software, a shareware program supplied by Miriam

Balaban of Israel. The second was a more fundamental one, dealing with

refereeing of papers through a peer review process. The system of peer review
designed for 
D&I was extremely innovative, rigorous, and uncompromising
regarding what would be accepted for publication. It was based on the principle

of pure peer review as applied by the best journals of the world.
As 1989 ended, it was clear that 
D&I was succeeding beyond the
expectations of its initiators. We had managed to bring out four issues of high

quality material, every issue on time (in the month shown on the cover). We had

received some 314 manuscripts and had processed enough of these to keep two

issues ahead in terms of articles ready for production. Also, we had received 236

paid subscriptions.
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992112Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovations related to computers were becoming very useful, for instance:
   some authors were submitting their articles on diskette, thus obviating
error-prone re-entering of text;
   we had the manuscript tracking system computerized; and
   we had introduced and mastered a mathematical typesetting software
(Expressionist) that improved our handling of physical science papers.
After one year of operation, we could better understand and deal with our
business environment. The information technology environment within which

DTP grew at the AAS was auspicious in some respects, but terrible in others,

though each of these facets had to be recognized and managed by doing. Nairobi,

and particularly the ICIPE campus at which the AAS was housed until 1992, was

full of microcomputers, but not DTP. A good proportion of the secretaries could

operate a word processor but had not been trained in the more complicated

aspects of page layout or importing graphic files. Technical support was available
but insufficient, especially when it came time to dealing with hardware problems.
In terms of scientific content for our publications, the supply was good, as
nearly all scientific and technical disciplines were well represented in Nairobi
Šinprofessional societies, universities, libraries, government agencies, research

institutions, international organizations, and NGOs. The AAS, through its project

on Profiles and Databank of African Scientists and Scientific Institutions
, theFellowship of the Academy, and the Network of African Scientific Organizations

(NASO), was already in touch with much expertise Africa-wide and indeed

world-wide. (See 
Box 2.) ICIPE itself represented a multidisciplinary scientific
and technological milieu. Its scientific programs and activities kept the AAS
replete with new visitors, contacts, information, and advice. Nairobi was (and

still is) the hub of trade, communication, and commerce for Eastern and Central

Africa and attracts much equipment and trade information. Telecommunication

within Nairobi and outside is easy, but not cheap. Thus the ASP Editor had no

major problem originating publications ready for the printers. He could mobilize

peer-review and technical editing, and consult other experts and libraries for

scientific and technical
BOX 2 COMPLEMENTARY PROJECTS
The peer review process reinforced the AAS's desire to develop a deep and
broad knowledge of the African scientific community. This is why the 
Profilesand Databank of African Scientists and Scientific Institutions 
project was so
useful. Often the 
D&I Editor came to my office and said: "Alex, could you look in
your database and find me an expert to review this paper
Špreferably not from
the following country(s)." Most of the time I would succeed, and also take the
opportunity to add the authors to the database, if they qualified.
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992113Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.publishing minutiae (e.g., the current convention for depicting vectors and
matrices in print).
The printing industry in Nairobi responded well and turned out to be up to
the task of printing a sophisticated publication like 
Discovery and Innovation
Šatreasonable prices and with acceptable timing. Although most printing had

previously been taken outside (mostly to London), this was traced to the colonial

legacy of Kenya and the perceived editorial shortcomings of African editors.

Thus, it was actually editorial expertise that was sought. Once that editorial

confidence was built
Šand the ASP/DTP did a lot to build it in Nairobi
Štherewas no looking back. In other words, while the environment affected AAS, AAS
did much to affect the STI environment too!
The one clear negative aspect of the STI environment for the international
scholarly publisher in Kenya was the prohibitively expensive international

postage demanded by the government-run Kenya Posts and Telecommunications

Corporation (KPTC). High prices forced the AAS to ship its publications, in

bulk, to a cheaper distributor in the United Kingdom or Amsterdam. While saving

us money this also led to horrible delays in fulfillment of subscriptions and

orders. Telephone and fax, also managed by the KPTC, were at least four times
higher than in neighboring Uganda. The other barrier in Kenya was the lack of
full liberalization of foreign exchange markets (unlike Uganda) and high duty on

computer equipment.
Departure of Professor Isoun
The first major challenge to the DTP program at the African Academy of
Science came in early 1990 when Professor Isoun returned to Nigeria. He retained

his post as non-resident Editor and the office in Nairobi was reorganized. I was

appointed Associate Editor and was to assist him in ensuring the editorial quality,

scientific content, and general sustainability of the journal. Specifically, I was to

deal with:   the editorial acceptance process: referee selection and manuscript traffic
monitoring;   technical editing for scientific content, especially in the physical sciences;
and   overall program development for AAS publications.
I did this along with my duties as Assistant Program Officer in charge of
several other projects. (See 
Box 3.) Mrs. Ngola, in turn, took on more
responsibility for managing the journal's technical editing, production,

publication, and marketing. We were lucky in October 1989 to hire, as a graduate

secretary, Mrs. Nancy Amulyoto, who grew to be invaluable in running the

manuscript tracking system and generally running the office. She was the 
defacto Assistant to the
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992114Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Editor while Mrs. Ngola became, in essence, the Production Editor.
BOX 3 PROFILES OF AFRICAN SCIENTISTS
I was asked to publish 
Profiles of African Scientists
, from my computerized
databank. I was initially appalled because I thought it a retrogressive step to go
from electronic to paper-based data. Later, it dawned on me that most of the
world was still "paper-bound" and could not access our data anyway. But

computers would still help, via DTP. There followed one of my most nightmarish
exercisesŠconverting my IBM Dbase files into Microsoft Word files ready for
DTP on a Macintosh! We published the book, complete with photographs, in
March 1990. It had about 400 entries. The book was an immediate hit, and
generated a lot of interest and heated discussions, particularly by those who had

been left out. The photos were included because, apparently, there were some
people who still doubted that there actually 
are 
African scientists. This book put
those doubts to rest. The second edition, revised and expanded, was published

in March 1991, with over 600 entries.
The Peer Review Process at the AAS
I want to provide some detailed information about the peer review system
that we used at ASP. If a journal is to be taken seriously by the international

scientific community, it must follow a rigorous peer review process. The system

established for the peer review of 
Discovery and Innovation 
was among the first
in Africa.After preliminary assessment of a paper by the editor, we mailed copies to
two or three independent referees. We first removed any information about the
authorŠname, country of origin, and current institution
Šso that the reviewer
would not be unduly influenced by such particulars. We looked for reviewers who

were not from the same country as the authors. In order to continuously

recalibrate our standards, we also chose reviewers from outside Africa.

Depending on referees' comments, the editor would:
1) accept for publication;
2) send referees' comments (anonymously) back to author for revision/
response;3) send copy to other referee(s) for further opinion; or

4) reject and return the manuscript to author.
The revised manuscript could be accepted or sent back to referees. Clearly
the peer review process often resulted in extended cycles of interaction between

authors and referees, mediated by the editor. Though expensive and time-

consumingINNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992115Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(given Africa's poor postal communications), we found this process extremely
important in safeguarding the quality, credibility, and integrity of the journal.
Never during the first four years of publishing 
D&I did the AAS receive any
feedback challenging the intellectual content of the journal. Indeed, potentially

embarrassing submissions were caught before damaging our reputation. Some of

the exchanges generated a lot of heat. We also learned that the matter of

confidentiality is often a managerial formality to protect the concerned parties:

active experts worth their salt can usually guess the identity of the author or at

least the institution from which a given paper originated. As long as this formality
is respected by all, however, the process can obviate any suspicions of bias,
plagiarism, blockage, and unfair competition in the scientific community.
Another unique feature of the 
D&I peer review system was that it was purely
voluntary. We correctly believed that if our journal was excellent, then reviewers

would find it an honor to be associated with it and contribute to its success.
As 1990 ended, it was clear that 
D&I was well established. We had fully
mastered the intricacies of originating and producing a high quality, peer

reviewed journal on African soil. However, 
D&I 
was now pushing the human
resources to the limit, particularly at the post-production, business end:

marketing, distribution, subscription fulfillment, and so on. This became the

focus of our struggle: to convince our donors to support the hiring of a marketing

officer. This was finally accomplished in June 1992. With this position filled, the
AAS controlled all the basic functions of DTP, and ASP became, at last, a full
(but still small) DTP-based publishing house.
Other Publications
As soon as ASP proved the viability of DTP for scholarly publishing in
Africa with the release of 
D&I 
in March 1989, the managers of AAS were
emboldened to widen the DTP scope to include books, monographs, and reports.

The editorial office already had four manuscripts on hand, coming out of other

AAS programs or through outside collaboration. These quickly became pioneer

DTP books under the ASP imprint. Their titles were:
   Science for Development in Africa;
   Soil and Water Management in Africa;
   Directory of Scholarly Journals Published in Africa; 
and   Regional Integration in Africa: an Unfinished Agenda
.By November 1989, we had produced the African Academy of Sciences'
Strategic Plan 1989
Œ1992, much acclaimed for its design excellence and quality
production in green, cream and gold, which became a major selling point among

the AAS's donors and clientele. Production of equally well-designed Annual

Reports became a tradition at this time.
In 1992, another milestone was passed when 
Whydah, the AAS newsletter,
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992116Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.was finally produced in-house by DTP. This was a major achievement, because it
was accomplished through internal capacity building, without expanding the

staff. Our Administrative Secretary, Miss Margaret Anaminyi, taught herself DTP

basically by watching and doing over the years, until she challenged us to let her

do it all. Her pioneering effort allowed us to produce the newsletter more

efficiently. She also spread the skills and confidence she gained to the other staff
members and other AAS projects. This caused a quantum leap in the efficiency
of our secretariat and the quality of our products as we became almost 100

percent computer-literate.As 1992 ended, problems remained at the post-production, business end but
these were being addressed by the new marketing officer. The biggest problem

threatening the DTP operation was that many of its pioneering staff began to

leave for a variety of reasons. After Professor Isoun left in mid-1990, we

managed to cover for his absence through sheer energy and hard work. But

when, at the end of 1991, Professor Nyong'o left to join the multiparty politics of
Kenya, the pressure became unbearable. At the same time, I was making plans to
return home to Uganda and decided to stay only one more year as Head of

Programs and Associate Editor. Under this pressure, we still managed to produce

all of our serials on time every time in 1992, but the book publishing slowed

down.In the meantime, it appears that the impetus for dynamic use of DTP has
been picked up by the ICIPE Science Press, which is covered by Ms. Agnes

Katama's case study (included in this volume). Her study shows the development

of the market-oriented, potentially sustainable strategy that we were planning at

the AAS but had not yet begun to develop and implement.
RESULTS, IMPACTS, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
By the end of 1992, DTP was well established at the AAS. The result was
that all programs could confidently produce camera-ready copy: books, journals,

newsletters, brochures, and reports on time and to consistently high levels of

quality. Our flagship publication, 
D&I, had broken all records by coming out
regularly, on time, for four volumes (16 issues).
Its high quality content, favorably reviewed in 
Nature, helped us break
through a thick barrier into the international science citation system. It was

abstracted and indexed in the secondary literature by 
Chemical Abstracts 
andCurrent Contents
. It was also carried in the catalogue of the African Book
Collective in London, signalling its entry into worldwide promotion, marketing,

and distribution. The number of papers submitted had risen to 780. 
Discovery and
Innovation  was quickly establishing itself as the principal forum for scholarly
and policy discourse in Africa.
ASP books and periodicals were displayed at international conferences and
book fairs worldwide, and could be found in many libraries. Our books were

hitting the market at a prolific rate, with 11 titles in our catalogue, plus thousands

of brochures, pamphlets, flyers, catalogs, indexes, and promotional materials.

AcademyINNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992117Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Science Publishers became one of the fastest growing scholarly publishing

houses on the African scene. A new AAS staff member confessed that he had

been misled before joining, by the number of publications reaching his

institution, into thinking that AAS was a large organization with a hundred

employees. He found about ten. We worked hard, and we worked smart, mostly

through DTP. (See Box 4.)The AAS is pinning great hopes on ASP to become the main pillar of its
quest for self-reliance and reduced donor dependence.
Impacts of DTP rapidly spread throughout the organization. The dot-matrix
printer was abandoned suddenly for the laser when our Director started refusing

to sign non-laser printed letters. Suddenly, everyone wanted a Macintosh with

laser printer. Timeliness, quality, and financial prudence became AAS

management goals. DTP could ensure delivery of the required results most of the

time.AAS's pioneering spirit created a mini freelance industry in DTP, mainly
composed of expatriates who were unemployed because of Kenya's strict

employment regulations. They set up DTP facilities in their houses and serviced

the high-pressure demands of the AAS, through their spouses and friends. Miriam

Isoun worked in this way to publish 
Science for Development in Africa, taking a
great weight off Gill Ngola's shoulders; she also stepped in for an issue or two of

D&I when Mrs. Ngola was away. Laura Tindimubona designed almost all the
books, the Strategic Plan, and Annual Reports. She used DTP to publish
Inventions of African Scientists, which was printed by ICIPE Science Press in
1992. These entrepreneurs were soon joined by others, including ICIPE

secretaries and graduate students at the University of Nairobi. And so DTP spread

in Nairobi.Here are some other examples of the impact of the desktop publishing
program at the AAS:
   One industrialist saw a new food formulation reported in an AAS
publication and started a new production line in his factory;
   An article from 
D&I was repackaged for the popular media and got carried
by several news agencies in Africa;
   I won the 1992 UNESCO Swraj paul award for work on development of a
science culture in Africa, an article first published as a guest editorial in

D&I in 1990;
BOX 4 IMPACT OF ASP
  A colleague visited a foreign organization based in Nairobi with the
mandate of collecting and disseminating African literature. He asked

them whether they had any books on science in Africa. They said,

"Sure." So he said: "Can I see some so as to acquire them for the

AAS library?" They brought out the books they had, and lo and

behold, they were all from the AAS.
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF

SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992118Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   My analysis of the characteristics of the African scientific community,
published in the 
Profiles 
book, led to a better understanding of the same and
helped in design of new AAS programs, such as the Education of Girls and

Women; and   Experts who received papers to referee for 
D&I ended up submitting papers
or getting involved in other AAS projects.
Finally, I believe that 
D&I and other AAS publications went a long way in
building the African scientific community, and perhaps, ultimately, an African

science. Any journal is an expression of the scientific community that surrounds

it. The famous "internationally recognized" journals that the African scientists

were clamoring to publish in, e.g., 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 
(JACS), are actually quite parochial in their core, because they have to be

relevant to the needs and aspirations of American chemistry. For these reasons,
African papers reporting on African problems would not be easily deemed
relevant to such journals. 
D&I, if it could overcome the problems it faced, could
be such a mouthpiece, and yet be internationally recognized. This program in turn

has had a great impact in making the AAS a highly visible authoritative leader of

science in Africa.ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
The main lesson we learned is that DTP should not be confused with simply
typesetting or design on a computer
Šwhich is what most laymen think. It should
be understood as 
publishing, first and foremost: this means managing the entire
process or chain by which raw manuscripts are transformed and delivered to the

consumer in the most appropriate fashion. This entails managing the origination,

printing, marketing, and distribution
Šand ideally doing all of this profitably and
in a self-sustaining way. The computer can play a role anywhere along this chain.
Seen in this way, DTP as most people see it, is only a small part of the entire
process. In our time, the AAS certainly mastered the origination process and we

depended heavily on the mature printing industry of Nairobi, but we had yet to

come to grips with the post-production or business end. There is still lots of room

for innovation and capacity building in these areas in Africa. Otherwise, why do

we still have so few reliable, sustainable scholarly journals in Africa? The key
aspect we mastered was the technology of DTP
Šat a time when few others had
much experience with its application.
Another key to our rapid expansion in this period is traceable not only to the
internal training of secretaries but to the more fundamental trick of strategic

recruitment of a cadre of several young university-trained graduate secretaries.

They had the basic knowledge, skills, and aptitude to scale the heights demanded

by the high standards set by the AAS in all its work. Tribute must be paid to this

cadre for
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992119Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.many of the achievements of DTP at ASP. Most of them have since grown
professionally to even higher levels and many are training their other colleagues.
Marketing and distribution of scholarly materials in Africa is still tough, and
more training and capacity building is needed in this area. But the imminent

creation of an African market, since South Africa became free, evidenced by

more free movement and the vibrant Book Fairs at Nairobi and Harare, may all

improve matters in the near future.
In scholarly publishing, it pays to have a good, marketable product to work
on. The AAS itself, its mission of excellence, its Fellows, and programs could be

sold to a good extent, inside and, more particularly, outside Africa. We had no

problem getting materials to work on. But spotting and working on these took

interest, vision, talent, and devotion.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This report has highlighted the experiences of an emerging scientific
organization whose dynamism and leadership was spearheaded by DTP. In the

period 1989
Œ1992, we initiated and firmly established DTP at the African
Academy of Sciences through a series of creative innovations. The AAS can now

embark on the post-publication activities such as promotion, marketing, and

distribution. The results today (1995) give cause for looking at the future with

confidence.At the end of the reported period, ASP was also looking to consolidate and
expand its scholarly publishing business. Consolidation means putting in place

all the basic parts (people, funds, and equipment) of the publication chain, so as to

make it market-driven and self-sustaining. This process has continued. The ASP

can expand into tertiary level textbooks and other scholarly materials, while

maintaining the journal and newsletter. This door remains open for ASP, since

the market is still underserved. Other prospects lay in strengthening the role of

the Fellows and their ownership of the Academy.
The commitment of the donors, especially the Carnegie Corporation of New
York and the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Science, was crucial at a

time when we had to build up the credibility to attract a revenue base from

subscriptions and advertisements. They had the vision and patience to nurture,

over a long period, what was clearly a promising idea, while keeping the pressure

high for quick maturity and independence. The challenge was how to support the

basic parts of the process so that donor withdrawal would not lead to collapse and

thus wasted effort. Clearly, more quantitative and diverse funding and promotion

are needed to sustain scholarly publishing and we look to any innovations in this
regard. The challenge to Africa's supporters remains.
INNOVATIONS IN DESKTOP PUBLISHING AT THE AFRICAN ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES, 1989
Œ1992120Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Case Studies on Electronic Networking
Perhaps no information technology generates as much interest as
networking. Bringing electronic networking and Internet capability to a country

opens avenues of communications that create hundreds of other opportunities.

Computer-based communications provides a means to bridge time and distance to

facilitate inter-personal communication. People who have the need or desire to

communicate about a particular subject can do so without being either physically

present in the same location (as in a conventional meeting), or even available at

the same time (as in a telephone conference call or a video teleconference).
Electronic communication is in everyday use in many organizations in
Africa; however, getting it into place in a new environment poses many

challenges. Complex economic, social, political, and legal factors affect the use

of the technology and present barriers to its successful implementation. The

telecommunications systems in many African countries are suffering from

deteriorating equipment and inadequate investment. Telecommunications costs

are high in relation to other costs, and participation in some computer-based

communication activities can require scarce foreign exchange.
Still progress is being made. In the last year or two several African countries
have gained full Internet connectivity. Others are creating local networks and

adding users one by one until they build a user base large enough to sustain an

Internet connection. In the meantime, the users and the system operators are

learning valuable skills.
The case studies in this section describe the difficult processes that five
system operators have gone through in order to build the networking capability in
121Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.their countries. These five projects are interconnected since the project managers

were introduced to the technology by many of the same people and through many

of the same megaprojects. Their individual stories are unique, however, because

each author overcame different technological, managerial, and infrastructural

constraints.As one author wrote, networking tends to sell itself. The more users you
have online, the more users you have waiting to be connected. So, almost one

user at a time, these authors are helping to build Africa's information highway.
122Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Networking for the Research
Community in Ethopia
by Lishan Adam
Lishan Adam has a B.Sc. in Electrical Engineering and a
M.Sc. in Computer Information Systems. He is working

towards his Ph.D at the University of Sheffield, United

Kingdom. He has worked in the information field for the last

six years, focusing mainly on technology for accessing

information, which includes electronic communication

networks. Currently, he is the coordinator for the Capacity

Building for Electronic Communications in Africa (CABECA)

project. His research interests include electronic
communications for grassroots institutions, networking technologies, and

techniques for building qualitative information systems and networks.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
This case study describes the challenges faced in setting up a research
communication network in Ethiopia. It covers the activities I undertook and the

constraints I faced while expanding electronic connectivity to a research

community. It also discusses the lessons I learned in the process.
Ethiopia is located in the horn of Africa and shares borders with Sudan,
Kenya, Somalia, Eritrea, and Djibouti. Addis Ababa, the capital city, is often

called ''a city for Africa" because it hosts two major organizations: the United

Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) and the Organization of

African Unity (OAU). UNECA is the African regional arm of the United Nations

Economic and Social Council. UNECA has established and sponsors a number of

African institutions to promote all aspects of socioeconomic development of the

region.The Pan African Development Information System (PADIS), one such
regional institution under UNECA, was created to build both information and

networking capability in African countries. PADIS was instrumental in setting up

a national electronic network in Ethiopia and in connecting members of the

research community to each other locally and with colleagues worldwide.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA123
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 UNDER-USE OF EQUIPMENT
A recent survey conducted prior to linking colleges outside of the capital city
with the network showed that one college received a few modems in 1993 and
did not know what to do with them. The modems were locked up in cupboards

for two years!There are only a few advanced research institutions and two major
universities in Ethiopia. Addis Ababa University, the country's largest university,

administers most of the colleges. The Agriculture University of Alemaya, in

Harar Province 500 kilometers east of Addis Ababa, is the next largest research

center. Health research is undertaken by the medical faculty of Addis Ababa

University and at two other research colleges in Gondor and Jimma. The country

has several teacher training schools and research centers.
The level of scientific and technological information (STI) and infrastructure
in these research centers varies. Some colleges lack the most essential resources,

such as paper and ink. Others use computers and connect to the local electronic

networking host. The need for STI and communication is great, especially by

colleges outside of Addis Ababa.
The Current STI Environment in Ethiopia
Ethiopia is the second poorest country in Africa, having been devastated by
long-lasting war, drought, and mismanagement. The national STI environment is

generally weak, reflecting the poor economic situation in the country. The

transition1 economy is too weak to support the population, which is growing at an
annual rate of 3.1 percent, with the fertility rate mounting to 7.5 percent. The STI

environment has suffered from the poor economic performance during the last

twenty years.All STI centers, including university libraries, have been unable to expand
and keep up with demands. There were hardly any books coming to the country

during the previous socialist government. According to the head of the Addis

Ababa University libraries "most collections are those of the 1960s." Those were

the "golden years" of library collection development
Šwhen resources were made
available to support new acquisitions.
Most colleges are not equipped with computers and other information
technology tools. The more remote the college from the capital city, the less it is

exposed to computing technology. (See 
Box 1
.) Under-use of existing equipment
due to lack of training and low quality of maintenance is also common. Lack of

knowledge about different hardware contributes to the under-use of computer

accessories.Computer equipment is generally expensive. A non-error correcting, 2400
bps modem that costs $ 40.00 in the United States costs the equivalent of $ 200 in

Ethiopia. The local price of accessories is between 400 percent to 1500 percent

more than the original cost. A bureaucracy for clearing equipment through

customsELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA124
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.exasperates most possibilities of getting it through mail order or from friends
residing in foreign countries.
One additional problem, unique to the country, is related to the use of
Ethiopian script. Ethiopia is one of the oldest countries using its own script. The

shortage of good, easy-to-use software that is adaptable to local script is a major

problem. Generic native-language software interfaces that allow easier storage

and retrieval of textual information in local languages and scripts are not well

developed. Modern tools, such as Windows [Byte, 1994], that have features for

processing data in all languages simultaneously are not readily available in
Ethiopia.A lack of good training schools and colleges in computing technology has
created a chronic shortage of trained personnel in advanced networking, although

Addis Ababa University now offers courses in computer applications and system

design. Due to the lack of incentives and of an enabling environment, one seldom

finds dedicated computer "gurus." The culture for competition and independent

effort to solve complex computing problems is not well developed.
Several small computer companies were set up during the transition period
but they have not become a source of objective advice in computing technology.

Most companies focused on generating quick income through computer

applications training. Qualitative and advanced services in networking and local

area network (LAN) management are not available at these companies. Due to the

lack of a good professional background, techniques such as application

development, system integration, and networking are not practiced.
The telecommunication sector is another underdeveloped area in the
country. National telecommunication service in Ethiopia is owned by the

government. Analog telephone
2, digital leased lines, and radio links to rural areas
are major services of the national operator. There is no modern communication

technology. Rural telecommunications is still operator assisted. Packet switching

and ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) are under consideration.
A three to five year queue is usually the case for individual households that
wish to install a telephone. Business and international organizations may get

telephone lines within one to three months when lines are available. Some

institutions have to wait for months to get direct lines.
The above national STI environment dictated the type of network
technologies we chose to use, as well as the pace at which we could install and

apply them. Policy, regulatory, management, and cultural problems were by far

the most challenging
Ševen when compared to the technical bottlenecks faced in
setting up electronic mail links to the research community. All the same,

electronic networking in Ethiopia was started during one of the most rigid
governments in Africa.
3PROJECT DESCRIPTIONNetworking activity in the country began under a project funded by
International Development Research Centre (IDRC) entitled "Computer

Networking in Africa." The aim of the project was to assess the viability of

networking between
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA125
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.African institutions. The specific objectives of the project in Ethiopia were
to:   improve the exchange of scientific information within Ethiopia by
establishing a working, efficient, and reliable electronic network that brings

contact with other networks locally, regionally, and internationally;
   develop human resources in electronic networking through training,
transfer of skills, and university teaching;
   develop corps of skilled users in the country through training, trouble-
shooting, and ongoing technical support;
   establish a national scientific network that supports all levels of
technologies (Fidonet, UUCP, and TCP/IP, which stands for transmission

control protocol/Internet protocol and connotes a full, interactive Internet

connection) for various categories of colleges and users under different

situations; and
   set up an Internet link through development of the user base that justifies
the cost of a TCP/IP connection.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The first activity of the project in Ethiopia was initiated in September 1991,
when the Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission, which coordinates the

national STI networks, participated in the first African workshop on low cost

networking. The workshop provided training on low cost communications

technology and charted connectivity strategies among research institutions in

Africa and those in Ethiopia. Subsequently other academic institutions

(universities, colleges and faculties) began to link to the main national host.
4To date the main national host serves over 1,000 users drawn from NGOs,
research institutions, government, business, and others. Researchers evolved from

network-"hesitant" to power users. For example, a connection was made to the

chemistry department of Addis Ababa University at the beginning of 1993. At

that time, a professor said openly "this is a waste of time and of computer

resources." In 1995, the department became the top user of the national hub and a

center for network support to Addis Ababa University users.
Network usage and development activity at the university intensified in
October 1993, immediately after a workshop was organized for participants

drawn from various departments of the Addis Ababa University. The workshop

created conditions for setting up a steering committee to promote networking

within the university. The steering committee evolved from a few actors to a full

fledged university-wide networking group. It established a networking committee

to promote networking in the country and develop connectivity to the Internet.
The research community became the second largest user of the national
network (See 
Table 1
.) It constitutes 14 percent of PADIS installed sites and 26.2
percent of total local users.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA126
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 1 Composition of PADISnet Users (April 5 1995)
User Category
Number of
installedsitesPercent of
total sites
Average
number ofusersTotalnumber of
usersPercentResearch and
academic3914727326.2
NGO9132.7436435
Government1144444.2

Business165.753484.6

Individuals4817.252969.1

International7225.9321620.7

Media10.4220.2
TOTAL278100-1043100Source: PADISnet registration forms.
In addition to developing a sound user base that would eventually justify the
upgrade to a full Internet connection, one of the major activities of the project at

the beginning involved experimenting with a mix of technologies to select the

hardware that was most appropriate for working with poor telephone lines. We

conducted the experiments using a mix of technologies to arrive at appropriate

solutions. We evaluated the following four connection techniques during the

process:   long distance dial-in to UNIX hosts in North America;
   UUCP6 link through a leased line by running a gateway software;
   packet-radio connection to health institutions; and
   Fidonet
7 based mail connection to Internet using GnFido gateway in
London.Our first attempt to link researchers in the country used long distance dial-in
to UNIX hosts in Canada and the United States. Access to large academic
networks such as BITNET was the main interest at the time. A direct dial-in to a
UNIX server at Carleton University in Canada was made every day to collect and

send messages to the research community. Rudimentary terminal access

programs such as Procomm were used to link to the Carleton server. This turned

out to be one of the most frustrating means of making connections as the lines

broke at almost every trial. Successful connections were so rare that the

connection was discontinued after a few months. The cost of telecommunications

mounted every month. The cost was made up of:
   long distance telephone charges;
   low speed connections (successful connections were at 300 bps); and
   additional procedures required as a result of long distance dialing and line
breaks (i.e., transferring files several times after line breaks; login

procedures to packet switching network in the U.S.).
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA127
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Paying enormous bills every month for long distance connections forced
PADISnet to switch to a more cost effective site. While exploring sites, a link

using the United Nations Alternate Voice and Data (AVD) leased line to the

Institute of Global Communications (IGC) became cheaper and more attractive.

The IGC link enabled us to convert local Fidonet messages into UUCP format

before leaving the PADIS host via a gateway software. This created conditions
for developing local expertise in running gateway software and in experimenting
with UUCP packets. However, since the line was devoted to UN communications

(voice and fax), it became slow and inadequate for data communications.

PADISnet was given only a 15 minute window to send and receive UUCP

messages. This was an inconvenience and resulted in the final suspension of the

connection after ten months of operation.
Another technology used for STI connectivity in Ethiopia was a HealthNet
link. PADIS helped to establish this link and to secure its ground station license.

The HealthNet ground station, which links to a low earth-orbiting (LEO) satellite

operated by SatelLife, was licensed in April 1994
Šafter 18 months of
negotiation with the national telecommunications operator. The ground station

was installed at a teaching hospital, one of the largest in the country. This
connection was not used as effectively as hoped due to the following difficulties:
   Unreliable power supply. Fluctuation in electric current at the site of the
ground station led the system to crash from time to time.
   Very complex software. A home-written Fidonet software made
configuration difficult. Lack of documentation and troubleshooting tools

heightened the problem.
   Synchronization of systems. The HealthNet system is composed of a
receiver, transmitter, modem, antenna, microcomputer, satellite, and

software. Failure in one or more of these systems resulted in a complete

crash of the node from time to time.
   Lack of an overall plan for user support. The national HealthNet node did
not come up with a plan for introducing the technology, connectivity, or

regular user support.   Low bandwidth. The uplink and downlink speed of the modem and satellite
pass time was limited. With growing user demand for bandwidth-intensive

documents, such as reports with graphics or images, the system became

inadequate.   Marketing. The failure to develop an expansion plan and lack of marketing
of the services limited its use in the country.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA128
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A direct Fidonet connection to the Association for Progressive
Communications (see description on page 189) in London using public telephone

lines remained the most attractive of all the above techniques. This connection is

currently our main link to the global networks and provides all store-and-forward

Internet services. Due to a lack of knowledge about the potential of store-and-

forward technology, researchers mainly use the email and bulletin board services
of the linkage. Some students and a few researchers are exploring other potential
services such as:
   searching the PADIS database using email query;
   accessing the Hornet bulletin board system (BBS);
   batch Internet services such as ftp, gopher, and archie through mail; and
   conferences and Fidonet echo mail.
The Hornet BBS is perhaps the most unique application of low cost
technology in Ethiopia for information exchange. Hornet offers an introduction to

the potentials of electronic information systems and provides a reservoir of

background information and discussion on the Horn of Africa. [Parker, 1994] The

bulletin board offers:
   Fidonet conferences (or echoes) to as wide an audience as possible, with no
on-site software set-up necessary;
   a mechanism to exchange information and skills among users of the PADIS
system; and   a central store of information, files, help, useful Internet addresses, and so
on.Simplicity and minimum hardware requirements on the users' side make the
BBS more popular. Prompted by this offering, a number of research institutions,

including the Addis Ababa University and the Ethiopian Science and Technology

Commission, are setting up a scientific bulletin board system. Local bulletin

board systems connected to information reservoirs, such as databases and tools on

CD-ROM, are found to be the most useful tools for STI networking under the

local infrastructure.During the last two years, increasing user demands for real time
connections, the need for joining the Global Information Infrastructure (GII), and

congestion of the host telephone line forced the national node to look for a better

technology. At the time of this writing, the node is exploring full Internet

connectivity and/or other intermediate solutions. The effort to get a full Internet

(TCP/IP) connectivity is hampered by three major problems:
   high cost of leased lines;
   institutional and national constraints; and
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA129
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   financial resources to cover implementation and running costs.
Leased Line Costs
The national telecom operator provides leased lines at a very high tariff.
Table 2
 shows approximate monthly charges for international leased lines to the
United States and South Africa.
8TABLE 2 Cost of Leased Line from Ethiopia to Selected Countries
Type of circuitCountryCost/month19.2 kbits analogUSA$4,700
19.2 kbits analogSouth Africa$6,200

64 kbits digitalUSA$11,700

64 kbits digital
South Africa$15,500Source: Action plan document of a committee for Bringing Internet To Ethiopia (BITE).
National Infrastructure and Political Constraints
The low level of infrastructure as well as policy-specific problems continue
to hamper the progress of setting up full connectivity to global networks in

Ethiopia. Changing the attitude of the government and of the PT&T (the national

telecommunication provider) remains one of the most challenging tasks. Some of

the national infrastructure and political constraints we face include:
   competition and unwillingness of the national telecom operator to endorse
operation of national cooperative or private nodes;
   low participation of government institutions in overall network
implementation;   lack of knowledge of electronic communication by government officials
that results in delays to approve research network (see 
Box 2);   education structure and low value accorded to information management,
transmission, exchange and use; and
   lack of a critical mass of trained UNIX experts or "gurus."
Despite the above problems, the project continued to work towards
improving network access to researchers. The bottom-up approach for building a

network (starting from users, soliciting institutional support, and then

approaching the government) helped us bypass an often difficult bureaucratic

structure in the country.
Eventually, the increase in the availability of local "hand holders" and
troubleshooters encouraged expansion of the network. The local troubleshooters

createdELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA130
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.institutional champions and then the institutional champions helped users get
around configuration problems. In time, we motivated others to get connected.
BOX 2 HEALTHNET IN ETHIOPIA
Often government policies work against the introduction of new
technologies. Lack of understanding can lead to delays and other frustrations.
For example, it was a painful process to secure a HealthNet ground station

license for Ethiopia. The process took over 18 months. Simply clearing the
ground station equipment from customs took over a month. An engineer from
SatelLife, who could have been used for training and set-up, ended up running

between the national telecom operator's office and the Ministry of Health. The
license was approved with a traffic compensation fee of $350 per month. The
ground station, which was donated as national asset to aid in the transmission

of health information, was instead treated as a CNN hub. The word "ground
station" was found to be misleading for technicians who did not bother to know
what a packet radio connection to low earth orbit satellite was. The traffic
compensation fee was waived six months later.
Reliability of the network has also contributed towards the diffusion of
networking technology in Ethiopia. Network reliability is a function of good
systems operators (sysops) running the node, advanced computing technology

tools, and reliable telecommunication infrastructure. PADIS' effort to make the

system reliable by hiring additional system operators
9 and acquiring the latest
technologies favored the situation.
Other factors that contribute to further network expansion include:
   the availability of dedicated local champions and
   the availability of simple network learning tools, such as the Hornet Bulletin
Board System.PADIS management played a major role in leading and supporting
networking in the country. The availability of information
10 at PADIS provided
incentive for several users to seek connection to the network. PADIS made its
resources available via the network to satisfy users who wanted to go beyond

electronic mail.
Individual willingness
Šespecially from top government officials
Štoembrace existing technology and their demand for better services are perhaps the

major motivating factors for expansion to a full TCP/IP. Influenced by their
former contacts (usually at universities or NGOs in developed countries)
researchers who are not connected demand quicker and better connectivity.

Contact requirements and realization of benefits of networking compelled several

users to demand email services even under difficult circumstances. What are the

major benefits that prompted researchers to look for electronic networking?
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA131
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Reduced Communication Costs
The most outstanding benefit of electronic networking to the research
community in Ethiopia was that of bringing a new tool for reducing high

communications costs. Ethiopia is a country with one of the lowest pay scales in

the world. The following vital figures shows the situation.
Professor or researcher salary per month
$162.00Cost of:
1 page fax to UK
7.205 page fax to UK16.10

3 minute telephone call to UK8.20
5 minute telephone call to UK
13.70Electronic networking brought a considerable amount of communications
cost savings compared to fax, telex, telephone, and courier service. Though email
costs are complex and difficult to quantify, we do know that networking offers a

far cheaper option to all existing transmission media. (See 
Table 3
.) The
following tables and computations show a considerable comparative advantage of

email over a fax
Šwithout involving costs of other elements such as hardware, or
training.Using compression tools, such as PKZIP, an average document can be
compressed 2.5 times. The amount of bytes per minute after compression would

be:Compression factor 2.5

Total bytes per minute 2.5 x 103342 = 258357

High speed modems, with good error correction, synchronized to the
receiving modem, can also increase the amount of bytes transmitted per minute.

Using 28.8 Kbps modem the amount of bytes per minute would be: bytes per

minute of 28.8 kbps modem (1.5 x 285357 = 387535)
Using the above figures, we can calculate the cost per kilobyte of different
means of communication.
TABLE 3 Raw data used in computation
Date and Time
Number of bytes transferredTime takenBytes/minute10 July at 6:00565,5835:25104,737
11 July at 6:00728,4106:53105,873
11 July at 1:00353,4963:30100,998
11 July at 5:24
562,2565:24104,121Source: Log files of the PADISnet host July 1995.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA132
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In addition to the reduction of communications costs, email made the
following contributions to the research community in Ethiopia [Adam, 1994]:
   It facilitated the organization of international seminars, joint authorship, and
the execution of joint projects that otherwise would have been expensive

and time consuming. According to the Director of the Institute of Ethiopian

Studies, Dr. Bahru Zewde, ''Global conferences in Ethiopia and those on

Ethiopia in 1994 were cost effective and successful because of email

connections."   It inspired the introduction of standard computing operating systems such
as UNIX. Recently the School of Information Science for Africa (SISA)

purchased a UNIX server as a networking backbone. The Mathematics

Department of Addis Ababa University received a UNIX computer in

connection with its networking effort from Ethiopians residing in North

America. Deans and department chairs were forced to plan to "wire" their

offices and create local area networks (LANs) to cope with an increasing

demand from researchers to have independent accounts on work stations.
   It facilitated a switch from the hierarchical model of organizational
procedures to the informal interaction among researchers in the country and

those worldwide. User feedback indicates that delays in signing regular

correspondence were eliminated upon arrival of email. (See 
Table 4
.)Email also brought about the reunification of the research communities in
Ethiopia with those elsewhere. It improved family and informal ties between

Ethiopians residing overseas and those at home.
11Improved Training Options
Electronic networking facilitated the availability of more national and
institutional trainers. It created the expansion of knowledge on the use and

benefits ofTABLE 4 Cost Comparison Between Fax Message and Electronic Mail Between
Addis Ababa and London
MediumAverage kilobytes/per
minuteCost/KBCost ration to a fax
Fax12400.181:1
Email using 14.4modem2370.00931:19
Email using 28.8modem133550.00621:29ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA133
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.networking and TCP/IP connectivity. The methodology used in training
contributed to improved skills in the country. The national host uses the following

techniques to train users.
IntroductionUsers are introduced to key features of networking. This covers basics of
local networking, what it involves, cost, and types of services.
Site configuration and training
Site training is meant to connect researchers to the network. It involves
configuring the hardware, setting up telephone lines, providing hands-on training

on system usage, and training in basics of troubleshooting.
Ongoing assistance
The host provides continuous online assistance to improve users skills in
dealing with different utilities and to work on improved and cost efficient

techniques.WorkshopThis is used both as marketing tool for the national node and for advanced
training. Experience indicated that initial introductory workshops overload users

with new concepts. Successful workshops could only be held after usage of the

networks. Advanced workshops were found to be useful in promoting

connectivity.Improved Skills
Another considerable impact of the network was an increase and
improvement of the skills at the main national node. We developed skills in

managing networks, dealing with administrative problems, developing techniques

to respond to users' problems, managing system malfunctions, developing tools

and guidelines, and gathering data. The experience we gained was immense.
Improved Access from Rural Areas
The spread of the network to the rural area is one of the most significant
achievements of the project. Despite technical problems, such as unreliable

connections and more focus on the capital city, a number of users were able to

link to the PADISnet from outside of Addis Ababa. NGOs with field offices

outside of the capital found networking a convenient tool for sending logistical

information and data on field situations.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA134
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Doctors with no telephone connections were able to use networking.
Medical doctors from 
Medicins Sans Frontiers
, headquartered in Belgium, who
were working 800 kilometers from Addis Ababa were able to send messages and

data to their correspondents all over the world. Lacking telephones at their field

site, they send messages via small airplane to Addis Ababa for uploading to their

host to resend to PADIS. All international messages received are sent back by the
same plane the following day. Other mobile field researchers from the same
location were able to link their modems to the nearest city where phones are

available.A number of colleges outside of Addis Ababa are discovering the value of
networking. They face double isolation
Šfrom both the developed world and the
country's capital where most of the activities and decisions take place. Everything

in the country is hierarchical and centralized. Decisions at higher levels (at the

capital) take a long time to reach institutions in remote areas. Networking can

reduce the isolation and make communication more efficient.
Connectivity to the rural areas facilitated the coordination of resources and
the diffusion of technology. Connectivity at the Mekelle College (710 kilometers

from Addis) recently stimulated the establishment of a LAN for connecting

individual professors to the global network. A project run by the Ethiopian

Science and Technology Commission to link over thirty-six colleges outside of

the capital stimulated further international cooperation between the colleges and
other universities worldwide. The Commission intends to "wire" all colleges and
high schools in the country while working on a full TCP/IP connection at the

capital.ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Lesson 1
The resources required for achieving access to knowledge and wider
national coverage are a fraction of the benefits gained by building networks.

Coordinating activities at a national level assists in realizing cost effectiveness

and efficiency. Networks can subsidize themselves. Lack of an infrastructure

should not be seen as a major bottleneck to networking.
There are two major goals of electronic networking of the research
community:   wider coverage of users by reaching many scientists, researchers, students
etc.; and   improving access to knowledge by bringing global information resources
closer to the scientific community.
Attaining these two goals needed institutional and infrastructure readiness
from the outset. When these two goals were first proposed to managers and policy
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA135
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.makers their initial reaction was that "there are no resources" and "we can not do
it under our telecommunications situation"!
Lesson 2
Training is the main element in infrastructure development. Do not start
training on DOS based networking at universities, start with UNIX, which I

believe to be the multi-user system of choice for networking universities.
Wider national coverage requires local infrastructure development. Local
infrastructure means not only the physical set-up of machines and software, but
also building a sense of awareness and increasing the participation of users.
Training should cover a wide range of groups at different levels and should
introduce all standard technologies such as UNIX to the academic community

from the very beginning. Starting training in the DOS environment limits
universities' capacity to move quickly on to sophisticated techniques. Using DOS
for networking universities instead of UNIX is like using typewriters instead of

word processing. Good documentation saves time.
Lesson 3
Build as many local area networks as possible. A LAN is a building block
for Internet connectivity.Capacity building in universities requires setting up of a university-wide network
for inter-connecting many LANs, serving individual departments, libraries, and

administrative offices, and offering the connections to the Internet through
gateways. LANs are building blocks for good research networks.
Lesson 4
Good network management practices should begin when the number of
users is very small. Good network administration can prevent user and donor

frustration.The professional management and administration of a network should begin as
soon as you have two users. A well-run network needs a good billing structure,
well developed methods for gathering data on the type and nature of users, and
mechanisms to backup log files, document problems, and track progress. Put

these systems in place before the number of users grows to an unmanageable
size.ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA136
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lesson 5
Networks should be interactive on both an inbound and outbound basis.
Interactive sysops are the best assets of good networks. Inbound interaction with
local users and outbound links to other networkers worldwide assist in sharing
knowledge, resources, and time. Documenting tips and passing them on to users

helps networks to expand.
Lesson 6
Using software with simpler user interface is important.
One of the major components in infrastructure building is the provision of
simple tools to users. Users should get uncomplicated tools. Using software with

good user interfaces reduces frustration and improves users' interests in
networks. The community of Macintosh users should not be neglected.
Lesson 7
Do not focus only on global information sources. Assist in building local
capacity in STI exchange.
Improved knowledge access can be achieved by creating a collaborative
atmosphere within a country and by connecting to global networks. National
STI sources should be strengthened to enable local exchange of information and
collaboration. Networking should be built with maximum participation of local

STI providers and users.Lesson 8
Do not promote the concept of subsidy. Promote the concept of "pay a small
amount to keep your network healthy."
Networks should sustain themselves. Income-generating should start at the
beginning. Users should be told to pay for services. Subsidizing researchers is
important; researchers should, however, know the costs and participate in paying
for services from the beginning. The payment could come from university

budgets or projects.ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA137
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Scientific and technological information in Africa needs to be strengthened.
African input to global information resources emerges from the local STI

institutions. Databases and low cost networks will ultimately serve African

information needs. This is especially true for local loops where

telecommunications and other infrastructure continue to be problematic. The

international link itself is also inadequate. Except in South Africa, the other
eleven African countries with Internet connectivity have a maximum speed of
(usually) 19.2 Kbps. Reaching the global community and providing African STI

to global users need efforts in strengthening the local capabilities both in

networking and in information generation, management and dissemination, while

upgrading the bandwidth for international connectivity.
Quality, reliability, and sustainability of African STI and networks is
becoming another critical focus. Surveys and experience indicate that databases

on STI lack good quality and are mostly unreliable. Database and information

systems development in the region need to build quality tools and strategies for

sustainability of African STI databases. The quality and sustainability of low cost

electronic networks serving STI in Africa should also be improved.
Electronic communication will become a major tool for distributing global
information to Africa. This does not mean African researchers need and can

afford full TCP/IP connectivity. The key questions become: Is the African STI

environment ready for full Internet connectivity? Will communication be two-

way (from Africa to developed world and vice versa)? What will be the overall

implications of Internet for a few in the capital cities versus those who are

isolated due to a poor infrastructure and who need to break the isolation?
The answers to these questions remain a challenge to STI providers in
Africa. African STI institutions need Internet connectivity. Internet connectivity

means full participation of local providers and STI institutions in information

generation and usage on the global networks. The current trend in most African

countries focuses on Internet "proximity": bringing Internet closer to the users

with no expansion plans for wider connectivity using low bandwidth links.
Encouraging STI institutions to participate in information exchange will become
the next challenge after bringing an Internet link to a country.
The situation in Ethiopia, which is often similar to that in other countries in
Africa, indicates that careful analysis of the national STI environment should be

made to design the most appropriate solution to improve overall research capacity

in a country.
Efforts should begin by building the capacity of national science and
technology institutions, such as research institutions, colleges, and small STI

service providers. They should be encouraged and trained to manage information

and use global information sources. Interim innovative services, such as

connections to major databases or Internet services via local Bulletin Board

Systems, should be
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA138
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.available. Users should be made fully aware of the services available to them
even through existing low-cost, store-and-forward technologies.
One of the major tasks facing African STI networks is a lack of knowledge
of what is happening in the same region, the same country, or even the same

institution. We should develop directories, dissemination tools, and guides on

STI networking efforts. We should disseminate via our networks STI meta-

information (information on scientific and technology information). Without a

solid regional STI base, connectivity alone cannot serve its purpose.
NOTES1. Ethiopia's longest crisis and war years were between 1974 and 1991. During the transition
period (1991Œ1995) the government attempted to eliminate centralized and rigid policies to make
favorable conditions for economic growth.
2. International telephone linkage to major cities in the world is relatively good. Users can
connect with up to 28 Kbps to London without difficulty. A 300 to 900 CPS connection can be

achieved using error-correcting modems. It is often easier to telephone internationally than across

regional cities. The call from Addis to Mekelle is often compared to that of Addis to London.

Cost of international communication is also high. The tariff was raised by 75% in May 1994.
3. The Ethiopian socialist government which had fallen apart in 1991 promoted strict policies on
communications. Modems were not allowed due to reasons related to national security. Any
move towards opening up communication was looked upon as a "war against socialism."
4. The national host was set up at PADIS and the network is called PADISnet. It is open to all
categories of users on a fee-for-use basis.
5. Since April 1995, the number of installed sites has increased by an average of 5 per week,
thereby nearly doubling since that time.
6. UUCP is a UNIX based store-and-forward technology. Developments were fast and based on
international cooperation between programmers. It is a suitable start up technology for the

academic community.
7. Fidonet is a store-and-forward networking technology by which computers poll each other to
exchange email and conference messages. Ability to work over poor telephone lines and software

that enables off-line working make Fidonet attractive to NGOs and African institutions with

small budgets.
8. Leased line costs to South Africa are almost 1.5 times those of links to the United States. There
is double hop to reach South Africa.
9. In June 1995, PADIS used an intern
Šan Ethiopian PhD student from Columbia University
Što look at university-wide networking and to improve the reliability of local systems.
10. The PADIS information system consists of bibliographic databases on African socioeconomic
development, databases on African experts, on-going research projects in Africa, research

institutions in Africa, and other numerous complementary and specific databases on Africa.
11. The author received numerous requests from Ethiopians studying abroad to link to their
families at home. Families separated during the war and those who fled economic problems are

beginning to use networking to reunite with their families. Ethiopian researchers abroad who

discovered the existence of the linkage are connecting back with their former teachers and

institutions.12. Fax costs vary based on text type. Graphics can be 100K or more. Regular fax message can
be 10 to 70K in size. An average size was taken for this calculation.
13. A 28.8 Kbps was taken to be 1.5 times faster than a 14.4 Kbps modem.
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA139
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHYAdam, Lishan. (1994) Sustainable Academic Networking in Africa: System Operator's Perspective,
paper published by American Association for Advancement of Science, Accra, Ghana.
Beyond Windows: Globalization of Windows. 
Byte June 1994, pp. 177
Œ183.International Association of University (1991) 
University Based Critical Mass System for Information
Technology.National Research Council (1991) 
Status of Scientific and Technological Information Systems and
Services in Selected African Countries
. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Parker, Ben. (1994) The Hornet: The Horn of Africa's Electronic Information Exchange. Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN ETHOPIA140
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Networking in West Africa
by Moussa Fall
Moussa Fall is network manager for ENDA-Dakar node in
Dakar, Senegal. He also works for the CABECA project and

through that project has installed electronic mail nodes in

Morocco, Chad, and Mali. He has plans for working in

Mauritania, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Niger,

Togo, and Benin. He was an administrative assistant at ENDA

before getting into the networking field in 1991. He asks that

his case study be dedicated to "Pape, gone so early, and to

Touti and the whole tribe for their help and support."
"Networking means connecting people to people and people to information;
it does not mean connecting computers to computers."
Wendy D. White
ŠGrowing the Internet in Africa,
Internet Society News, 1994, Vol. 3, No. 2, p. 28
.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
I work for an organization called Environment and Development Action in
the Third World (ENDA). It was founded in 1972 in order to:
   work with grassroots groups on the basis of their needs and objectives;
   contribute to the search for alternative development possibilities at all levels
as well as to the various kinds of training programs that will make this

development possible; and
   contribute to intellectuals' and trained personnel's involvement in the setting
up and implementation of development programs in the service of the

largest number of people possible.
ENDA has also had a leading role in various global networks dedicated to
habitat, energy, street youth, pesticides, and other issues that have an

environmentalNETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA141
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.component. ENDA works in all parts of the Third World but the headquarters,
where I work, is in Dakar, Senegal, in West Africa. Senegal is a francophone

country.Since 1975, my role at ENDA, among other administrative tasks, has
consisted of organizing seminars, conferences, and training sessions. These

outreach tasks have helped to put me in contact with many people and I believe

that I started networking from there.
I first met Doug Rigby
1 in 1991, at an Interdoc meeting in Epe
(Netherlands), at which there was an introduction to electronic networking. He

spent considerable time talking to me about Fidonet technology and the NGOnet

project. (See 
Box 1.) Back in Dakar, I pushed my boss to get an email account
with a European private email provider. We accessed this account through the
Senegalese PTT X.25 and we extensively used it for email and for the fax
service.PROJECT DESCRIPTIONIn June 1992, the NGOnet project organized a one week workshop in Dakar
to introduce Fidonet to the non-governmental organization (NGO) community.

Doug Rigby was the organizer and, of course, I was among the participants. To

encourage NGO networking, the project donated one PC 386 for the node and
four modems. ENDA was chosen to host the node because of its commitment to
immediately acquire a dedicated phone line and to allow me to give part of my

time to the networking project.
BOX 1 THE NGONET PROJECT
The NGOnet project was instrumental in bringing networking to Africa. It
started as a project of the Environment Liaison Centre International (ELCI) in
Nairobi where a Fidonet bulletin board system had been set up to provide a

conduit for electronic mail traffic in the region and to NGOs worldwide. This was
done using a high-speed modem to make daily calls to the GreenNet Fidonet
(GnFido) gateway in London.
The project was based on a survey that found that there were significant
numbers of non-governmental organizations that had computers but were not
using them for electronic mail. To provide NGOs with the cheapest access,
emphasis was placed on establishing a series of hosts with high speed modems
distributed throughout Africa. These then provided NGOs with local support and

a local call to connect to the global electronic network. Four prototype hosts
were set up, one for each region of Africa - ELCI in Nairobi, MANGO in Harare,
ENDA in Dakar, and ENDA-Arabe in Tunis.
NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA142
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Here, I have to confess that I had no DOS skills
ŠENDA only used Macs.
But, because I was really interested in this new technology, I bought books on

DOS and computing in general and started learning. When you are very

motivated you can ''move mountains"
–For three months, the four NGOs that had received training and modems
started communicating just among themselves. There was no international traffic!

Then, in August 1992, the network received another donation from the NGOnet

projectŠa high speed modem (Telebit Trailblazer 2500)
Šwhich made us ready
to connect to the rest of the world.
FidonetŠA Grassroots Network
My introduction to Fidonet was so important that I should take time here to
describe this form of networking in more detail. Fidonet is a grassroots electronic

communications community that has been hard at work for over a decade

devising ever cheaper and increasingly sophisticated tools to serve its needs

through dial-up, store-and-forward, and modem-based connections. Fidonet

technology has proven to be a powerful do-it-yourself tool for establishing initial
footholds into the world of electronic communications. It offers users an
affordable option even if they lack institutional affiliations, financial resources,

or are located in a country where the nearest electronic communications link

requires an expensive dial-up call over international phone lines.
Because Fidonet technology emerged in an environment where individuals
operated each system independently and covered their own costs for phone calls

and equipment, it had to be very flexible, decentralized, and designed to operate

inexpensively with standard modems and microcomputers connected over

ordinary phone lines. The "handshaking" and file transfer protocols built into all
Fidonet-compatible software incorporate compression, error correction, and error
recovery capabilities that squeeze as much data as possible into the shortest

transmission time that the hardware will allow. Instead of using packet-

switching, these independent systems establish gateways with larger,

international electronic mail systems using high speed modems. At regular

intervals, the independent systems dial into the larger systems to swap incoming

and outgoing messages. This approach keeps down the cost of international calls

without requiring sophisticated computer equipment.
Fidonet messages are sent along a hierarchy. At the top are five very broad
geographic zones. Africa is Zone number 5. The zones are divided into regions,

then into hosts, then into hubs, and then into nodes. Just like all the levels above

them in the chain, nodes offer local email, pass new messages to and from the
hub, and collect messages to and from the 
pointŠthe lowest level of the Fidonet
hierarchy. Point operators have systems that are configured with all the software

necessary to call (or poll) the node and upload and download messages and files

whenever it is convenient. The computer can do all the work automatically,

making the calls
NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA143
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.into the central system at a time when the lines may have less traffic or the costs
may be lower.
BOX 2 INTERNET NAVIGATIONAL TOOLS
TELNET - Telnet, the Internet standard protocol for remote terminal
connections, is used for logging into and searching other computers connected
to the Internet. 
FTP 
- FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol and allows users to
exchange files between their workstations and remote computers connected to
the Internet.
GOPHER - Gopher, a software program for browsing and information
retrieval, provides a menu-driven interface that shows what is available on a
server. The user burrows through a set of "nested" menus to get closer and
closer to a specific topic. Gopher collects information scattered across many
computers and presents it on the same menu.
VERONICA - Veronica is an indexer that can query every gopher on the
gopher system to search for a keyword or phrase in a menu title. It then gives
the address of all the menus with those key words.
WAIS - WAIS, Wide Area Information Server, searches the full text of a
document to look for specified key words. WAIS accepts commands in plain
English, processes them at the user level, and relays the processed information

from the user to the selected databases.
WORLD WIDE WEB (WWW) 
- WWW is a tool for working with collections
of data, or databases. It is a 
hypertext 
based system that provides access to a
variety of files and information. Hypertext allows a user doing research on one

document to jump to a related item in another document through hypertext
links. In WWW, each document contains highlighted items for which additional
information is available. The additional information is contained in another

document that is displayed when the user selects the highlighted item. With
appropriate software, such as 
Netscape, the user can view not just text but
pictures, sound files, and video.
Fidonet is a communications technology that many consider to be less
advanced and, therefore, less useful than other technologies. It does not offer all

of the sophistication that other, more costly systems do. However, as you have

electronic mail capabilities, you can access important Internet tools like file
transfer protocol (FTP), Gophermail, World Wide Web (WWW), Veronica,
Wide-Area Information Servers (WAIS), and listservs
Ševen if you do not get
the results immediately as in a direct Internet connection. (See 
Box 2
.) Fidonet
technology has limited expansion capabilities, insofar as it will always remain a

store-and-forward, modem-based network. It lacks the capability for online

information retrieval, data-base searches, remote-login, and remote-execution

that other systems offer. However, while the expansion of more advanced

computer networking technologies is often constrained by prohibitively high

costs and inadequate telecommunications infrastructure, Fidonet technology is

not.NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA144
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Association for Progressive Communications (APC), a global network
dedicated to NGOs, was involved in the NGOnet project.
2 The APC was our
natural partner. Through the APC London-based member, greenest, we connect

through their Fidonet gateway (GnFido) to the rest of the world. GnFido serves as a

gateway for small Fidonet hosts not only from Africa, but also from Asia and

Latin America.Through this system we have been able to use email, download conferences,
and use the GreenNet fax service, which costs very little compared to the

national PTT charges. The computer conferences received were on various

topics: environment, development, health, AIDS, and so on. We also followed the

United Nations Environment Programme's preparatory conferences and the NGO

discussions regarding these conferences. ENDA now runs a private conference
for its own use, linking its various offices around the world.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
How Users are Trained
Users are trained either on an individual or group basis. After only one hour,
the trainees are able to send messages and check their mailboxes. Usually training

is done gradually. It is better to have three sessions of one hour each than just one

session of three hours. During the second session, users are shown how to encode
files to be sent and how to decode the received ones. The last session teaches them
how to subscribe to conferences, how to contribute to a conference, and how to

quit a conference.
Because the point software we use is user-friendly, after the training
sessions, users need very little help. This they can request by sending a message

to the postmaster who will respond to them as simply as possible.
For organizations using desktop computers, training is organized on site. For
individuals or organizations using laptops, we ask them to come to the ENDA

offices where things will be easier in case there is a problem.
Development of the Network and Perspectives
Accessing our network is relatively cheap
3 . Since the host is a non-profit,
non-governmental organization, it does not intend to make a profit from

providing networking services.
Our active users are our best advertisers! They help us "sell" the benefits of
networking. Presently the ENDA-DAK node has over 110 users
Šcoming from
national and international organizations, individuals, government agencies,
universities, and even the private sector. Our users come not only from Senegal,
but also from other neighboring countries, including the Gambia, Mali, and

Burkina Faso. The demand is increasing locally and also in all the neighboring

countries.NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA145
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Connecting Problems
During the period of April-May-June 1995, we experienced problems in our
connections with GnFido in London. The Senegalese phone system was not

working properly and users complained that their mail had not been delivered in

time. We tried several modems and, paradoxically, the modem with the worst

reputation behaved better than all those of a supposed higher quality. Now the

situation is better and we are presently using a Zyxel modem.
Regional NetworkingIn 1994, I was a consultant to the United Nations Environment Programme,
Global Environment Facility Project, which consisted of linking national teams

doing research on greenhouse gases in Senegal, the Gambia, Morocco, Uganda,

Tanzania, Nigeria, and Kenya. My part of the work consisted of developing

teaching tools for national teams in Senegal, Gambia, and Morocco. I also did

system installation, provided training, and helped link these teams to the
conference set up for them. They were thus able to exchange data on their
research, exchange views on methodology and software used, and share

experiences. It should be noted that this conference was bilingual and I did most

of the translation into French.
Since 1994, I have also been involved in the PADIS/IDRC CABECA
project (see 
Box 3), which tries to give access to countries where there is no
connectivity at all or where the existing infrastructure is too expensive for the

NGO community to afford. An agreement between the ENDA Executive

Secretary and Nancy Hafkin, who is the head of PADIS and the CABECA
project, allowed me to work full time in electronic networking.
This agreement was easier to reach than might be expected. I should point
out here that first our two institutions shared a common goal: to give electronic

access to communities at the grassroots level. This facilitated the collaboration. I

should also note that Nancy Hafkin's devotion to African networking and her

confidence in this continent and its human resources made this institutional
collaboration possible.
Through the CABECA project, I installed nodes in Rabat, in Chad, and in
Mali. Another CABECA goal is to train node operators who will themselves

become trainers.In the CABECA project, we are trying to implement a regional network that
is badly needed in francophone West Africa. Among these countries the

telephone exchange is relatively good and the costs are relatively low. The idea is

to have a regional hub
ŠENDA-DAKŠwhich will be the focal point for the
region, through which all regional mail shall be routed. With this infrastructure,
there is no need for mail addressed to the neighboring countries to be routed
through European gateways. Putting our resources together will make regional

networking more efficient and will reduce our costs for international traffic. We

believe that once this
NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA146
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.infrastructure is set up, the region will be a zone for intensive information
exchange. Organizations in the region have a great deal of information to share,

the countries have the same language, the same currency, participate in the same

economic organizations, and often are in the same ecological zone. Common

interests and experiences should encourage the growth of networking in West

Africa.BOX 3 CAPACITY BUILDING FOR ELECTRONICCOMMUNICATION IN AFRICA
Funded by a grant from the Canadian International Development Research
Centre (IDRC), the project on Capacity Building for Electronic Communication in
Africa (CABECA) builds on the experience gained over the last four years from a

number of IDRC-funded electronic networking projects in Africa. A public
corporation created by the Parliament of Canada to support research designed
to adapt science and technology to the needs of developing countries, IDRC has

taken the lead in financing African electronic networking initiatives with the aim
of demonstrating that the technology for deploying electronic connections
throughout Africa is readily available and can be implemented at relatively low
cost, taking into account the economic, social and political difficulties the region
faces. The CABECA project design attempts to address the problems of the

African region that have isolated it from the international networking
phenomenon.CABECA's overall objective is to provide technical assistance to bring
about sustainable computer-based networking in Africa, at an affordable cost,
accessible to a wide variety of users from both the private and public sectors. To
build African capacity for computer networking, it will train a corps of systems
operators who can train others in their area and offer continuing support to

fledgling users to ensure the sustainability of national nodes with connections to
international networks. The project's aim is to offer inexpensive and easy access
to local and international information services on systems run by local operators

and sustained by revenue from users. They will be able to exchange electronic
mail worldwide at a fraction of the cost of fax or telex; they will also have access
to conference mail, file transfer and databases. Efforts will be made to facilitate
African connectivity to the expanding range of Internet information services.
Some international organizations understand this very well and are
discussing with us how to connect their projects or field offices to this low cost

infrastructure. We are presently discussing with HealthNet the best way to for

Senegal and other countries in the region to collaborate with this project.
Methodology for Sensitizing
In each country visited under the CABECA project, we organized a half-day
workshop to sensitize NGOs and individuals to electronic networking. Some

workshops,NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA147
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.such as the one in Chad, brought together as many as 35 people. After a
preliminary introduction to the technology, using a phone simulator I always

carry with me, we split participants into three groups, each one sitting around a

computer. That way, each group can prepare one or two messages addressed to

the other two groups and then, through modems and the phone simulator,

exchange mail. They can see how fast the message can go and also the other
possibilities of the system.
After this hands-on training, all groups get together for a final discussion on
how this technology can serve the national community, the advantages compared

to technologies such as fax or even conventional mail. We always focus first on

how this technology can serve information sharing and exchange within the

country before opening up to regional and international networks.
Here we must not forget the context in which we work in many African
countries: there are poor phone lines and electrical shortages and outages. In

some of these countries, you can get a dial-tone only after working hours. In

some others, it is even worse, as not only do you have to wait a long time for a

dial tone but, once you get it, you are not sure your international call will

succeed. In one of these countries you can dial directly only to France!
Difficulties in Sensitizing
There are people who are allergic to new technologies. In one of the
countries I visited for sensitizing purposes, the Government computing

department is now attached to a national service. During our meetings, the head

of that service had been completely against the introduction of this new

technology, despite the fact that minister and all his colleagues agreed that their

country should be part of the process. They all wanted to join the growing
networks and reap benefits from them. Yet, the head of the service was able to
block progress. Every month, his office sends data concerning the country to

their subscribers who pay for the information. The documents are sent by regular

mail. After many demonstrations and taking into consideration the volume of

information sent monthly to North America and Europe, that person still retains

his original position
Šwhich makes his colleagues quite unhappy.
RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Some of our users told us that they were able to get rid of the international
line they used to send faxes after they discovered our fax service. Now their fax

machine is mainly receiving faxes from their correspondents who do not have

email and this has dramatically reduced their communications costs.
NGOs have been changing their way of communicating
Šespecially with
their northern partners. They are not only sending faxes but they send and receive

emailNETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA148
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.messages and files. Some of them have been subscribing to listservs while the
others, because of language problems, wait for the opportunity to have access to

conferences in French.
BOX 4 USING EMAIL TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
In Burkina-Faso, there is a daily newspaper that is issued at noon every day
except Sunday. The editor told us that to send an issue to a town located 400
hundred kilometers from the capital city they have to transport it via "bush taxi."
Due to lack of road infrastructure, the newspaper can be sold only the following
morning. Using email technology, the newspaper can be transferred very easily
and very quickly through the phone system, printed on the spot, and issued at

the same time as the capital city.
NGOs have also benefited from the technology by being better able to
participate in the preparations for such events as the United Nations environment

conference. Through the NGO forum, even small and isolated organizations can

be heard. ENDA itself, during the UN Environment Conference, issued a daily

newspaper in French giving accounts and comments on what was happening. The

newspaper was uploaded to Dakar and issued in both places on the same day. The

newspaper was broadly diffused among NGOs in Africa via networking

technology. (For another example of the benefits of email, see 
Box 4.)ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
   Sacrifices are necessary to begin a network. You must be prepared to work
long hours, spend your own money, visit users who have problems that
have nothing to do with the electronic communications system, and fix

hardware and software problems.   If you give people your home phone number, then you will be disturbed for
anything.   You also need to be patient with people. You may find people with laptops
who will take minutes to write a single word.
   For strategic purposes, you will sometimes have to give free accounts.
   Fidonet is a simple technology to master for NGOs which do not have the
resources and the time to invest in too sophisticated technologies. Presently
this is an appropriate technology for some African countries taking into

account the situation described above.
Fidonet has been criticized for its limitations, but for people who are
interested in email only and fax services, this is no doubt often the best choice. In
spite of all what is said, IT WORKS
–NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA149
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Here is probably the best recollection I have from networking. Two years
ago, I was surprised to find a message in my mail box saying:"I have been

searching the Internet for an electronic address in Africa and found yours for

Senegal. My name is
–, I am living in 
– of the USA and I am 12 years old." For a
while this young boy and myself have corresponded.
This would surprise any African
Šas we have not yet reached this level of
computer use in Africa. Taxes continue to make computers unaffordable for

individual use. And because of this we have a very low level of computer

literacy.One should note also that almost all NGOs use computers only for word
processing, which really shows lack of computer skills.
When you try to convince NGOs or individuals who have access to
computers to join the network, they are afraid of investing a lot of time learning

something new. Those who do not have access to computers do not understand

the necessity to invest money in a new technology of which they are afraid.
At this level, those who are connected are only interested in email and
sending faxes. This is understandable as communication costs are very expensive

in our countries.
NOTES1. Dough Rigby came to Nairobi in 1989 to work at the Environment Liaison Center
International (ELCI), which served as the node for several networking projects. While there, Mr.
Rigby did much to extend networking technologies, principles, and training throughout Africa.

Many local systems operators credit their current enthusiasm and success to Mr. Rigby.
2. The APC has contributed much to African networking. For more information about this
organization see page 189 in this volume.
3. The following rates are applied: installation US$ 20.00; monthly fee US$ 5.00; charge per
kilobyte sent US$ 0.10; charge per kilobyte received US$ 0.10.
NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA150
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSI am deeply grateful to Jacques Bugnicourt, ENDA's Executive Secretary for
his generosity and his open mind. He understood very quickly how crucial this

technology was for his own organization and for the NGO community. And

without his personal commitment and his encouragement, I would not have been

able to work in this field.
To Abou Thiam, from ENDA, who first mentioned email to me.

Thanks to Doug Rigby for the role he played in electronic communications
in Africa. He is the one who introduced the technology to me and to many

African system operators.
Thanks also to wonderful friends and colleagues who played and continue
playing a crucial role in African networking: Bob Barad, Karen Banks, Mike

Jensen, Cesare Dieni, Youba Sokona and Ann Heidenreich.
Thank you also to the very good friends in the APC networks.
NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA151
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKING IN WEST AFRICA152
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Background Summary SatelLife and
HealthNetSatelLife is an international not-for-profit organization whose mission is to
improve communications and the exchange of information in the fields of public
health, medicine, and the environment. It is an initiative of the International
Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, recipient of the 1985 Nobel Peace

Prize. Not wanting to see space become a battleground, Dr. Bernard Lown,

IPPNW co-founder and co-president, suggested the creation of a satellite-based

global health communications system as a means of demonstrating that space can

unite rather than further divide humankind.
SatelLife works in developing countries where libraries, hospitals and other
organizations often lack adequate funds or foreign currency to subscribe to

medical journals or to maintain ongoing subscriptions. Where communications
facilities are intermittent, of poor quality, or expensive, the use of direct "real-
time" voice or fax connections can be inefficient and frustrating. Health workers

can become isolated from one another because of the high cost of telephone calls,

fax services, and travel. Even with today's improved networks, communication in

remote and rural areas is still difficult or impossible, and always extremely

expensive. SatelLife has thus put much of its efforts into providing and improving

access to "store-and-forward" message systems.
HealthNet, administered by SatelLife, is an information service that
connects health care workers around the world. Using the most affordable and
appropriate technology, HealthNet offers electronic mail and conferences as well
as access to several electronic journals and publications. It also provides access to

databasesBACKGROUND SUMMARY SATELLIFE AND HEALTHNET153
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and experts. SatelLife initiated the 
Library Partnership Program 
to facilitate
access to medical literature for libraries in the developing world. Finally, for its

Internet users, HealthNet offers pointers to useful health mailing lists, Worldwide

Web homepages, Gopher and FTP sites on the Internet. HealthNet is currently

operational in the following African countries: Botswana, Burkina Faso,

Cameroon, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mali,
Mozambique, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zimbabwe.
SatelLife began by linking medical education centers in Africa with medical
libraries and other centers in the United States, Canada, and Europe via a low-

earth orbiting (LEO) satellite. The satellite was expected to be an essential part of

the solution to the communications problems in developing countries but, since

its launch, modern telephone switch equipment has been installed in many cities
in Africa, providing good international connections. Because of rapidly evolving
technologies, dialed telephone circuits and error-correcting modems are often a

more economical and efficient solution for international transfer of electronic

data in developing countries than the LEO satellite.
Fidonet-based networks were in widespread use in Africa in the late 1980s
and SatelLife joined the many NGOs supporting Fidonet use there. Fidonet

provides an economical alternative to Internet email systems. The evolution of

HealthNet has produced a large network of Fidonet nodes. The network is still

growing rapidly, although much of its growth is in the ''points" connected to
network nodes rather than nodes themselves. SatelLife is committed to supporting
this low-cost access system along with advanced Internet services so that services

can be brought as close as possible to the end-user.
Since 1993 SatelLife has operated the Internet domain "healthnet.org" to
support access by its member networks. While the cost barriers to providing

international permanent leased lines are still prohibitive for most public health

and medical education programs in the developing world, there are now several

cases in which full Internet access is a realistic alternative to store-and-forward

networks. SatelLife is helping its member networks take advantage of these
circumstances as they arise.
The HealthNet satellite system offers Internet message services to any
remote area where the local telecommunication infrastructure is poor or

inefficient. The ground equipment needed to contact the satellite consists of an

IBM-PC compatible computer, a Terminal Node Controller (TNC), a satellite

radio, and antennas. At this stage, SatelLife is field testing a new radio design
that merges the satellite radio and the TNC in one single box that can be portable.
Advances in satellite technology, opportunities in radio technology, and the
growth of Internet connectivity to Africa, all mean that SatelLife will become

increasingly diverse and complex. The only practical approach to handling this

complexityBACKGROUND SUMMARY SATELLIFE AND HEALTHNET154
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.is to base the system on a powerful software environment called UNIX. In the
past two years, Linux, a public domain software for UNIX on personal

computers, has become a stable and respected (and very low cost) alternative to

commercial UNIX system software. SatelLife is working to bring together many

different networking technologies (including full Internet, satellite packet radio,

and Fidonet) into an automated system based on Linux. Its own engineering task
will be to provide software to simplify the control and monitoring of this package
so that the amount of training required is kept to a minimum.
This new network node technology will offer many new options in network
services and will make HealthNet more useful and attractive to users of standard

Internet mail systems. Using whatever technologies are available SatelLife and its

HealthNet service network will continue to address the twin problems of an acute

shortage of current health information and of the severe isolation of African

health care workers from their colleagues.
BACKGROUND SUMMARY SATELLIFE AND HEALTHNET155
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND SUMMARY SATELLIFE AND HEALTHNET156
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MUKLA: Evolution of a Homegrown
Network in Uganda
by Charles Musisi
Charles Musisi is Network Manager of MUKLA (Makerere

University in Kampala) and pioneer of electronic networking

in Uganda. He has an electrical engineering background. He

has shared his networking expertise with colleagues in

Kenya, Tanzania, Nigeria, and Ghana.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE
PROJECTThis paper tells the story of the establishment of the MUKLA Electronic
Network in Uganda. There is much in the establishment and growth of an

electronic network that can be learned from our experiences. MUKLA is an

example of a sustainable network bred from a homegrown desire to network. I

say this because:
   Our primary emphasis is on self-sustainability;
   We are now in our fourth year of operation, with an increasing base of
users, expanding facilities, and a financially viable operation;
   Starting from a university and grassroots NGO base, we now have
established strong working relationships with various levels of government

and other sections of the community;
   We are internationally connected to the Internet, the Association for
Progressive Communications networks, United Nations organizations,

major commercial networks, and facilities around the world; and
   All of this was accomplished with very little donor funding and no
government grants whatsoever to commence operations. A small team of

dedicated individuals in a unique government institution is running a sound

business-based electronic mail service.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA157
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The need to communicate across distances on vital issues is far from new.
An ever-increasing range of technologies has been applied to this need, from

rudimentary tools before the age of transport to the constantly emerging suite of

sophisticated services offered by the information age.
The ESANET Project
The MUKLA node began with the Eastern and Southern Africa Networking
(ESANET) Project. Inspired by the communication needs mentioned above, the

IDRC-funded ESANET research project was aimed at investigating various

microcomputer-based methodologies for communications. The countries of the

five participating institutions are all members of the Preferential Trade
Agreement (PTA) region. The participating institutions themselves were the
Institutes of Computer Science at the University of Nairobi and Makerere

University, and the Computing Centers at the University of Dar es Salaam, the

University of Zambia, and the University of Zimbabwe. The long-term goals of

the ESANET project are given in 
Box 1
 below; the specific objectives of
ESANET were to:
   experiment with alternative techniques for data communications between
the five nodes in five countries;
   evaluate the technical, economic, sociological, and management aspects of
the communication network experiments;
   disseminate information to the research community within the region about
the development and the results of the project with a view to increasing the

awareness of possibilities, stimulating new and wider applications, and

inviting feedback on related topics; and
BOX 1 LONG-TERM GOALS OF ESANET
  The long term goals of the ESANET project were to:
Ł   strengthen local, provincial, national and international capacity to
collect and use multi-sectoral information in decision-making
processes and to enhance capacities to collect and analyze data and
information for decision-making;
  develop or strengthen local, provincial, national and international
means of ensuring that planning for sustainable development in all
sectors is based on timely, reliable and usable information; and
  make relevant information accessible in the form and at the time
required to facilitate its use.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA158
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   make recommendations to the research community (users and
telecommunications authorities in the region) on cost-effective data

communication modalities, and appropriate network models and policies

for specific environments and applications.
The introduction of electronic networking to the wider community in
Uganda began in May 1991 as a natural spin-off from the ESANET project.

MUKLA was mandated to provide email services to non-governmental

organizations (NGOs) within the NGOnet-Africa project, which is described

more fully in Fall's case study on page 142. We also sought collaboration with the

HealthNet project whose aim was to facilitate communication among health
professionals within the African region and with their peers elsewhere. (See
information on page 153.) While the mode of communication chosen by

HealthNet was a store-and-forward, low-earth orbiting satellite (LEO) with

tracking ground stations, the regional interconnection of the ESANET and

NGOnet nodes was to be across regular, dial-up telephones lines using Fidonet

technology.Activities of ESANET
A start-up meeting for ESANET in November 1990 brought together
representatives from all the participating institutions, as well as those from

IDRC, SatelLife, and the Nirv Centre/Web of Canada. The start-up workshop

focused on identifying suitable methods of communication and on drawing up

preliminary lists of hardware and software requirements. We decided that the

project would support a series of workshops in the different participating
countries.At a design workshop held in May 1991, in Harare, Zimbabwe we formally
adopted Fidonet technology as the technology of implementation. Our review of

the status of licensing of the HealthNet ground station revealed only Zambia at

the time had obtained a license. Other highlights of that meeting included

confirmation of lists of requirements by different nodes and the topology of
regional mail traffic exchange. The nodes in Uganda and Tanzania were to route
their regional traffic and international traffic via Nairobi, while Zambia would

poll (or generate a computer call to) Harare, which would in turn poll Nairobi for

regional mail.The University of Zambia (UNZA) hosted an experimentation and review
workshop in November 1992. Our aim then was to enhance internode telephone

calls (polling) and review the progress of the project to date. At the time of the

review workshop, we observed that some interesting trends had clearly emerged

and we realized that the assumption upon which the topology had been drawn
was evidently unattainable. For instance, the interregional polling in East Africa
was not possible due to several factors: delayed arrival of equipment purchased

from overseas suppliers; wrong power specification supplied; or poor telephone

lines at
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA159
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the node on an old analog exchange. Hence, while activity was well under way in
Uganda by February 1991 and a little later in Tanzania, the MUKLA node only

became operational in August 1992.
MANGO, the NGO network in Zimbabwe, was an established Fidonet
bulletin board by the time the ESANET project began and so only needed to

integrate the ESANET activity early in 1991. UNZA was also fully operational

early in 1991 but routed its regional and international traffic through Rhodes

University in South Africa. Interregional polling between these two was never

reliably successful owing to poor interconnecting telephone infrastructure
between Zambia and Zimbabwe. All of the ESANET participating institutions
and bodies met in September 1993 at an evaluation and closeup workshop held in

Uganda.PROJECT DESCRIPTIONAs it happened, Doug Rigby, a networking consultant at the Environmental
Liaison Center in Nairobi but also working for the NGOnet-Africa Project, visited

Kampala in February 1991. I was then a final year student of Engineering at

Makerere University but on forced vacation as a result of student riots that caused

the closure of the campus.
My meeting with Rigby was helped by the student riots as much as by my
volunteer work at an environmental NGO, called JEEP, a grassroots network

organization. JEEP staff asked me to meet Rigby at the Entebbe airport. This was

perhaps my longest wait at an airport for any visitor coming from abroad
Šas the
scheduled flight, I later learned, had been a phantom one. All the same, I

persevered until he arrived on a late evening plane and took the 35 kilometer

journey back with him to Kampala. After hearing his stories enroute, I never
regretted the long wait and I slept that night dreaming about this intriguing new
concept of electronic mail! The following week was to usher in many more

exciting ideas that have led, as it turns out, to a new and unforeseen career.
With Rigby, we went through the drills of Fidonet: installing a modem;
communication software for end users; and even basic DOS commands. The team

of trainees had now grown to five: the then three folks from the Institute of

Computer Sciences; one representative from the Developmental Network of

Voluntary Associations (DENIVA), an umbrella network body for local and

indigenous NGOs in Uganda; and myself. A windup workshop of Rigby's mission
brought together the first batch of potential users from different organizations.
Among them were people from CARE (the relief agency), the Centre for Basic

Research, the Makerere Medical School, a handful of DENIVA members, JEEP

itself, the Makerere University's Vice Chancellor, and other independent

participants.While I may not have been the most conspicuous participant, I had
apparently caught the eye of some people and I was chosen as the person to carry

the mantle of making it work.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA160
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The Critical Years
I quickly realized that my new role would have to be accommodated within
my academic life when campus reopened. That I did by working at the node after

classes, not an easy thing to do for an engineering student. The next thing was

that I had to do to this work as a volunteer. There would be no pay at first. I still

remember those first meetings with prospective users
Šenvironment groups,
missionaries, and other NGOs. This was new to all of us. Even as I crawled under
desks to connect modems to telephones, and even as I made test polls to Nairobi,

not one of us was sure that we were not going to get enormous telephone bills. I

wasn't all that sure that I would be able to pay the actual telephone bills, even if

they were not enormous! (See 
Box 2.)BOX 2 SEEING IS BELIEVING
I really thought everyone would be so excited that they would just put in
some money and we would be up and going in no time. Not so, I learned. There
was a lot more to do
Š and the hardest lesson of all was that, until I could prove
that this thing saved money, there was no chance of it getting off the ground.
The harder electronic networking seemed the more determined I was to
prove that it worked. It was the best thing I could have done. The process taught

me a great deal, refined my thoughts considerably, and led me into contact with

many people whose expertise I would need if this was going to succeed.
Originally, I had planned to set up a non-profit network for NGOs to run
parallel to MUKLA. That might have been ideal but, with my unfinished

engineering degree in the way and a lack of clear institutional support from the

NGO community, this seemed a formidable task. I labored to convince the
director at the ICS that there was more to be gained in merging ESANET with
NGOnet activities than there was in operating them separately.
Shortly after the university reopened, however, we reached agreement and
installed the ESANET equipment and procured a dedicated telephone line. The

MUKLA node got under way and the real fun began! At the end of our first year

of operation, we had nearly 50 users, quite a remarkable achievement and a good
omen for an exciting future. We were beginning to fulfill many people's dreams
for use of this media. At this point, I stood as the systems operator (sysop) and

manager of an ever-growing network. I was confident that I had established a

sound management structure to introduce cost recovery. The director's secretary

would handle billing and accounting while I concentrated on software and

hardware developments as well as other technical matters.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA161
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3 HELP FROM SOME FRIENDS
There are many funny stories from those first few months. I grappled with
the establishment of a node facility for which there were no textbooks - only a
concept and some guiding hands from friends abroad. Invaluable help and

support handily came in from Doug Rigby at ELCI, Mike Jensen at WorkNet in
South Africa, Karen Banks at GreenNet, and later Bob Barad in Washington. I
had considerably under-estimated the technical complexity of what we were

doing.Project SynergyThe ESANET project, with its idea of electronic networking at the Institute
of Computer Science, took second place to the higher profile and better funded
UNESCO Intergovernmental Informatics Project (IIP). The IIP was aimed at
sensitizing decision makers in government and other sectors of society on the use

of informatics tools in decision making and management. The attention paid to

the IIP reduced high-level interference in the day-to-day running of MUKLA.

Electronic networking nevertheless benefited from the many IIP workshops

organized where email was always on display.
As the rush to sign on to MUKLA grew, so too did the pressure on the
hardwareŠthen a 386 SX, 2 RAM 80 megabyte hard drive personal computer.
So, by July 1992, with the user base standing at well over 150, the node personal
computer was upgraded to a 486DX 33 MHz, 8 RAM and 170 megabyte hard
disk from the IIP project consignment.
ChallengesAt this level of expansion, MUKLA posed a real management challenge.
With technical capacity to handle new installations and user support

overstretched, we made a decision to get more members of the teaching staff

involved. One person was put in charge of documentation and promotions, while a
technical assistant was assigned to help me. (See 
Box 3.)Billing and accounting were firmly put in the hands of an accounts clerk who
also doubled as the director's secretary. I believe that the stability of our network

caught the attention of other regional networking projects, based mainly in

Nairobi, and that they borrowed ideas from our experience. We then had over 10

groups or users dialing-in on long distance trunk phone calls from Nairobi and
other parts of Kenya.
Around this time I was drafted into a number of regional initiatives. I, for
instance, participated in the design and implementation of the UNEP/Global

Environment Facility (GEF) Greenhouse Gases project to link up researchers in

sixMUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA162
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.African countries, namely: Uganda, Tanzania, Nigeria, Senegal, Morocco and the
Gambia. I was also hired as an independent consultant for the CABECA project

to setup and train systems operators in Uganda, Nigeria, and Ghana. (See

CABECA box on page 147)
Between the UNEP/GEF and the CABECA project I have established a total
of nine nodes in the above mentioned countries. I have also trained a score of in-

country technical support people and have installed several end-user sites for

access to email and the Internet. I have also set up email access for the UN's

World Food Programme (WFP) offices in Dar es Salaam, Mombasa, and
Kampala. Only recently I was on mission to war torn Burundi on an International
Alert of London mission. There, I set up email so that the UN's special

Representative to Burundi could access information and participate in discussions

aimed at better informing the world and also the warring factions in conflict

resolution.Present Situation
From around mid-1993 to the present, we began routing MUKLA's
international traffic through the GreenNet's GnFido node in London via four daily

polls. This link works satisfactorily well, though disruptions in the past often

occurred due to factors such as adverse weather conditions. Lately, the
unreliability of the GnFido node can be attributed to over-stressed hardware
facilities coupled with lack of support staff.
As of January 1995, MUKLA had an installed user base of over 300 sites.
The majority of these are around Kampala but there are about 15 sites in Entebbe

(35 Km from Kampala), five in Jinja (80 Km east), three in Mbale (150 Km east,

close to the Kenya border), three in Mbarara (220 Km southwest), and three in
Kabale (400 Km southwest, close to the Rwanda, Tanzania, and Zaire borders).
The upcountry installations all have to make long distance calls to Kampala.
It therefore became imperative to set up local access points in these towns.
In February 1995, a node was established in Entebbe at the Uganda Virus

Research Institute with equipment supplied by the HealthNet project. Similar

nodes are planned for Mbarara, Kabale, Mbale and Jinja during the first half of
1996.Even now a few users call in from Nairobi, though the majority of regional
traffic flows to MUKLA via Sasa Communications System. This company, based

in Nairobi, is an initiative of the East Africa Internet Association. (See 
Box 4.)Recent Developments
Throughout 1995, I consulted for a commercial enterprise (StarCom) to help
establish a full Internet (IP) link for the Uganda market. In August 1995, another

company (InfoMail) opened full IP access from Uganda
Šthus becoming the first
site in East Africa and the Horn of Africa region to give full access to the

Internet, including facilities such as World Wide Web. Starcom became
operational in November
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA163
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1995. It is noteworthy that both these companies implemented international
access using very small aperture terminal (VSAT) satellite technology in

preference to the overpriced and unreliable digital leased lines from the Uganda

Posts and Telecommunication Corporation (UP&TC).
BOX 4 THE EAST AFRICAN INTERNET ASSOCIATION
The East African Internet Association (EAIA) is a not-for-profit group formed
in April 1995, seeking to promote and expand cooperative electronic
communications and inter-networking in the East African region. Its members
include the majority of electronic service providers, serving at least 3,000 users,

in the following countries: Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.
Partner networks abroad are also members, as are a number of interested
individuals. Membership is open to all interested parties for a nominal fee. The
Association is in the process of being officially registered in each country.
EAIA's aims of cooperative internetworking in Africa are also supported by:
Capacity Building in Electronic Communication in Africa (CABECA, UN
Economic Commission for Africa), GreenNet (London), UN Environment

Programme (Kenya), UN World Food Programme (Kenya), RIO/ORSTOM
(France), Web (Canada), Wolfnet Communications (London) and SangoNet
(South Africa).Discussions take place on a private Internet mailing list.
As seen from the information in 
Appendix A, the electronic network market
in Uganda is now fully liberalized with not less than five providers with services
ranging from email access to full Internet. However, the usage charges remain

high. The charges given are accurate as of January 1996.
RESULTS, IMPACTS, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Beyond EmailWhile the bulk of our traffic on MUKLA remains electronic mail, there is a
new trend towards user participation in electronic conferences. MUKLA at the

moment carries over 50 different conferences mostly from the Internet and APC

networks, with a few specifically regional or local ones. Perhaps the most notable

among these is a discussion list on Uganda-related issues and news, appropriately

called Ugandanet. Through this conference, over 600 Ugandans from all over the

world link with each other on a daily basis to interact with lively discussions on

various topics ranging from the constitutional process, to entertainment, to sports

and news.MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA164
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Perhaps responsible for the bulk of growth in the beginning was the email/
fax service that MUKLA provided. Users are able to send, at the price of email,

faxes to destinations all over the world. Its popularity was mainly due to the

exorbitant international charges levied by Uganda Post & Telecommunication.
Sectoral Involvement
UniversityElectronic mail has had a particular attraction for research activities to many
researchers. Students are also increasingly getting to use email. About 25 percent

of MUKLA traffic is for university related activities.
Non-Governmental OrganizationsThese form the single largest group of MUKLA users accounting for over 40
percent.GovernmentThe involvement of government in any major way has not come yet,
although from the early days government departments were interested in what we

were doing and, in 1992, we were approached by many government bodies for

connectivity. Presently, however, only isolated projects within government

departments are connected, usually for very specific reasons, such as easy access
to a donor office abroad. We have been approached by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to explore possibilities for linking Ugandan embassies, especially in

particularly hard-to-reach places like Zaire and Rwanda.
Business Sector
This perhaps remains a weak and under-represented section of the network.
Nevertheless, from the early days, business users concerned with sustainable

development issues began to join us.
OthersThere are many other individuals and independent groups that MUKLA
knows are interested in electronic networking. We have yet to tap this group.
FinanceThough MUKLA benefited from the ESANET research fund as seed
capital, cost recovery was instituted at an early stage to supplement this. As of

now, and at completion of the ESANET project, MUKLA is fully self-financing

through feesMUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA165
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.levied on users. A check is put on users via shadow billing whereby an itemized
bill for all users is prepared at the end of the billing quarter to check on excessive

use and possible abuse of our lenient terms. There is no additional charge for the

fax facility though strict monitoring is done for each of categories above. When

excessive use is noticed, the user is upgraded to the higher billing group.
ResultsThe ESANET project introduced the idea of electronic mail communication
to researchers and other users at Makerere University campus
Šthough the focus
of the project was then on experimenting with various computer-based

communication technologies and working out the technical bugs involved with

poor telephone lines, erratic management of the telephone long-distance dialing

system, and hardware and software equipment.
As of September 1993, most of these problems had been ironed out. The
electronic mail system using the GnFido system has reached a level of reliability

that surpasses that of fax machines. A cost-effectiveness analysis was carried out

at the end of the ESANET project and this provided the evidence needed to prove

that this venture could be sustainable, given the proper setting and management.
The ESANET project established that microcomputer-based electronic
communication was a viable, sustainable technology and appropriate to the

context of the region in which it has operated. There is a proven demand for

electronic communication, both regionally and internationally. Following are the

recommendations from the ESANET project:
To the research community, we recommended that:
   Relevant institutions be encouraged to consolidate and expand their user
base.   We should undertake more research into improving and expanding
technologies used.
   Manpower requirements for this activity be consolidated into the
establishment of the institutions concerned.
   Appropriate mechanisms be established for operational cost recovery and
institutional funding to cover system operation and expansion.
   Cognizance be taken of the ever-improving nature of electronic
communication worldwide and relevant upgrading be considered.
To the telecommunication authorities, we requested:
   Further investment be made in improving regional telecommunication links
to enhance electronic viability of using national telecommunication

infrastructure for modem related activities
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA166
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Special tariffs be applied to the academic and research communities for
packet switching and leased line facilities thus enabling greater access to

computer based communications regionally and internationally.
   Liberalization of user terminal equipment connected to national
telecommunication networks be encouraged.
   Pragmatic policies be established with regard to licensing of alternative
communication methodologies such as packet radio and low earth orbit

satellite.To the donor community, we recommended that:
   In view of the fact that national communication networks are an
indispensable component of national development, providing as they do for

an efficient and effective information delivery system in diverse sectors,

continued funding be made available for establishing infrastructure related

to computer-based communications for capacity building in order to

facilitate transfer of technology.
To regional governments, we recommended that:
   They recognize the importance of national and regional networks for all
aspects of development and for human resource and manpower

interactions. The final meeting of the ESANET project paid tribute to the

invaluable contribution that IDRC had made through this project in

furthering the case of electronic communication within academic, health,

and other related communities. We accordingly asked IDRC to:
  Š Ensure that ESANET nodes be covered in any forthcoming regional
electronic network support programs.
  Š Share the findings of this project with other donor and development
agencies.  Š Be receptive to future requests from ESANET community to consolidate
and expand what has been achieved so far.
Analysis of Lessons Learned

The ESANET project provided the participating institutions the opportunity
to experiment with regional and international microcomputer-based

communication. The aim of the experimentation was to establish the viability of

the regional computer networking for data communication from the technical and

management perspectives. We acquired data and experience from the

experimentation phase of the project using Fidonet and packet satellite

technologies. Based on this experience and data, we made the following specific

observation on hardware, software, connectivity, network management and

research activities.MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA167
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HardwareFor modems, we have observed that:
   9600 baud or higher modems (e.g., Telebit Worldblazer) perform better for
international connections, while 2400 baud modems (e.g., GVC 2400) are

sufficient for local connections.
   External modems perform better and are easier to handle than internals.
   Modem power supply should be 240V AC.
   Modems should be Hayes compatible.
for the node computer, we recommend a machine with the following
specifications:   386 or higher,
   a minimum of 4 megabytes RAM,
   120 megabyte hard drive minimum (max 12 ms cached),
   dual floppy,
   fast serial ports,
   220 V AC supply, and
   UPS with stabilizer.
There is always a need to have a backup computer.
SoftwareWe used the following software packages in most of the our node
operations:   FrontDoor 2.1+ 
Š mailer   Gecho 
Š conference mail processor
   Msgtrack 
Š mail tracker,   ReDir 
Š mail redirection   GUS, Echovol 
Š for conference tracking,
   AC 
Š for accounting and billing
ConnectivityWe observed that GnFido, Rhodes University, or WorkNet polling into
ESANET nodes was cheaper and easier than direct polling between ESANET

nodes. This has been the case for regional as well as international traffic. We thus

disproved the earlier assumption on which the interconnectivity topology had

been based.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA168
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.User Base
We also observed that:
   A massive effort was required to develop and support a user base. We
needed advertising, workshops, and maintenance visits.
   There was a need to clarify to the users what installation and support imply
and discourage frivolous requests.Network Management
To sustain the network it is important to:
   train system operators and establish official positions for system operators
at various universities and
   put into place efficient and cost effective cost recovery mechanisms.
Some Fidonet management tools are available in basic node software.
Additional software was developed during the project period to supplement these

basic tools. Examples are: AC (accounting) from the Zimbabwe node and

MTMON and HISMON (monitoring) from the Zambia node. However there is

still need to develop more tools. Whereas there was sufficient documentation for

point operation (the lowest level of the Fidonet hierarchy), there was need to
develop more documentation for node operation. Nodes are the individual
systems that belong to Fidonet. They are responsible for passing mail between the

points and the next hierarchical level of Fidonet
Šthe hub.Research and Development
We need to encourage technical innovations to improve the system and we
can use student resources for such projects. Technical innovations are required in

the following areas:   Terminal Node Controller (TNC)
   The packet satellite upload program (PG)
   Modems and modem testing/evaluation
   Mailer interfaces
Beyond the ESANET Project: Future Developments at
MUKLAWhile the interest in using electronic mail among researchers is strong, the
technical capacity to meet this demand remains severely constrained due to lack

of adequate funding. Additional funding is needed both for the personnel

involved inMUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA169
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.its spread and for the purchase of hardware upgrades for the present installation.
Although a number of groups and individuals have expressed interest in using and

learning more about electronic mail, there are no adequate pedagogical materials

nor the funding to have technical experts available to advise on both hardware

and software problems as well as to do the installation and training.
Given the lessons learned from the experimentation phase, with the outlined
constraints, it is imperative that MUKLA seek to improve its institutional

capacity to effectively spearhead a development plan. We will seek support for

recruiting trainers whose job will be to build on the achievements to date and

enhance the existing network amongst all these groups. We will also seek support

to update the hardware at the existing nodes and to create a pool of modems to

serve as seed investments in new areas where electronic communication is to be
introduced.Specific goals should be towards:
   upgrading the hardware and software at the MUKLA node to full Internet
status via leased line;
   developing appropriate educational materials and formats for workshops
and short-courses;   providing technical assistance and training; and
   facilitating communication via email amongst users within the country and
region.There are two sets of activities to look at in the process. The first would
involve the acquisition of the necessary funding and identification and purchase

of the necessary hardware for a full IP connection. Simultaneously, we would

prepare training materials for the use of electronic mail, instruction on both

hardware specification and troubleshooting, and hands-on training with the

software. The second set of activities will include the provision of regular and

ongoing technical support to users. This will be necessary both to iron out

technical problems encountered in the daily operations of the electronic mail, as
well as to sensitize and train new users.
New Nodes
We expect that the user base will have grown to an estimated 2000 installed
sites by the end of 1996. It is time now to consider new nodes to improve services

in areas outside of Kampala. Some possible sites for expansion of MUKLA are

given below.Entebbe is a major seat of government ministries and headquarters to many
international United Nations bodies and NGOs. It is ripe to have a node

established that could serve as hub to all users in and around Entebbe. This node

would periodically poll MUKLA to transfer national, regional and international

traffic.MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA170
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.There is potential for up to 150 installed sites within one year; this would
also relieve the pressure on MUKLA.
Kabale located about 400 Km from Kampala has good potential to play a
node role for Rwanda, Burundi, and some parts of Western Tanzania that fall

within the Kagera Basin. Kabale is the gateway to these countries that have

traditionally used the northern corridor trans-Africa highway to link them to the

Kenyan seaport of Mombasa. There is an automatic exchange that is part of a

large telecommunications project linking the countries that comprise the Kagera

Basin Organization (KBO): Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda. With 3,000
lines, the exchange is the most modern to be installed in Uganda. The KBO
regional telecommunications project consists of a microwave transmission system

interconnecting the four countries. It is aimed at the promotion and development

of agriculture, forestry resources, and telecommunications links between member

states that share the river Kagera.
Goals of Expansion
The nodes in Entebbe and Kabale, together with a series of training
workshops for users in Jinja and Mbale, would constitute the first phase of the

expansion program.Existing national and international mechanisms of information processing
and exchange, and of related technical assistance, would be strengthened to

ensure effective and equitable availability of information generated at the local,

provincial, national, and international levels, subject to national sovereignty and

relevant intellectual property rights.
National capacities would be strengthened, as would capacities within
governments, non-governmental organizations and the private sector, in

information handling and communication, particularly within the East African

region.Improved ServicesMUKLA would offer its clientele the full benefit of a wide range of Internet
services. Electronic mail and conferencing, public and private access to Internet

mail and other worldwide networks might be provided via partnership with the

Association for Progressive Communications. MUKLA can also provide

consultancy services on network establishment for organizations and government

departments.Future Needs and Possibilities
One of the difficulties we face as we prepare for future developments is to
clarify the role of what is essentially a well meaning private enterprise with the

responsibilities in this area of various tiers of government and public in Uganda.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA171
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The question of appropriate ownership structures for networks like ours is
quite complex. Our decision to operate as a private company was indicated at the

time of our birth. The people are sufficiently interested to devote time and

financial energy to the project and do not have any particular philosophical

attachment to a mode of operation.
However the structure has served us well amidst the politics of governments
and NGOs. We have always regarded ourselves as the carriers of information

related to these issues, rather than as a policy body or an arbiter of truth and best

practice. In the early days, this structure and philosophy allowed us to engender

cooperation between NGOs who did not see eye-to-eye on all issues. In later

days, the same stance has allowed us to assist cooperation between tiers of

government and government departments, which have been known to jealously
guard their own interests rather than cooperate. And, more importantly, we have
managed to remain credible with both government and its more radical

opponents. It is probably our strongest point, that we can operate independent of

the political will of any tier of government or its funding priorities.
The future holds many specific problems to address
Šquestions of
cooperation, questions of standards, and questions of access to information will

have to be addressed. Much work will have to be done towards these ends by both

ourselves and government bodies.
Regional InterconnectivityThere will be immense savings by sharing costs and collaborating with other
regional providers. The East African Internet Association (EAIA) effort could be

one way to foster further regional interconnectivity. (See 
Box 4
 on page 164 for
more information about EAIA.)
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
My experience suggests that there is far more to establishing a successful
network than purchasing and learning the technology. Indeed, technology

expenses have been a minor part of our budget. Outlined below are some basic

principles I believe are essential in establishing viable networks.
User Friendliness
Experience indicates that the issue of user friendliness is one where there
should be no compromise. Simplicity of interface is crucial; however, simpler

interfaces, those that use graphics, for example, also require more computing

power. It is important to have machines with adequate power, memory, and speed

to perform the necessary tasks. This is where a full needs analysis is necessary.
The simplest looking interface may not do the job; nor will old or obsolete
equipment provide enough sophistication to run programs such as Windows.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA172
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Adherence to Standards
The only trade off in user friendliness that might occur would be in the area
of adherence to standards. Here, important standards have to be considered if

contact with global networks and global relevance of data collected are concerns.
Promotion and Education
The most common mistake we can make in large scale electronic messaging
installations is believing that somehow the system will ''introduce itself." Not so!

You can only successfully train the converted. The network has to be actively

promoted. Its benefits have to be known before people will use it. Its applications

to work areas and advantages have to be received with enthusiasm. Without this,

the basic aims will not be achieved.
TrainingEqually, training is an absolute must for a successful implementation. Links
should be made to existing training organizations. Training materials must be

available for any software used. (See 
Box 5
.)Product Champions
The concept of a "product champion" is often mentioned in sales literature.
It essentially refers to enthusiasts who promote concepts and products willingly

because they believe in them. All networks need them. Product champions

sometimes create problems for organizations with their over-enthusiasm and are

rarely popular with administrators. But they are totally necessary and need to be

identified and supported.
Adequate Funding
An under-funded initiative that fails can delay a concept such as sustainable
development networks in a country by a decade or more, and a few failures can
BOX 5 TRAINING NEEDSA typical mistake made in electronic messaging implementations is to
spend all available funds on hardware, bandwidth, and software development
and find that no funds are available for training. This has been noted in many
universities where typically less than 13 percent of academics actually use

systems. It's not surprising they are presented with very basic interfaces, no
help desk, no manuals, and only the very brave and technically-inclined actually
make it.
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA173
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ruin the concept altogether. It is far too easy to attempt to stretch available funds
too far and to leave behind a string of underdeveloped projects with little chance

of success. It is also far too easy to get carried away by enthusiasm and to start a

project without sensible financial plans to ensure viability.
Appropriate Ownership Patterns
This is a difficult question for which there is no immediate formula. An
appropriate ownership pattern has to be one which will not restrict the

participation of any governmental or non-governmental body whose cooperation

is needed.
Plans for Financial Sustainability
Unless the venture is to be a continual financial burden to funding
organizations, a realistic business plan has to be adopted to ensure that the

network is self sustaining within a given period (perhaps 2
Œ4 years).Managerial, Sales and Technical Expertise
Šin that order!
The need for managerial expertise must be obvious, as is the need for
technical expertise. What is less obvious is the need for sales expertise. Even if a

facility is not expected to raise revenue, it surely is expected to engender use and

that's a sales job.
In conclusion, I would state that the world is not a series of isolated
ecosystems bearing no relationship to one another and capable of resolving their

own problems. National sovereignty does not rule the atmosphere, nor the
oceans, nor indeed the rivers that meander happily across borders with no care to
the politics of the government of the day. Global cooperation is vital, and access

to the experiences and knowledge of others is essential if we are to solve the

problems facing us.Indeed, this paper is written in the belief that what we have achieved and
learned in Uganda is valuable, and may be of assistance to people in other
countries wishing to establish similar facilities. We would be happy to assist and
advise based on our experiences here.
APPENDIXŠINTERNET/EMAIL PROVIDERS IN UGANDA
1. MUKLA Institute of Computer School
Makerere University, P.O. Box 7062, Kampala
Info@mukla.gn.apc.org

Contact: Charles Musisi, Network Manager

Services offered: Electronic Mail, Listservs, APC conferences/Usenet,
FaxingMUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA174
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Usage chargesStudents$ 10
A monthly individual/small NGO$ 30
A monthly corporate rate$ 50

Big corporate/International
$1002. StarLight Communications (U) Ltd (STARCOM)
Sheraton Complex, 14
th 
Floor, Ternan Ave., P.O. Box 10524, Kampala
Staff@starcom.co.ug
Contact: Kiggundu Mukasa, Internet Manager

Services offered: Email and email fax, World Wide Web, Telnet, FTP

Usage charges:E-mail only (unlimited usage)$ 30
Shell account$ 50
SLIP/PPP account$100

Full IPNegotiable3. Infomail (U) Ltd Plot 
2 Clement Hill Rd. P.O. Box 11465, Kampala
Info@imul.comContact: M.M. Otyek, Manager

Services offered: Email, World Wide Web, Telnet, FTP

Usage charges:MonthlyDurationSetupOvertimeBasic$ 503 hours$50$20
Premium$1208 hours$50$20

Big corporate$25020 hours$120$15

Very big corporate
$50050 hours$120$104. Transmail Ltd Blacklines 
House, Suite 2B4, P.O. Box 7482, Kampala
mawanda@tmail.gn.apc.orgContact: Patrick Mawanda, Manager
Services offered: Email, Electronic Fax, Mail Broadcasting, Conferencing

Usage charges:Traffic not exceeding 420KB
$50/monthTraffic not exceeding 910KB
$100/month
MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA175
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5. InfomaNet
4th 
Floor Impala House, P.O. Box 8945, Kampala
xtina@infoma.com Contact:
Christine Nantongo

Services offered: Email, Fax

Usage charges:
Quick start plan:
Setup$30Email sending$1.20 per page
Email receiving$0.70 per page

Fax sending$2.95 per page
Power user plan:
Installation$50Security deposit$50

Subscription$15

Email sending$1.00

Email receiving$0.40

Fax sending$1.95MUKLA: EVOLUTION OF A HOMEGROWN NETWORK IN UGANDA176
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The UNIMA Fidonet Network: Computer
Networking for Communications in Malawi
by Paulos Nyirenda
Dr. Paulos Nyirenda is Head of the Department of Physics

and Electronics at the University of Malawi. He has a Ph.D.

in electrical engineering from the University of New South

Wales. He has been working on networking at the University

of Malawi since 1992. He asks that this chapter be dedicated

to his late wife, Gemma
.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE
PROJECTMalawi is a landlocked country located on the southeast side of Africa. It
shares boundaries with Mozambique, Tanzania, and Zambia. The country has a

population of about 9 million, of which about 90 percent live off subsistence

farming. Malawi's economy is agricultural-based, with few manufacturing or

mining industries.The University of Malawi is the only university in the country. It is made up
of five colleges spread out over a wide geographical area in the central and

southern sections of the country. There are many research institutions in the

country, most of which are linked to the agricultural sector and, as such, are

located in remote locations across the country. Most of these research centers

have access to direct exchange telephones that work most of the time but are of

relatively poor quality, just as in some other African countries. Also, as in other

African countries, the telephone penetration into the population in Malawi is very

low.Communications in Malawi is difficult and expensive. Research and data
communications have been achieved primarily by physical travel to a site
Šoftenover seasonal roads in poor condition
Šor by fax where available. This is also the
case for most governmental and private sector communications. Most needed

research and other data and information do not reach the people and decision

makers who require this data to make important national and international

decisions.THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR

COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
177Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.However, even as early as 1992, most research, governmental, and major
commercial offices had computers. Most of these were IBM-compatible desktop

computers or Apple Macintosh computers.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONRealizing the difficulty of communicating among widely separated
university colleges and research institutions, I proposed a project titled 
Study of
Computer and Telephone Network Based Communications in Malawi
. Theproposal was submitted for funding to the University of Malawi (UNIMA)

Research and Publications Committee (RPC) in February, 1992. The original

budget was for Malawi Kwacha (MK) 5123
1 or roughly $1,000. The main
objectives of the project were to:
   investigate the feasibility of establishing computer and telephone-based
communications in Malawi; and
   demonstrate more efficient and effective communications among
researchers and academics within Malawi as well as among those in

Malawi and outside.With these objectives and minimal base funding, the Malawi Fidonet
network was started. The network, now called 
UNIMA, has grown to be a public,
nationwide network serving all sectors
Šgovernment, non-governmental, and
commercialŠof the Malawi economy. It thus serves a much wider population
than the academic and research communities originally envisioned and for which I

had budgeted. It is a public network in the sense that anyone and any organization

in Malawi can be linked to the network
Šprovided they have the basic resources
required for such linkage. The project has since attracted funding from various
national and international organizations.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The proposal I made to the University led to the establishment of the UNIMA
Fidonet network. The specific objectives of the proposal were to:
   experiment with modems, microcomputers, and the telephone network for
data communications within the University of Malawi;
   design and build electronic interface devices for connecting direct telephone
lines and switchboard (PABX) extensions to one computer and modem

node to handle both local college and direct line connections;
   evaluate the quality of the Malawi telephone network for data
communications; and
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
178Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   evaluate the cost of computer communications using modems and the
telephone network and compare it to other electronic communications

modalities.At the time the UNIMA project was started, there was a regional project
called the East and Southern Africa Network (ESANET) funded by the

International Research Development Centre (IDRC) of Canada. (For a complete

description of the ESANET project, see Charles Musisi's case study on page

158.) The UNIMA project had similar general objectives to ESANET, which

linked university computer centers in Zimbabwe, Zambia, Tanzania, Uganda, and

Kenya. Because I was involved in these activities, the UNIMA project benefited
considerably from the ESANET project in the beginning, even though Malawi
was not a participating country in ESANET. The startup modems and non-

commercial Fidonet software that enabled UNIMA to take off were obtained

under ESANET.My proposal to study computer and telephone-based communications in
Malawi was accepted by the RPC in January 1993. I next needed to request

security clearance from the Malawi Government, as well as from the Malawi

Posts and Telecommunications to start the project. The government issued the

security clearance on 15 June 1993, one day after citizens passed the referendum

that introduced multiparty politics into Malawi. The Malawi Posts and

Telecommunications Department then cleared the project in July 1993. The

direct telephone line required for the node or hub of the telephone-based
computer communications network was installed at Chancellor College in Zomba
on 24 September 1993.
We next installed the equipment for the node: an IBM-compatible 386
computer running at 20 MHz with a disk space of 40 megabytes (borrowed from

the Physics Department at Chancellor College); a VIVA 2400 baud modem

donated by IDRC under the ESANET project; and non-commercial Fidonet

communications software (FrontDoor 2.02) obtained under ESANET and tested

earlier. This startup setup was then used to negotiate the network address, initial

mail routing, and initial polling procedures required for the network. In the
startup phase, the network address was negotiated under ESANET to be a
Fidonet point address off the University of Zambia electronic mail network.

Malawi now has its own network number and the node established has the

Fidonet address 5:7231/1.
2Connecting to the University of Zambia Fidonet node was very difficult
and, when the connection was finally made, the line quality was poor. We

decided in November 1993, to switch connections to the Africa Zone Gate

directly at Rhodes University in South Africa. This improved the connection

success rate as well as the quality of the connections. In May 1994, the UNIMA

network started receiving funding from the Capacity Building for Electronic

Communications in Africa (CABECA) project also funded by IDRC but managed

under the Pan African Development Information System (PADIS) in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia. (For more information about the CABECA project, see Fall's
case study on page 147.)
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
179Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Under CABECA, the UNIMA network received more modems and
assistance from the Southern Africa Non-Governmental Network (SANGONET)

in Johannesburg. SANGONET polled the UNIMA system twice a day at first but

this was upgraded to three times a day to cater to the increased volume. Also

under CABECA, we upgraded the node with the installation of a Telebit

WorldBlazer high speed modem. This modem was eventually replaced by a US

Robotics modem.
Figure 1
 shows the general Malawi Fidonet network and its linkage to other
networks in the world. The number of points running off the node has increased
FIGURE 1
 Fidonet structure in Malawi.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR

COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
180Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.rapidly even though the single most important constraint to the growth in the user
base has been the availability of modems at an affordable price within Malawi.
We replaced the computer borrowed from the Physics Department with a
dedicated computer borrowed from UNIMA RPC. This was also an IBM

compatible 386 computer with the same speed but with a 104 megabyte hard disk

and more memory. This computer made it possible to perform multitasking using

Desq View and QEMM. This allowed us to operate two telephone lines, using

intermail 
as the communications program on the node. With this setup the node is
now able to handle two data connections simultaneously, one on a direct
exchange telephone line and another on a PABX telephone extension that caters
to the local Chancellor College campus computers. Putting in the line from the

local PABX helped to reduce congestion considerably on the direct line.
The use of a multiline mailer that enabled the node to handle more than one
telephone connection at the same time made it unnecessary to develop hardware

devices to achieve the same results. However, there were problems with

rescanning the mail every time it was collected from the node. As the message

base and user base grew, this mail rescanning took more and more time and

eventually led to lengthy in-between call processing, leading to delays in
answering calls at the node.
After observing the significant contribution that the Fidonet UNIMA
network was making towards improving data communications in Malawi, the

World University Service of Canada (WUSC) provided funds to the UNIMA

network in February 1995 to purchase a Gateway 2000 IBM compatible 486 DX2

computer with 730 megabyte hard disk and running at 66 MHz. This has
considerably improved the performance of the node, which can now process mail
much faster and has removed the waiting that users experienced between calls

while the node computer was processing received mail and extracting billing

information. In addition the network has also received support from the Canada

Fund of the Canadian High Commissioner to Malawi to purchase modems to

assist the public sector in getting connected to the network so as to improve their

communications.UNIMA Network Operation
Under Fidonet, electronic messages and files are prepared offline to reduce
telephone connection costs. The messages and computer files are then transferred

onto the network in compressed files or packets to reduce the time of the

telephone connections and to improve efficiency. When a point has a message to

send, the message is normally sent to the node to be routed to its destination. If
the message is destined for another point on the UNIMA network, the message
waits at the node to be picked up by the destination point. Before April 1994, the

node originated international calls to the Africa Zone Gate at Rhodes University

for delivery and collection of international mail. All international mail is now

routed via SANGONET, which polls the UNIMA node three times a day.

International mail from Malawi is made to wait at the Malawi node in Zomba for

international delivery during one of the polls from SANGONET.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
181Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.When mail is received at the UNIMA node, it is processed by the non-
commercial Fidonet mailer and other mail processors. Gecho.exe (version 1.01)

is used as a mail and conference processor and also for mail compression and

decompression. Netmanager, Netmgr.exe (version 0.99), is used as a general

message processor for message-by-message identification, distribution, and

redirection. Message tracking is done by msgtrack.exe, which produces a
message-by-message log indicating such data as message origin, destination,
dates, and volume.I have written additional software to produce bills sent to users for cost
recovery and network sustainability. Most of the billing information is obtained

from the data produced by msgtrack.exe. Other data used to evaluate the

performance of the network and the telephone system is collected from the

various log files produced by the mailer and mail processors and analyzed using

tools developed at the UNIMA node.
RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Network Performance
The network performance reported here was monitored at the UNIMA
Fidonet node. As outlined above, the node software produces log-files (logs) for

the day-to-day, telephone call-by-call, as well as the message-by-message

activities that the node performs in sending and receiving electronic mail and

files. The collection of the data presented here started in October 1993 and ended

in March 1994. Much more data has been collected at the node but this has yet to
be analyzed. By processing the log files, the monthly international mail volume
can be determined. This is shown in 
Figure 2
.Cost of the Service
Shown in 
Figure 3
 are the costs of sending or receiving one kilobyte volume
of mail and the monthly telephone bill in Malawi kwacha, as charged by Malawi

Posts and Telecommunications Department. This calculation was done on a

month-to-month basis as well as on a cumulative basis where the total bill and the

total volume, up to the dates shown, were used to calculate the cost per kilobyte

of mail. As shown in 
Figure 3
, the cost of operating the network per kilobyte of
mail has dropped from MK4.68 (four Malawi kwacha and sixty-eight Malawi
tambala) in October 1993 to MK0.88 in March 1994 on a month-to-month basis
and from MK4.68 to MK1.10 on the cumulative basis. Using these data, the node

has recommended that users be charged at the rate of MK1.00 per kilobyte of

mail sent or received internationally. This charge rate was still in place at the

writing of this chapter.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
182Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 2
 International email volume and telephone bill using a 2400 baud
modem.FIGURE 3
 Cost per kilobyte of international telephone calls for email transfers
using a 2400 baud modem.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR

COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
183Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Although the modem used for collecting the data changed from a 2400 baud
modem to a 14400 baud one (with most good connections at 9600), the Malawi

telephone charge per minute also changed upwards considerably from about

$1.00 to $3.00 per minute in January 1995. We are currently collecting and

analyzing data to check the effect of the modem speed change versus the

telephone charge rate change.
A comparison between the cost of using the email system and using a fax to
transfer text messages can be made based on the above data. One full page of text

(as on this page) uses nearly 3 kilobytes and would therefore take MK3.00 to send

by email. After examining several fax transmissions at Chancellor College, we

found that such a page would take more than one minute to send but often less

than two minutes. (The Malawi Posts and Telecommunications would therefore
charge two minutes.) Most of the international mail transferred during the
observation period has been for contacts outside Africa. The cost of sending such

text messages internationally by email is therefore about 20 times cheaper than

faxing similar messages at the current telephone rates and email charges at the

UNIMA node.
Billing Users
Using the data collected from message tracking, a bill is sent from the
Bursar of Chancellor College in the University of Malawi to each user once every

three months. In addition to the volume fee outlined above, which now stands at

roughly seven cents per kilobyte, each user account held outside the university is

charged at 70 cents per month for account maintenance. Experience has shown

that although these rates are very low, most Malawian users and organizations

still have difficulties paying. I am currently proposing to conduct a study to find
out whether this is due to genuine financial difficulties. I hope that user
perception of ''user pays" electronic communications will be better understood

following the survey and analysis of the results.
I have shown in Figures 
2 and 
3 that even though the monthly bill and the
monthly volume of mail sent and received internationally are increasing rapidly

from month to month, the cost of sending mail per kilobyte has steadily

approached a constant value. I expect that the speed of the modem used at the

node will play a crucial role in determining the cost per kilobyte of international

mail transferred at the node. At the moment this has been complicated by the
international charge rate change made in January 1995. I hope that the further
data analysis now being carried out will assist in clarifying the situation.
All the money raised from the bills is paid into a project account held at the
Chancellor College Bursar office. Money in project accounts does not get

absorbed into the University's pool account; although the money does not

generate interest in such accounts, it is available when required to pay the bills

incurred by the project. It also helps cover equipment maintenance and staff

costs.THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
184Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Failure Rates
Figure 4
 shows the failure rate of telephone calls for data transfer as
monitored at the node. All the calls at the node involve the Malawi Telephone

system. Data transmitted during a call that fails in some cases have to be re-

transmitted because the decompression of the data at the receiving side fails due

to incomplete packets or files. Thus a failed call is a major concern to a user on

the network. As can be seen from 
Figure 4, the proportion of calls that fail has
come down considerably from nearly 100 percent in October 1993 to about 18

percent in March 1994. This improvement in performance can be attributed to

various factors. The international mail route changed in November 1993 from via

Zambia to via South Africa. We observed that fewer calls fail on the new route.

We have also learned when to make the international calls in order to achieve

higher success rates. This information was not available during the startup phase

of the network.
The number of calls to the node from Fidonet points within Malawi has
grown considerably as a proportion of the total number of calls recorded by

fdstats.exe at the node. This means that while the performance reported in 
Figure 4
applied more to international calls in the startup phase of the network, it applies

both to national and international calls in March 1994. We can estimate from

Figure 4 that on the Malawi telephone system about 18 percent of the calls for
data transferFIGURE 4
 Failure rate of telephone connections using a 2400 baud modem.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR

COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
185Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.using modems will fail. More data needs to be collected and analyzed to
determine the separate failure rates of national and international calls on the

Malawi telephone system and to determine the rate which the graph in 
Figure 4
settles down to.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Network Use
The main services on the Malawi Fidonet network are electronic mail and
file transfer. No remote login of any kind is currently supported. We need to

conduct a survey to determine and categorize the purposes of sending mail by

users within the University of Malawi and outside. During the experimental phase
of the network, we have sought such information from users in the University and
outside. The message tracking software at the node collects information on the

sources and destinations of mail. We have observed that University of Malawi

users use the Fidonet network mostly for the following reasons:
   contacts with academic colleagues and supervisors;
   negotiating links with other universities at department level;
   submission of research papers, proposals and reports;
   applying for further studies abroad;
   coordinating research for staff on study leave abroad;
   library contacts;
   seeking funding for research and other projects;
   discussion of issues pertinent to Malawi;
   ordering equipment from suppliers outside Malawi;
   personal mail; and
   file transfer using 
archie and 
ftp 
by email.
In using the network, University staff and other users are finding it easier
and more efficient than before to request and access information from colleagues

and institutions outside Malawi. I hope that as the network grows inside Malawi

it will also become easier and more efficient to access colleagues and information

sources within the country.
A number of users on UNIMA were already on email in Malawi but they
used to make international calls to access email facilities abroad, such as

CompuServe or CGNET. Since the UNIMA Fidonet network was established,

many of these users have switched to using the UNIMA network and are finding

it cheaper and more convenient since it only involves a local telephone call. (See

Box 1.)Toward the end of 1994 and the beginning of 1995, users in non-
governmental organizations and commercial companies began making up a fast-

growing proportionTHE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
186Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the user base. These are high volume users who request and send large
amounts of data over the network
Šmostly involving business related
information. I expect that in the near future these users will be the main revenue

generators for the running of the network.
BOX 1 REVIEWING THE NEW CONSTITUTION
The UNIMA network made a significant contribution in the development of
the new Malawi constitution. It made it possible for international lawyers in
Malawi and outside to exchange information in a fast and more efficient way. It
promoted discussion and editing as the constitution was sent worldwide for

comments and review. This was reported in the local press in Malawi (
TheNation). It was said that, without this mode of communication, the review of the
constitution would have been lengthy and it would not have been possible to
meet the deadlines for the review.
Growing the Internet
With more than one hundred points on the UNIMA Fidonet network and
over six hundred users, it is time for the establishment of a full Internet link in

Malawi. The user base is there to support the network and our experience has

shown that the users would also be able to pay the fees that such an installation
would demand. At the point of writing, a leased line to South Africa seems too
expensive and so we are suggesting that a VSAT connection be tried instead.

VSATs or very small aperture terminals are satellites that provide two-way, high

data rate services. VSATs appear to offer a low-cost telecommunication solution

in developing countries.
Users on the UNIMA network indicate that they would not like flat billing.
They would prefer message-by-message billing so that they pay for what they

use. We will, therefore, have to carefully examine the current billing practices on

UNIMA before full Internet connectivity is installed.
Equipment Shortages
The main constraint on the expansion of networks in Malawi will remain
equipment based, with modems topping the list. I recommend to donors that,

when projects are funded in a country like Malawi, each project should have an
information technology section providing for the supply of computers and
modems, when and where these are not available. Donors should also consider

the expense of the installation and training of users of the information technology

within the project. The minimum here should include electronic mail in any

project proposal and implementation.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
187Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A project to study computer and telephone network based communications
in Malawi has been in progress in the University of Malawi since 1993. Under

this project a nationwide electronic network using Fidonet technology has been

installed and is being expanded. The network supports electronic mail and file

transfer. This is a public network in the sense that anyone or organization with the

required resources can link into the network. Most of the objectives of the project
have been accomplished.
The project has shown that using the installed network for electronic
communications is cheaper and more convenient than existing methods, such as

fax and voice telephone. It has also shown that the Fidonet software can be used

to generate data on a local telephone system that can be used to monitor the

performance of the local telephone network. We expect that such data will be
useful to the telecommunications operating corporation.
We have had many positive and congratulatory comments on the network
performance and about how it has improved the communication efficiency of our

users. So while the project began as a scholarly undertaking, mostly to determine

the feasibility of establishing computer and telephone-based communications at

the University of Malawi, it has resulted in the provision of improved
communication services throughout the country. The small amount of seed money
that we received from the University has been effectively multiplied and the

impact of the project has been felt far beyond what we had originally intended.
NOTES1. The value of the Malawi kwacha has changed considerably from roughly US$1=MK5 at the
time when this data was collected to US$1=MK15 roughly at the time of writing of this report.
2. Fidonet uses a hierarchy to pass messages through the system. A Fidonet address identifies the
zone, the hub, the node, and the point (if there is one) number of the user. This address, 5:7231/1,
means Zone 5 (Africa), hub 7231, and node number 1. See Fall's case study for a more complete
discussion of Fidonet.
THE UNIMA FIDONET NETWORK: COMPUTER NETWORKING FOR
COMMUNICATIONS IN MALAWI
188Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Background Summary A Global Computer
Network for ChangeThe Association for Progressive Communications (APC) is an extensive
global computer network, dedicated specifically to serving non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and activists working for social change. Composed of a
consortium of international member networks, APC provides effective and

efficient communications and information-sharing tools to NGOs and

individuals. Member networks exchange email and participate in selected

electronic conferences with over 50 partner networks worldwide. Many of these

partner networks provide the only email access for NGOs in their countries.

Through this global partnership, APC offers vital communication links to tens of

thousands of NGOs, activists, educators, policy-makers, and community leaders

in 133 countries.
APC member networks develop and maintain an informational system that
allows for geographically dispersed groups to coordinate activities online at a

much cheaper rate than can be done by fax, telephone, or for-profit computer
networks. APC wants to assure that electronic communication tools are available
to people from all regions in the world. By collaborating with over fifty partner

systems in Southern countries, APC helps to increase the information flow

between South and South. To further assure equitable access to computer

technology, APC initiated a Women's Networking Support Program, which

focuses on increasing access to networking technologies and information sources

for women and women's NGOs.
The APC Networks are distinguished by the depth and quality of their
information resources, by the global reach of their communication services, and
by the diversity of their membership. APC developed from a dedicated grass-
roots constituencyBACKGROUND SUMMARY A GLOBAL COMPUTER NETWORK FOR CHANGE189
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and has become a true global community. The Network provides information in
several languages, including Spanish, Portuguese, Estonian, Serbian,

Macedonian, Bosnian, Croation, Slovenian, Russian, English, Swedish, German,

Polish, French, and Esperanto. In addition, APC provides extensive user support

and training to help people access the system easily and learn to use it efficiently.
The APC Networks are designed for use by NGOs, United Nations
agencies, research organizations, government departments, educational

institutions, multi-stakeholder groups, and individuals who communicate with

NGOs. People use APC as an information and organizing tool for a wide range of

issues, including peace, human rights, public health, environmental issues,

population, social and economic justice, development, education, poverty, and

demilitarization.Dial Locally, Act Globally
All APC member networks provide users with an Internet email address.
APC users can communicate with any of the over 40 million people who have an

Internet email address; as well as with most commercial, academic and other

networks. Many APC networks provide navigational tools to help their users

access information that is otherwise difficult to locate on the Internet. For

example, users can access any public computer on the Internet, including
universities, libraries, research institutions, and public databases. Several APC
networks make information publicly available on the Internet via the Worldwide

Web (WWW) and via Gopher P
Ša user-friendly, text-based, menu-driven
information search tool. Several APC networks offer SLIP and PPP access which

allows the use of a graphic interface to Internet services.
APC provides the following networking tools:
   Electronic Mail (email)
   Electronic Conferences, both private and public
   Databases   Fax and Telex
   Internet Navigation Tools: Gopher, Telnet, Worldwide Web, FTP, WAIS
   News and Information Services
   International User Directory
The APC is a community without borders. NGOs and activists worldwide
use APC Networks for both their internal organizational communications as well

as their public organizing efforts. In addition, many progressive news services

distribute their publications electronically on the APC Networks.
BACKGROUND SUMMARY A GLOBAL COMPUTER NETWORK FOR CHANGE190
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bringing the Internet to Zambia
by Neil Robinson
Neil Robinson is a Senior Communication Software Engineer
with ZAMNET Communication Systems Ltd. He has been

working in Zambia for six years. This case study describes the

work that led to installing a full Internet link in Zambia and

the attempts to make the provision of Internet services a

sustainable enterprise, independent of external donor

funding.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
On 22 November 1994, Zambia became the fifth country in Africa (and the
very first sub-Saharan country outside of South Africa) to have full access to the

Internet, the world's biggest computer network. This achievement was made

despite Zambia's official status as one of Africa's poorest nations and followed

three years of development by the University of Zambia of an electronic mail

network serving non-commercial interests within the country. It was also

achieved in a country that lacks a Computer Science degree course and where

advanced computer skills are scarce. However, the technological achievement is

perhaps less important than the ability to meet the considerable costs of Internet

connectivity from within and thus to establish a sustainable service. ZAMNET

Communication Systems Limited is the company that has been established to do
this.Computer Skills in Zambia
Despite a steady increase in the numbers of computers in use in both
government institutions and private companies, the number of skilled computer

specialists working in Zambia is still desperately small. Top quality staff

command high salaries and other benefits (housing and transport) that are beyond

the reach of government-funded institutions and the majority of Zambian

companies. Most of
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA191
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the top computer specialists work in the financial sector or for Zambia
Consolidated Copper Mines in the (up until now) well-funded mining sector.

There is a growing number of small computer sales and support companies in the

capital, Lusaka, but the quality of service they provide is variable. Against such a

background, the number of expatriate computer specialists working within

Zambia is relatively high.
Zambia's highest national qualification in computing is a three-year
computer studies diploma taught by Evelyn Hone College. The University of

Zambia has no computer science department so people who wish to advance to

degree level have to go outside of the country. The Mathematics Department in

the School of Natural Sciences does provide a Mathematics and Computing

degree but their department is desperately short of computers and is unable to
provide the practical experience necessary in such a course. The locally produced
graduates with the strongest computing background come from the Electronic

Engineering Department of the School of Engineering. Many who succeed in

acquiring the necessary skills and qualifications during training overseas fail to

return to Zambia for very long, if at all.
The University of Zambia
The University of Zambia (UNZA) is the larger of Zambia's two universities
(the other being the Copperbelt University in Kitwe). It has a student body of

some 5,000 and approximately 500 academic staff. UNZA is wholly dependent

on the Zambian government for its funding, although several schools within the

University benefit from international donor support for their equipment

requirements.The University uses an old IBM 4361 mainframe computer for
administrative computing requirements. The systems that run on this computer

(personnel, payroll, admissions, examination systems, and so on) have all been

written and are maintained by the University Computer Centre, a department of

about 50 staff. Some 15 of these are technical programming and analysis staff.

The rest are involved in the considerable data entry and computer operations

requirements of such a mainframe-based system.
The Computer Centre is also responsible for providing technical support to
computer users throughout the University. Up until about four years ago, this was

largely confined to support for the mainframe computer to which students and

staff were given access through a small terminal room at the Computer Centre.

However, as elsewhere in Zambia, the number of microcomputers in use around

campus has been growing steadily and the support requirement for the repair of
hardware components and for the maintenance of microcomputer applications has
also grown.The vast majority of microcomputers within the University are donated and
as such there is a diverse range of models and types of computers. However, in

general, there are still far too few microcomputers to distribute access to the

studentBRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA192
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.level, and even in the mathematics department most student computer project
work is carried out on the mainframe.
UNZA has recently embarked on a major project to downsize its
administrative systems to a microcomputer-based network. A campus-wide fibre

optic network is being installed to distribute the administrative tasks to the

schools themselves. Once again donor supported (through the Dutch

government), this should provide access to the first of the systems (student

records) by the end of this year. It will also provide access for members of staff

through departmental networks to the Internet, although the extent to which this
happens will largely depend on the ability of each school to extend its own
section of the campus network through its own buildings.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONSince 1991, the Computer Centre at the University of Zambia has been the
focal point for academic, non-governmental organization (NGO), and health-

based email networks in Zambia. In that year, as a result of the International

Development Research Centre (IDRC)-funded ESANET 
1 project, Zambia was
given a microcomputer and modem to provide the hub or "host" of the first

University email system. The very first recorded message through this system

was sent to the Baobab, an African interests network based in Washington, D.C.,
on 30 September 1991. This and other international messages were initially
routed through the Association for Progressive Communication (APC) network in

London. The first recorded user of the system was the School of Medicine's

Medical Library.The rapid growth and development of what was then known as UNZANET
was assisted by an arrangement with Rhodes University of Grahamstown, South

Africa which, in November 1991, began providing a link with Internet via

thrice-daily, computer-to-computer telephone calls. These were paid for by

UNINET, the South African Universities Network funded by the Foundation for

Research and Development (FRD). This arrangement remained until December

1994, when full Internet access was achieved and by which time some 270 email

points were linked to the network.
The Early Technology
From the beginning UNZANET was a Fidonet system using dial-up
telephone lines to transmit messages via dedicated host computers. When

UNZANET was first established in 1991, Fidonet has been successfully tried and

tested in Zimbabwe and in Kenya for NGO networks.
2 Thus UNZANET was able
to learn from the experiences of similar networks in the region and benefit from

cooperation with them.
The UNZANET host system was configured to handle simultaneously three
telephone lines attached to three separate modems. Two of these lines were direct
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA193
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.external lines, while the third was an internal switchboard line for users on
campus and with access to an internal telephone extension. The configuration of

the Fidonet system remains in place today, primarily to serve rural users and

those whose telephone lines are inadequate for interactive communication. It also

serves users in advance of the completion of the campus network.
UNZANET'S Traditional Users
The original users of UNZANET were the schools and departments of the
University. From the very beginning, a single site address or point number
3 was
allocated to each school and administrative department. In the majority of cases,

computers already existed in those departments and the email facility was

installed using modems supplied as part of the ESANET project. Some of the

computers used were old IBM personal computers, which were still perfectly

adequate for email.From very early on, it appeared to be inevitable and desirable that initiatives
in academic networking would lead to collaborations with other sectors. Without

expansion of the service into other, better-funded areas, the UNZANET system

could never be sustainable. The development of a non-academic user base was

encouraged especially for those users who had an immediate need for

communication and for those who would have a growing need for communication
in the future. These users would want to be part of a longer-term, more
sustainable solution. However, with UNZANET's dependence upon donor

support in mind, and particularly that of UNINET, the emphasis was always on

non-commercial applications.
In Zambia, following the use at the University itself, there was widespread
growth in the use of email among NGOs, health institutions, and aid or

development agencies. Encouragement for the first two came about through

external support, while the majority of aid and development agencies were able to

fund the necessary infrastructure (modems, computers and telephone lines)
themselves.UNZANET'S Free Service
One of the reasons for the rapid growth of UNZANET was the fact that it
was provided as a free service. Users only had to cover the cost of local calls into

the UNZANET host or access the system through the University's internal

switchboard. This allowed users to ''taste" email and to experiment with it before

they had to commit themselves to paying for the service. We feel that the growth
of UNZANET would have been considerably slower had it been necessary to
charge users from the beginning, although a culture of non-payment can have its

disadvantages when a subscriber-funded service is introduced.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA194
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Need for ZAMNET
Through the technical success of UNZANET, it was clear that email was a
viable technology within Zambia. This was true not just for a rich urban elite, but

also for smaller, less-wealthy organizations within Lusaka, the Copperbelt, and

further afield. We had shown that email had the capacity to remove some of the

communications barriers that otherwise engender a feeling of international

isolation in professional communities. At the same time it was attractive to a
large community of users outside of the academic sector. Email offered a fast,
easy, and highly cost effective method of communicating compared to any other

available technology. (See 
Box 1.)However, a free service
Šprovided through the generosity of others
Šcouldnot be sustainable. The Computer Centre of the University, with its

responsibilities to the University administration, was not in a position to sell and

maintain a commercial service to customers from outside of the University, nor to

pay the salaries of the high quality staff that such a service would require.
By the end of 1993, users were transmitting large volumes of international
messages to and from the Internet, and there was a strong desire among users of

UNZANET to expand the horizons of the system. The Internet was already

expanding very rapidly: more and more data, journals, and information became

available in electronic from; the nature of the information being offered

broadened beyond the bounds of academic interest into business and recreation;

and publicity about it was reaching the popular public media. The ability to
transfer large files to and from other users; to directly access remote databases
and electronic libraries; and to participate in electronic conferences and other

peer group discussions had become of considerable interest both within and

outside of the University.
To accommodate this growth and change in direction, the basic
infrastructure of the UNZANET system and the way it was funded needed to be

reviewed. The Computer Centre had already perceived the need for collaboration

between the University and its fellow research institutions, as well as with the

commercial and
BOX 1 POOLING RESOURCES
At times it was suggested that the users in the NGO and health sectors
should form their own networks (ZANGONET and HealthNet respectively)
Šindependently of UNZANET. However, the need for a full-time system operator
and the considerable advantages of pooling equipment and staff resources with

UNZANET, dictated that both groups be maintained and administered from the
University Computer Centre. The advantages of such an arrangement are even
more apparent under the current self-financing service, which enables non-

commercial NGO's and health institutions to be subsidized to some degree by
ZAMNET's 'commercial' customers.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA195
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.international organizations that had the resources to pay for the high quality, high
volume access to information. Some of these other organizations were using

UNZANET but, because they needed to transmit larger volumes of information

more quickly, many had made their own direct links to their international head

offices using a variety of electronic mail systems. Pooled access for these

organizations to the Internet through a single service provider would clearly bring
considerable cost savings, while improvements in speed and efficiency of
communication, as well as the extra services available, would allow international

organizations to better service their target communities.
The ZAMNET Proposal
By the middle of 1993, we made a decision to submit a proposal for donor
funding to enable the University of Zambia to establish a direct link to the

Internet. This was circulated among a number of major international donors but

failed to attract any direct support. At the beginning of 1994, the University

decided to establish a private campus company (ZAMNET Communication

Systems Ltd.) to put in place the connection to the Internet and to sell access to
the services that the Internet provides. Then the World Bank expressed interest in
funding the ZAMNET project and agreed to fund 80 percent of the first year

operating costs of the new company.
As a young campus company with no working capital aside from the grant
from the World Bank, ZAMNET issued a nominal share holding, the major and

controlling shareholder being the University itself. The board of directors is

comprised of senior administrators from the University and the Deputy Minister

of Health, with the Director of the Computer Centre as Managing Director.
The BudgetThe project budget was estimated at $ 150,000 and covered the cost of:
   the leased data circuit to the chosen (cheapest) point of Internet access;
   subscription paid to the service provider at that point;
   extra hardware required to provide the Internet link and to provide a service
to ZAMNET's customers;
   hardware required to provide a training facility for ZAMNET's customers;
   consultancy fees for technical Internet experts to assist in the configuration
of the service; and
   salaries for one administrator and two technical staff (to be met from
customer fees from the beginning).
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA196
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Proposed Service
We intended to distribute Internet services to users throughout Zambia using
a variety of methods including:
   local leased lines providing full Internet access to regular high-volume
users with their own local area networks (LANs);
   dial-up interactive access using SLIP or PPP for urban users on good quality
telephone lines; and
   Fidonet and perhaps UUCP access for users in rural areas where poor
telephone quality prohibited interactive access.
We anticipated that Fidonet would continue to play an important role within
Zambia providing as it did a quick, easy-to-use entry to electronic mail. It had

already proved to be relatively cheap on remote trunk lines and generally reliable

in a rural setting.
The Project Objectives
ZAMNET Communication Systems Ltd. came into being officially in
February 1994, although it was unable to employ staff or provide a service to its

customers until the following year. ZAMNET has the following objectives:
1) Put in place the hardware and technical support necessary to provide a
reliable full Internet service. To do this, we would need to:
   establish a reliable link between the UNIX network at the
University Computer Centre and an Internet service provider;
   procure, install, and configure all necessary hardware to provide
an Internet service;
   provide an access point for customers to dial into the Internet
with sufficient capacity to avoid congestion;
   provide a software package for customers to use to access the
Internet through ZAMNET;
   connect the existing Fidonet service to the new Internet service,
thus removing the dependence on the Fidonet-Internet gateway

at Rhodes University;   develop locally based information services for local and
international access;
   provide a training facility and develop training courses for
customers; and   produce or obtain user documentation for the system.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA197
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2) Put in place the administrative staff and procedures, and market the
Internet service so that it would be fully self-sustaining after one

year of operation, and after the World Bank funding had run out. To

do this, we would need to:
   set up a computerized accounts system;
   determine a pricing system; and
   produce marketing materials (pamphlets, brochures, price lists,
advertisements).PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Although ZAMNET has been operating commercially for less than five
months (at the time this report was written), the financial support from the World

Bank is soon to come to an end. Thus, while in many ways the project is still

ongoing, this is a good time to review progress on the ZAMNET objectives

during the establishment of the Internet service to date.
Establishing the Link to the Internet
The establishment of the data communications link between Lusaka and
Cape Town, critical to our service, proved very slow and time consuming. The

Internet Company of South Africa or TICSA (now Internet Africa) of Cape Town

had already generously agreed to carry our Internet traffic for free (for the time

being) when, in April 1994, we submitted the application to the Zambian PTT for a

leased, four-wire, 9600 baud, designated data circuit between our own offices in
Lusaka and the TICSA offices. After the necessary surveying work, we were
notified that it would be commissioned in July 1994. However technical

problems over the satellite link between the Zambian earth station at Mwembeshi

and Johannesburg meant that the line was not available to us to test until October

of that year. Unfortunately our problems were not over.
Our original choice of modem to serve both ends of our Internet link was the
Telebit Worldblazer. We had good experience with Worldblazers through our

work with the Fidonet system. However when we installed the leased four-wire

data circuit between Lusaka and Cape Town, we did not know that the

Worldblazer is purely a two-wire modem and, therefore, unsuitable for the type

of circuit that we were using. Unfortunately our email messages (our cheapest and

what should have been the easiest route to assistance) to Telebit often failed to
solicit a response and it required several long distance telephone and fax calls to
establish the facts and to find out what options were available to overcome this

problem.Our first solution was to install hybrids to convert the four-wire circuit to
two-wire over the local segment of the circuit in Cape Town and Lusaka. Both

the Zambian and South African PTTs were extremely helpful in immediately

inserting hybrids into their circuits. However, the resulting signal contained too

much echoBRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA198
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for the Worldblazers to cope with and, despite the further insertion of echo
suppressors into the circuit by the PTTs, the resulting signal was inadequate for

the Worldblazers at either end of the circuit to communicate with each other.
Eventually, after seeking advice from various sources, we decided to
purchase two (quite expensive at $1,100 each) Telebit Fastblazer modems

through their South African agents. Despite the availability of email,

communication with them proved as frustrating as trying to communicate with

Telebit in the United States. However, eventually, two modems were purchased

and installed. Alas our problems did not end there.
The line between Cape Town and Lusaka uses microwave technology as far
as Johannesburg, satellite to the Lusaka earth station, microwave once again as

far as Lusaka's main exchange, but then uses copper wire for the last six or seven

kilometers to the University. The signal loss over this section is high and the

signal coming from South Africa was already quite low. Over such a long

distance, the quality of the line allocated between central Lusaka and the
ZAMNET office was highly variable and it required some intensive work from
the Zambian PTT to identify the very best connections to provide for our circuit.

However on 22 November 1994 the line was finally strong enough to carry a

signal from our mail server to the Internet and vice versa.
The line has since been quite reliable (above 95 percent), the modems
training up to 14,400 baud. Although capable of connecting at 19,200 baud, it

appears that the signal loss over the circuit as a whole will prevent us from

achieving such speeds. When the data circuit does fail, the technical staff at the

two PTTs (ZAMTEL in Zambia and TELKOM in South Africa) have been quick
to respond and restore our circuit.
Procuring, Installing, and Configuring the Internet Hardware
Most problems encountered during the installation and configuration of the
hardware were due to our own inexperience with UNIX and our ignorance of

much of the technology with which we were dealing. The staff involved were

subjected to a very steep learning curve and inevitably much of that learning was

through our own mistakes. (See 
Box 2.)BOX 2 DANGER FROM LIGHTNING STRIKES
A real problem during Zambia's rainy season is the threat of high intensity
lightning strikes. All telephone lines and the leased data circuit to Cape Town

are protected from lightning strikes using a surge protection box that diverts
current surges down a thick copper wire into a copper stake driven into the
ground outside of the equipment room. So far this system has thankfully not

been tested by such a lightning strike.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA199
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Mail Server
Through the RINAF (Regional Informatics Network for Africa) project, the
University Computer Centre had received two identical Olidata (Olivetti) 486

computers. One of these was pressed into service as a new Fidonet host to cope

with the rapidly growing number of users accessing that host. The other was set

up on the Computer Centre network as a prospective mail server (puku.unza.zm).
A copy of SCO UNIX was installed on puku and this machine was
configured to run SENDMAIL (for mail delivery), to run a POP (post office

protocol) server (for mail collection by ZAMNET's customers), and to exchange

mail with the Fidonet host using UUCP. We experienced some difficulty finding

free Internet applications software to run under SCO UNIX (a commercial

product) and, when we employed an expert to assist in the configuration of our

mail server, we were advised to switch to FreeBSD-2.0. This was done in
December 1994
Šafter the Internet connection had been commissioned.
FreeBSD is a relatively easy operating system to configure and to manage,
but finding precompiled binary versions of Internet applications has proved

difficult. Compilation of ports and patches is cumbersome for those inexperienced

in UNIX and keeping abreast of the constant updates is time consuming. The only

alternative free UNIX system that runs on a 486 personal computer is Linux.

Having already started with FreeBSD, there are few advantages in switching at

this stage.
Puku is now running as the ZAMNET name server, as well as the server for
mail/POP, Gopher, and WWW. All of these services appear to be running quite

well. However from a hardware point of view we have discovered that a system

with eight megabytes of RAM and a 400 megabyte hard disk is insufficient to

tackle the range of tasks and to serve the number of users that we are asking of

puku. A gigabyte hard drive and 32 megabytes of RAM is essential on such a

pivotal system within an Internet service.
The RouterThe router required to connect ZAMNET to the rest of the Internet
Ša Cisco3000Šwas provided as part of the funding of the Zambian regional node by the
RINAF project. ZAMNET itself purchased a transceiver to connect this router to

the ethernet network. The Cisco gave no problems in terms of configuration;

however since its installation two problems have arisen.
First, one of the primary requirements of the router is to provide statistics
that can be used to bill ZAMNET customers who link their networks with

ZAMNET's using locally leased data circuits. Such customers are billed for all

traffic carried. The data to enable this kind of billing needs to be analyzed on

another computer on the network that is running UNIX. We have yet to find any

software to analyze this data that will run under the FreeBSD operating system on

puku, our mail server. The only such software that we have found is written for
the SUN operating system
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA200
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(SUNOS) and we have since been advised that nobody would attempt to do Cisco
accounting on a FreeBSD system!
The second problem is in trying to increase the speed of our link to the
Internet. That link currently operates at 14,400 baud. It seems that by switching to

an asynchronous connection using data compression it should be possible to

increase the throughout of data on our link. To do this, however, the Cisco needs

to have its auxiliary port configured to operate in asynchronous mode, which in

turn requires a memory upgrade and a new version of the operating system to be

loaded into the increased memory. With our whole system dependent on that one
router we are somewhat reluctant to attempt this upgrade.
Providing Customer Access
To provide access to the Internet service to as many of ZAMNET's
customers as possible simultaneously, 20 dial-up telephone lines configured as a

hunting group were installed by the Zambian PTT, and a Livingston Portmaster

2e-30 with 30 configurable ports was purchased along with 20 Zyxel U-1496

modems to connect these lines to ZAMNET.
The telephone lines were installed when a new cable was being laid into the
University and there were no problems in finding 20 new lines for ZAMNET.

The hunting group is functioning well, although up until now (with 193 active,

paying users as at the end of June 1995), we have rarely seen as many as seven of

the lines in use at one time.
The modems that the ZAMNET customers dial into were purchased by mail
order directly from Zyxel in California. Dealings with that company by email

were very easy. The modems were purchased before the V34 (28,800 baud)

standard had been ratified and they are all set to a maximum speed of 14,400

baud. However, given that this is also maximum speed on our data circuit to the

Internet, and that as yet there is no congestion on the dial-up lines, there is no

disadvantage in restricting our customers to connections at this speed.
The Postmaster was chosen over a Telebit Netblazer on the grounds of its
cheaper price and that its range of features was closer to our requirements.

However we were unaware when purchasing the Postmaster that some of the

software that is provided with it and that enables easy configuration and backup

of the system would not run under the FreeBSD operating system that we are

using on our mail server. The inability to back up the tables used to store user

names and passwords has proved a serious weakness on two occasions when part

of the user table was lost and had to be manually re-entered.
Provisions of End User Software
For ZAMNET users continuing to use the existing Fidonet service or leasing
local data circuits between their own LANs and ZAMNET, we did not need to
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA201
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.provide any new software. The Fidonet installation had already been developed
and proven over a number of years, while those linking through their own

networks were responsible for their own software.
However, for our dial-up interactive customers we needed to find an easy-
to-install, easy-to-use package for Windows, DOS, and Macs. When we found a

set of books for each of these three categories, complete with software diskettes,

we thought we had found the solution. However, we discovered that the DOS

software contained a hard-coded login script that did not match the prompts

provided by our Portmaster; the Mac software would not run on the systems on
which we attempted to install it; and the Windows software contained frustrating
bugs in its Mail program.
Software for DOS
The package distributed to DOS users is a slightly modified version of the
SLIP/MINUET package developed by the University of Minnesota. While not as

attractive as the Windows software, it does contain an easy-to-use mail program

and a Gopher client. It lacks a WWW client and we are investigating how

DOSLynx (a WWW client for DOS) might be integrated into the installation.
Software for Windows
After the frustrations encountered above, we borrowed the package
distributed by GreenNet in London for their own PPP customers. Their package

is based on shareware versions of the Trumpet Winsocket Manager, Eudora as a

mail client, Netscape as a WWW client, plus FTP and Telnet clients. We

modified this package for our own system and developed our own installation

program. This package is stable, easy-to-install and has been found to be easy to

use by our customers.Software for Macs
The vast majority of computer users in Zambia use DOS-based computers.
Consequently, providing support for the few Mac customers that ZAMNET has,

has proved very difficult. The package distributed to Mac users is a combination

of the diskette provided with the 
Internet Tour Guide 
and a second diskette
obtained from GreenNet that they distribute to their own Mac users. The resulting

package includes the Eudora mail client and Netscape and is very similar in its

two main components to the Windows package. ZAMNET still does not possess
its own Mac and so streamlining the installation is still some way off. Even
copying the two distribution diskettes requires a visit to one of the two private

individuals on campus who use Macs!
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA202
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Integration of Fidonet and the Internet
When the Internet link was established in November 1994, we had just three
weeks in which to commission the gateway between the Fidonet host and the

mail server before UNINET started charging us for the use of their own gateway.

On the recommendation of Bob Barad of the Baobab, we installed the new GIGO

package and were pleased to find that it was very easy to install and configure,

and what's more, it worked. Rhodes University had given us an experimental
UUCP account and, for the three weeks prior to cutover, we polled (generated a
computer call to) the Rhodes UUCP host on a regular basis. We encountered no

problems with this link and the modification of the software to enable

connections between the Fidonet host and our own mail server went equally well.
The only disadvantage of the link at this stage is that it requires a modern
and telephone line to be dedicated to the mail server for the UUCP connections

(none of our users use UUCP directly). Even using local phone calls at 14,400

baud the telephone bill for this exchange of mail between adjacent personal

computers is quite high. It would be better to move this mail over the LAN if
possible.Development of Local Information Services
The Zamnet Gopher
In December 1994, a Gopher server was set up (gopher.zamnet.zm) with a
menu structure covering Agriculture, Engineering, Health, Communications and

Networking, and ZAMNET News and Information. This proved to be a very

useful way of publicizing our work and making contact and service information
available to potential customers and other interested parties around the world. We
also found the Gopher useful for advising our customers of the latest

developments (or problems) on ZAMNET.
As customers became aware of the potential of the ZAMNET Gopher for the
distribution of local information, they expressed an interest in storing their own

information within its menus. To date a number of customers are paying for disk
space on our Gopher server at the nominal rate of $1.00 per megabyte per month.
For example:   the National Farmers Union is providing weekly Agricultural Commodity
Exchange prices;
   the Ministry of Agriculture posts regular food security and marketing
bulletins; and
   the Engineering Institute of Zambia is publishing a range of information
about the institute and its activities.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA203
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Worldwide Web Server
Our knowledge of the Internet has grown and we are aware of the rapid
growth of the Worldwide Web (WWW) and the trend towards storing more

information in hypertext form. Around April 1995, we installed our own WWW

server. The ZAMNET homepage is accessible as 
www.zamnet.zm and contains
pointers to information about Zambia, about ZAMNET, to the ZAMNET

Gopher, and to a small but growing number of pages developed for ZAMNET's
customers. For example:
   articles from the Post Newspaper are currently published twice weekly
before the paper actually reaches the streets;
   the Zambia National Tourist Board has published information about travel
and tourism; and   the University of Zambia has published the text of a short leaflet giving
background information about the University.
We plan to develop all of these areas. In particular several commercial
customers are interested in posting information about their companies and

services within our WWW pages.
Provision of Training Facilities and Courses
When ZAMNET was formed in 1994, it occupied one small office within
the Computer Centre. In April 1995 we got our own offices that include a training

room with capacity for nine networked personal computers. The room was

equipped in May with seven multimedia Compaq personal computers and we

have set aside three mornings per week to provide training to ZAMNET

customers.In addition, this facility has been used to provide sensitization seminars to
the staff, deans, and administration from each of the schools at the University.

When not in use for training, it is open for these members of University staff to

book for an hour at a time, and is also open for members of the public to use at a

rate of $7.00 per hour.
User Documentation
The Internet is a new concept to many people in Zambia and there are few
books or magazines about it in the bookshops in the country. Since it is important

for customers to have access to information that helps them make the best use of

the service they are buying, we decided to provide a book, 
The Internet Tour
Guide, with the ZAMNET subscription. In practice, as explained above, the
software included with the books has not been very useful and the books are very

American in style and language. However, there are few alternatives until we can

produce our own software specific guides. We have spent some time producing
detailedBRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA204
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.installation instructions for the software that we distribute and these certainly
appear to have reduced the number of queries that we field during customer

installation.Computerized Accounting
The initial chart of accounts was put together by an accountant who has
subsequently kept an eye on our progress. We are using 
Mind Your Own Business
(MYOB), a small business accounting package developed in the United States.
While quite easy to use, it has been not been adaptable to the multicurrency

system we operate (we accept payment in Zambian Kwacha and in U.S. Dollars).

We are considering replacing it with a package better suited to our own particular
requirements.Determining a Pricing System
No two Internet service providers use the same method to charge for their
services. Our own method of arriving at our fees was to draw up the budget over

the next few years; decide how much emphasis we wanted to put on the basic

subscription, the cost of international electronic mail, and the cost of connect

time; estimate the number of customers and projected growth rate in each
category; and to fiddle with the parameters until we could be sure of breaking
even within one year.
Since we need to support our traditional users, we added a two-tier pricing
structure for commercial and one for non-commercial customers. The resulting

fee structureŠwhich entails a signing-on fee, a basic monthly subscription, a per
kilobyte charge for international email, and a per hour charge for connect time
Šhas been well received within the country, although we have received some
criticism from without. We are always reviewing these fees and plan to increase

the free connect time to two hours per month. As yet ZAMNET is not sufficiently

financially sound for any radical discounting of the prices.
Marketing of the Product
To promote ZAMNET to a largely unaware population, we employed a
graphic artist to produce a leaflet and eight page brochure. This determined the

''corporate image" of ZAMNET and its style has been copied on price lists,

business cards, and advertisements. Over 1,000 brochures have been distributed

so far. Advertisements have been placed in the 
Times of Zambia, Productive
Farming, and Profit Magazine 
. However such has been the interest in the
Internet that ZAMNET has benefited from free publicity in articles in all three of

Zambia's leading newspapers, plus a lead article in 
Profit Magazine
.BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA205
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3 ZAMNET SALARIES
Even at the relatively (for Zambia) high salaries being offered by ZAMNET,
recruitment of the right quality staff was difficult. The package on offer of a two
year contract with a salary but no fringe benefits was perhaps not so attractive in a

country where housing and transport costs are so high and many employers
still provide housing (or housing allowances) and transport to senior information
technology professionals.Staff Recruitment
The recruitment of the administrator/bookkeeper with a full Association of
Accounting Technicians qualification and solid accounting experience proved a

lot easier than the recruitment of the technical staff, although an initial plan to

recruit a part time administrator was revised when it was fully appreciated just

how much would be involved in administering the ZAMNET service. (See

Box 3
.)Of only 30 applicants for the post of communications technician, six were
suitable to interview. Few of these had UNIX experience, and none had any

practical experience with internetworking technology. While one member of staff

was recruited from the Computer Centre and had been involved in the

development of the system from the beginning, the only external recruit is very

much learning as he goes along.
RESULTS, IMPACT AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
As part of the billing process it has been necessary to gather comprehensive
statistics about the use of the ZAMNET system from the very beginning. A very

simple analysis of the connection time and email statistics reveals very rapid

growth of the service. ZAMNET is growing at roughly the rate of one new

account each day and at the current rate this will lead to ZAMNET more than

doubling in size over the next twelve months.
Table 1
 shows the growth in the number of interactive accounts and the
connect time that those accounts have generated. Growth has been constant
Šwithaccounts connecting to ZAMNET for an average of just over four hours per

month, although the average number of connections per month has increased from

38 in March to 46 in June. This increase perhaps reflects the increased regular use

of the system for electronic mail rather than Internet browsing.
Table 2
 shows the steady growth in the volume of email, although it should
be noted that the mail volumes include mail from the Fidonet system which,

unlike the connect time data, would have been present before March. Nonetheless

theBRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA206
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.volume of international mail being sent has nearly doubled in two months. This
does not include incoming mail. Interestingly, while the volume of mail to

international destinations has increased steadily the volume of mail to local users

has remained nearly constant, perhaps reflecting the international requirements of

the newer users, and the benefits of ZAMNET in economizing over traditional

communication methods (fax, telephone and courier).
TABLE 1 Growth of ZAMNET by Month, January 1995 to June 1995
MonthNumber of Accounts
Number of Connections
Total Connect Time
(hours)January5325.12
February26875135.08

March933,510390.26

April1124,415503.87

May1686,926800.77TABLE 2 Growth of ZAMNET by Month, March 1995 to May 1995
MonthInternationalLocalTotalCountSizeCountSizeCountSizeMarch3,5057,629,5752,0577,316,0135,57214,945,588
April4,1038,535,9962,5228,300,0206,62516,836,016

May5,63313,571,732
2,4227,498,5558,05521,070,287
A Breakdown of the Users
The majority of urban users of the non-commercial Fidonet service prior to
ZAMNET's formation have now subscribed to the Interactive service. Those

remaining with Fidonet include:
   Users in rural areas (notably the health community) from where telephone
calls to Lusaka are expensive, and telephone line quality is often too weak

to support interactive communication.
   University users who will remain on the Fidonet system until the
installation of the campus network has been completed.
   Long term users of the Fidonet system who are due to leave Zambia shortly
and therefore do not wish to upgrade to the new interactive service.
   Some United Nations agencies that are currently planning to connect their
own network directly to ZAMNET with a local leased data circuit but, in

the interim, would prefer to continue to use the technology with which their

users are familiar.BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA207
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Looking at the geographical and categorical breakdown of the Fidonet and
interactive subscribers, it is clear that the vast majority of users of both systems

are Lusaka based. (See 
Table 3
.) While this is not surprising, the significantly
smaller concentration of users on the Copperbelt, Zambia's other major urban

area, is more unusual and perhaps can be explained by the greater difficulty in

fully supporting a service to users who are based outside of Lusaka. It will be
necessary to consider a point of presence on the Copperbelt to rectify this and
also to consider ways in which greater support can be provided to rural users.
TABLE 3 Users by Province
ProvinceFidonetInteractiveTotalLusaka Province38165203
Copperbelt61218
Southern Province7411

Western Province7310

Eastern Province516

Northern Province325

Northwestern Province033

Luapula Province112

Central Province022

TOTAL67193260Analysis of the new interactive subscribers by category is particularly
difficult. (See 
Table 4
.) Beyond learning that companies are commercial, no
attempt has been made to determine the line of work in which a subscribing

company is involved. Many of the private individuals joining ZAMNET as non-

commercial subscribers are attached to development organizations or

international NGOs and use their points professionally. Again we have made no
attempt to survey the uses made of email and so further analysis is impossible.
BOX 4 EMAIL TO FAX SERVICE
ZAMNET has recently reached an agreement with GreenNet in London
that allows ZAMNET customers to send email messages to fax machines.

These messages are delivered to London via the Internet and are then delivered
from there at the cost of the delivering phone call. For faxes to Europe and to
North America, this results in a total fax cost of less than 50 cents per page. An

informative acknowledgment email message confirms to the sender whether or
not the fax has been delivered. Delivery times are usually less than 20 minutes
after the email has been sent, which is perfectly satisfactory for ZAMNET's
customers.BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA208
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 4 Users by Category
CategoryFidonetInteractiveTotalPrivate25355
Health301848

University/Research181128

Development61824

Agriculture8917

Religion11516

Government066

Education/Schools055

Environment055

Tech Training022

Journalism011

Other246

Commercial04646

TOTAL67193259Apart from the 55 private individual accounts and 46 commercial accounts,
the largest category among the rest of the accounts is in health. As indicated by

the number of accounts still using Fidonet, many health and agriculture accounts

were users of the previous non-commercial service. Since the new ZAMNET
service was put in place there has been a growing interest from a number of
religious organizations active in Zambia (most of whom have head offices in the

United States or Europe), and encouragingly recent interest from the Ministries

of Finance and of Foreign Affairs.
FeedbackZAMNET has received very positive feedback from its customers within and
outside of Zambia. Zambian expatriates write to us saying how proud they feel

that Zambia is only the fifth African country to establish a full Internet service.

Starved on information about their home country, they are eager to see expanded

news and information services through ZAMNET.
ZAMNET customers within Zambia are particularly pleased with the cost
savings that communicating by email has brought. With international telephone

calls to North America and Europe billed at $7.00 per minute, the ability to make a

cheap local telephone call and send an email message for about 20 cents per page

is very attractive. To find that this message is delivered reliably and within

minutes is an added bonus. (See 
Box 4
.)Media CoverageAs the Internet has received more and more coverage in the international
media, ZAMNET has correspondingly come under the spotlight within Zambia.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA209
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
Zambia Daily Mail
, the Times of Zambia
, and the 
Weekly Post 
have all
published articles about the Internet and its arrival in Zambia (the Post

subsequently subscribing to the ZAMNET service). 
Profit Magazine
, Zambia'sleading business magazine published a full leading article about ZAMNET

complete with a front page image of some example WWW pages captured from

the Internet.The Zambia National Broadcasting Corporation has regular computing and
business programs that make reference to information technology and the

Internet. We hope that a full interview with the Managing Director of ZAMNET

will be broadcast soon, while plans exist to connect ZNBC to ZAMNET in the

near future.
Further afield, the efforts that Zambia has made to provide an email service
and to establish a full Internet connection have been mentioned several times on

the African service of the BBC World Service. In fact when the BBC began using

email and started accepting questions to their Pop Science program, the very first

email question that they received came from an email user in Ndola, Zambia.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Just four months after the ZAMNET product was made available to the
public, its existing infrastructure is already creaking. Its communications link to

the rest of the Internet is becoming congested at certain times of the day. Its mail

server is overloaded and does not have the memory or disk capacity to cope with a

significant increase in either the number of ZAMNET customers, or in the

number of Internet users from outside of Zambia accessing its information

services. Without a doubt the main area where ZAMNET might have been

launched differently was in its technical capacity.
Capital Funding
ZAMNET's initial budgets should have been significantly higher and
included items vital to the provision of a high quality, high volume, large

customer base service. Namely, in hindsight, we should have begun with a SUN

workstation, VSAT communications, a router capable of handling asynchronous

communication, and a full set of equipment to provide backup in the event of

system failures. While these items would have increased the initial cost of

ZAMNET significantly, repayment of that cost could have been spread over a

number of years.
Staff TrainingProviding technical support from a position of considerable inexperience has
been difficult. While the staff currently in place are learning fast, sustainability of

the ZAMNET service is not only dependent upon them but also on the availability

of suitable staff to supplement and replace the existing staff in the future. With

thisBRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA210
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in mind there needs to be greater opportunities for Zambians to learn about
Internet technology without having to travel outside of the region.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
ZAMNET is providing an important and much needed service to all sectors
of Zambian society:
   businesses and industries need a fast, reliable and economical
communications system in order to compete within the newly liberalized

Zambian economy;
   international development organizations need to keep in regular touch with
their projects in the field and their head offices overseas;
   the academic sector and researchers need access to the latest research and
need to keep abreast of international developments in their field;
   government ministries need an efficient means of communication with
district and provincial offices in the fields of agriculture, health and

education; and   private individuals wish to keep in touch with their friends abroad or simply
wish to use the Internet as a vast encyclopedia.
Both commercial and non-commercial customers have shown a willingness
to pay the fees that ZAMNET has set in order to cover the considerable costs of

its service.
Because its customers now rely upon its service, ZAMNET needs to ensure
its future both technically and economically. At the current, very fast growth

rate, the system will be overstretched within twelve months, by which time the

customer base should have more than doubled to over 600 accounts. The resulting

reduced performance could seriously damage the positive image of ZAMNET.

Meanwhile the lack of technical backup within the system leaves the whole

service vulnerable in the event of an equipment failure. The downside of this is

the capital expenditure involved in safeguarding against possible disasters.

ZAMNET urgently needs to look at ways it can improve and upgrade its

services.Increasing the Bandwidth
The capacity of the Internet link between Lusaka and Cape Town will not be
able to support 20 simultaneously connected users without a significant and

noticeable deterioration in performance. The most promising option for

increasing the capacity of this link appears to be a direct VSAT link from the

ZAMNET offices in Lusaka to our Internet service provider in Cape Town, or

failing that, an alternative link direct to the United States or United Kingdom.

Although continued cooperation with counterparts in the region would be

desirable, progress in
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA211
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.negotiations with Telkom (the South African PTT) have not been productive so
far.Based on the cost estimates provided so far, we know that the hardware
costs of a VSAT link, plus annual rental and license fees should prove cheaper

than the line we are leasing from ZAMNET and TELKOM at a cost of over

$60,000 per year. The disadvantages of this strategy will be the expertise

expected of the technical support staff and the cost of paying for both the existing

and the VSAT link during the transition. Indeed it may be desirable to maintain

the existing link to provide redundancy in the event of failure of the VSAT
connection.Increasing Dial-up Access
With the current customer base, we have rarely observed more than eight
ports on the Portmaster modem server active simultaneously. Further expansion

to serve 600 customers, while also accommodating increased activity among the

existing users, is likely to put severe pressure on our dial-up. This expansion can

only be accommodated through the purchase of a second modem server and a

further batch of dial-up telephone lines. Over the next year a number of leased

line customers will also subscribe to ZAMNET thus putting further pressure on

the number of free ports available on the existing system.
Covering for Equipment Failures
The current system is highly vulnerable in the event of any kind of
equipment failure. ZAMNET service would be lost in the event of:
   the loss of the leased line modem at either end of the data circuit that links
ZAMNET to the Internet;
   the loss of the router linking the ZAMNET LAN to the Internet; or
   the loss of the Portmaster providing local access to the Internet to ZAMNET
customers.None of this equipment is readily available within Zambia and, even if
finances were available, the resulting loss of service while replacements were

being shipped from abroad could last for several days and have a serious impact

on the image of ZAMNET among its customers. Spare items to replace those

listed above would cost about $8,000.
Increase Capacity on Mail and Information Servers
The current mail server is running on a 40 MHz 486 PC with just 8
megabytes of RAM and a 400 megabyte hard disk and is already overloaded. As
the number of customers and the volume of local information being provided to

users outside of Zambia increases, the burden on this machine will also increase. A
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA212
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.second machine is currently being configured as a News Server to accommodate
the growing number of useful log files that the system generates. However this

machine is itself only a 25 MHz personal computer, albeit with a one gigabyte

hard drive.ZAMNET needs to invest in a much more powerful personal computer with
at least 32 megabytes of RAM and another high capacity hard drive. Ideally

ZAMNET would seek to obtain a SUN workstation or equivalent, which is

capable of running some of the software needed for maintaining the Portmaster

and for monitoring traffic passing through the Cisco router. However the cost of
such a SUN machine would be $10,000 or more!
Expanding the Range of Provided Services
There is an immediate need to provide a News Server to enable ZAMNET's
customers to participate in the many discussion groups available over the

Internet. Work to configure such a Server is currently under way, although the

impact of a full news feed on the limited bandwidth of the Internet connection

has yet to be determined. It is likely that such a feed would be dependent on the
implementation of the VSAT link.
As the Internet develops further, other applications will be developed and
ZAMNET needs to be in a position to make these applications available to its

customers (within the limitations of the bandwidth of its Internet connection).

Current examples include "Real Audio" and the ability to communicate by voice

over the Internet.Increasing Technical and Administrative Support
ZAMNET currently employs just three staff, one administrator and two
technical support staff. This team is severely stretched in its efforts to provide

support and to develop the ZAMNET staff. We have decided to employ an

assistant administrator to ease the workload.
With the anticipated growth, it will be important for ZAMNET to employ at
least one additional skilled and experienced technical member of staff within the

next twelve months. With both the contracts of the ZAMNET technical staff due

for renewal at the same time, the possible impact of these employees departing at

the end of their contracts also needs to be anticipated.
Looking ForwardThis chapter was written in June 1995 and I want to provide a quick update.
By January 1996, ZAMNET had grown to accommodate 417 interactive

accounts. These accounts generated 9,558 connections totalling 1,600 hours of

connect time and 12,862 international messages. This is a growth rate of 100

percent in justBRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA213
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.eight months. We have taken several steps to ease the growing congestion on both
the Internet link and the server computers and to provide protection in the event

of system failures:
We ordered the VSAT terminal equipment and it has been shipped from the
United States. We need to complete some administrative procedures before it can

be used but we hope that a 64 kilobaud VSAT connection direct from ZAMNET's

offices to Johannesburg will be operational before the end of March 1996.
We maintain the Portmaster users table on the WWW server machine using
Livington's Radius software.
We moved the WWW server from the mail server to a second computer,
which has been configured as a News Server, although we still do not receive a

full news feed from the Internet. We just ordered a new mail server (a Pentium

120 with 32 megabytes of RAM and a 2 gigabyte hard drive).
We have recruited a new assistant administrator.

Within the next year ZAMNET plans to increase the number of access
telephone lines to 40 and purchase an extra 20 V34 modems and a second

Portmaster to serve these lines; employ two additional technical staff, a marketing

manager, and another junior administrator; and provide local telephone access to
customers based in the Copperbelt.
We have proven that the provision of an Internet service is viable and can
pay for itself. The costs of expansion require capital expenditure and, ultimately,

an injection of capital from investors either in the form of loans or in the

broadening of shareholding is required. Most importantly, however, several

months before the end of the World Bank funding, ZAMNET is self-sufficient
and is able to buy new equipment from its own funds and to guarantee repayment
on any loans it requires. This healthy position should enable ZAMNET to

significantly reduce its fees within the next three months and to continue to

expand services to meet it customers' demands.
NOTES1. The East and Southern African Academic Network (ESANET) is described more fully in
Musisi's case study in this volume. See page 158.
2. Moussa Fall gives a more detailed description of Fidonet in his case study in this volume. See
page 143.
3. Each member of the Fidonet system has a unique address. This address identifies the zone, the
host, and the node. The point number will ensure that a message gets to a specific user in the

node's subsystem.
BRINGING THE INTERNET TO ZAMBIA214
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Case Studies on the Collection,
Management, and Dissemination of Local
Information ResourcesMany STI projects focus less on the technology and more on the
management of information and the content of databases. Databases from abroad

do not generally give adequate coverage of research efforts in developing

countries and African scientists have learned that they cannot depend on such

outside sources for the services needed to keep them abreast of local

developments in their subject fields. The following group of case studies focuses

on efforts made to collect local information, to organize it into usable forms, and

then to disseminate it to those who can put it to good use.
Thus one case study in this section is about a group of natural products
researchers who banded together to form a professional network that unites them

through newsletters, conferences, publications, and now, electronic means.
The next case study describes how a research institute in Botswana collected
local data to produce an indigenous database on socioeconomic information. The

project manager learned that she required expertise in subject analysis and

indexing, system design, database management, and access to computer

hardware.The Kenya Medical Research Institute decided to focus on their institutional
needs for information and designed an information system that included all

aspects of their data needs. Their case study demonstrates that many management

tasks can be aided by automated data processing and that the introduction of

computers can aid the decision-making process, provide information about

financial and human resources, improve turnaround time for data analysis and

report writing; and improve the quality of data organization and analysis. By

adding equipment215
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for desktop publishing and CD-ROM searches they realized the same benefits of

other case study authors.
The CSIR in Ghana took a serious look at its mandate and designed a system
to improve national access to scientific and technological information. National

systems are difficult to manage and finance but the rewards can be great, as

demonstrated in this final case study.
216
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAPRECA and Its Role in the
Dissemination of Information on Natural
Products Research in Africa
by Ermias Dagne
Ermias Dagne is one of the founders and the immediate past
Executive Secretary of NAPRECA. He is an associate

professor in the Chemistry Department of Addis Ababa

University. He gratefully acknowledges the editorial

assistance of Wendimagegn Mammo in writing this paper.

Dr. Mammo is also an assistant professor in the same

department.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
This paper describes the background history, objectives, and main activities
of the Natural Products Research Network for Eastern and Central Africa, known

in short as NAPRECA. We give particular emphasis to the role of the network in

improving the scientific and technological information (STI) scene in Africa.
Origin and History
The Fourteenth IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry) International Symposium on the Chemistry of Natural Products was

held in July 1984, in Poznan, Poland. Over one thousand participants from all

over the world attended that symposium, including six Africans. 
1 As we Africans
met during the breaks and the social occasions, we realized that there were no

such fora in Africa, even though there were many natural products there who

could benefit from the exchange of experiences and ideas. Our meetings took on a

more formal character as we discussed ways to circumvent the isolation and

alienation that African researchers faced. We unanimously resolved to found a

network to bring scientists engaged in natural products research in Africa closer
together and to link those researchers with colleagues around the world who were
involved in tackling research problems of relevance to Africa.
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
217Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.We felt that the task of a network should not be to build infrastructure, new
centers, or new laboratories but instead to work towards strengthening national

capabilities through regional and international cooperation. We called for the

sharing of existing facilities and resources in the sub-region. As a first step in this

direction, we agreed to concentrate on information dissemination and exchange

of ideas through publications, including a biannual newsletter and other means.
These discussions led to the crystallization of the network's constitution.
Before the end of the Poznan meeting, we resolved to name the network the
Natural Products Research Network for Eastern and Central Africa 
, or
NAPRENCA. Later an ''N" in the acronym was dropped and the Network came to

be known in short as NAPRECA. We felt that Africa was too big an area to

encompass initially and, for the sake of expediency and modesty, we realistically
started with a sub-regional approach. Had there been participants from other parts
of Africa in that meeting, the arguments might have been different. In any case,

the geographic definition for the network satisfied all those present and the

consensus reached heralded the birth of NAPRECA.
I was elected Chairman and Editor of the Network's newsletter and we asked
Berhanu M. Abegaz of the same department as myself at Addis Ababa University

to serve as Secretary and Treasurer. The rationale for this decision was to avoid

having the two officers in different countries, a situation that would have

paralyzed the Network right from its inception.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONUpon returning to our homes, our initial enthusiasm did not wane; on the
contrary, all concerned received the idea of founding a regional network for

natural products scientists with joy. In Ethiopia, B.M. Abegaz prepared the final

version of the constitution and came up with invaluable suggestions and ideas on

how to launch NAPRECA and initiate the newsletter. (See 
Box 1
.)The maiden issue of the NAPRECA Newsletter came out in September
1984, immediately after the founding meeting of a NAPRECA branch in

Ethiopia. The editorial of that issue stated that:
BOX 1 THE CHAIRMAN AS EDITOR
The idea of entrusting the task of editor to the chairman of NAPRECA was
judicious. As one of the main tasks of a network is information dissemination,
anyone exercising the leadership of a network should take this duty to heart and
ensure the continuous flow of information through publication of a newsletter

and other circulars. The 
raison d'etre 
of a network depends on how well this task
is handled. Consequently this was a task that could not be delegated but
executed right from NAPRECA's top position.
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
218Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in order for the African scientist to be worthy of the noble name 
– the current
state of isolation has to be combatted and scientific fora created which will
contribute to the amelioration of the present dismal state of research and

academic activity.This issue also echoed the importance of contacts and exchange of
information. The editorial made a strong appeal to all natural products

researchers in the region to interact with each other and to initiate programs of

mutual interest. It stated, "the birth of an organization 
per se 
is not a historic
event. What is more significant is whether such an organization will live up to its

name." The publication and worldwide distribution of this issue was made

possible by contributions from the members in Ethiopia.
In Kenya, J. Ogur, senior lecturer of chemistry at the University of Nairobi,
brought together a large team of researchers and educators and founded

NAPRECA-Kenya, where he emerged as chairman. This branch was formally

registered by the Kenya Registrar of Societies in January 1986. Although no

Tanzanian took part in the deliberations in Poznan, colleagues at the University

of Dar es Salaam were swift in taking up the idea and founded a branch that was

registered in October 1985. At the same time a branch was also founded in the

Sudan.Colleagues in Zimbabwe decided to merge the NAPRECA concept with an
existing association with similar objectives, namely NAPRAZ (Natural Products

Association of Zimbabwe). This was fraught with problems from the start.

Although an understanding was reached from the outset that NAPRAZ would be

like a NAPRECA branch, in reality this never worked. In December 1988, a

separate NAPRECA-Z was founded. This turn of events contributed to a

weakening of the branch in Zimbabwe, a problem that has not been circumvented

to date.In Ethiopia, NAPRECA became affiliated with Addis Ababa University
(AAU) and the Chemistry Department served as the seat of the Coordinating

Office. This meant that NAPRECA benefited from the administrative framework

of the University. Funds for the NAPRECA Coordinating Office were

administered by the university as a project account. Since overhead charges are

waived on most grant accounts in AAU, this arrangement was greatly appreciated

right from the start. The network was also able to use such university facilities as

guest houses, halls, and laboratories.
In March 1987, John Kingston, a senior officer in the Division of Basic
Sciences in UNESCO, came to Addis Ababa leading a mission to the Ethiopian

Science and Technology Commission. That occasion provided an opportune

moment to discuss cooperation between UNESCO and NAPRECA. Jack Canon,

an Australian scientist, senior UNESCO advisor, and chairman of the Australian

Network for the Chemistry of Biologically Active Natural Products (NCBNP),

strongly supported the idea of affiliating NAPRECA to UNESCO. The

NAPRECA branches in Ethiopia, Kenya, Sudan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe urged

their respective UNESCO national commissions to support the motion of

affiliation at the UNESCO
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
219Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.General Assembly in November 1987. NAPRECA was formally declared a
UNESCO affiliated organization, entitling it to receive direct financial support

from UNESCO's regular budget.
This recognition boosted the morale of the membership and gave the young
network a wider international recognition. Its meager financial resources were

also increased. It was then possible to call a meeting of the NAPRECA

Coordinating Board, with representatives from each of the then five member

countries, namely J.A. Ogur and R.M. Munavu (Kenya); A. Taha (Sudan); H.

Weenen (Tanzania); N.Z. Nyazema (Zimbabwe), and, of course, ourselves from
Ethiopia. The meeting took place in Addis Ababa in March 1988.
NAPRECA was pleased with UNESCO's decision to send the Director of the
Division of Scientific Research and Higher Education in Paris and the Director of

UNESCO-ROSTA in Nairobi to the March meeting. The International

Foundation for Science (IFS) sent its scientific advisor as an observer. J. Ayafor

(Cameroon) and J. Mungarulire (Rwanda) came as observers. The latter country
joined NAPRECA a year later. 
2At the First Meeting of the NAPRECA Coordinating Board, we adopted the
constitution of the network, elected its officers, and decided that Ethiopia would

be the seat of the Coordinating Office. I was elected Executive Secretary and

B.M. Abegaz was elected Assistant Secretary-Treasurer. H. Guadey
3 joined as
Program Officer and ex-officio member of the Coordinating Board. Although
NAPRECA had existed since 1984, this board meeting heralded the active
chapter in the history of the network. Since that time, we have held eight annual

meetings and the number of member countries has increased. With the joining of

Rwanda, Uganda, and Madagascar in 1988, 1989, and 1990, respectively, our

membership rose to eight countries.
A day after the first NAPRECA Board Meeting, a scientific session was
held. As all of the Board Members and most of the observers were active

researchers in the field of natural products, each made a presentation followed by

discussions. This hurriedly organized scientific conference was christened the
First NAPRECA Symposium on Natural Products
. The high quality of the
presentations and the enthusiasm with which the one-day symposium was

received gave a clear signal that such events in Africa were long overdue.
In the same year, the International Program in the Chemical Sciences
(IPICS), based in Upsalla, Sweden, started to offer NAPRECA annual grants,

particularly in support of the Exchange of Researchers Scheme, the Summer
School Programs, and the symposia and specialized workshops. The IPICS grant
was kept mainly in Sweden and used for settling expenses directly from there,

relying on the efficient secretariat in Uppsalla. We have on many occasions also

benefited from the advice and guidance of Rune Liminga, Director of IPICS, who

has vast experience in networking in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
The main aim of the network as articulated in the constitution is to "initiate,
develop and promote research in the area of natural products in the Eastern and
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
220Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Central African sub-region." Dissemination of information pertaining to natural
products research is one of the major objectives of NAPRECA. The importance

of establishing links with counterparts in other parts of the world was emphasized

right from the outset, as one of the objectives of the network is to "foster and

maintain links with such scientists who are actively working in specific areas of

natural products that are pertinent to Africa." The sections that follow will
attempt to show to what extent NAPRECA has been successful in putting these
aims to practice.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Seven categories of activities will be described in this section. In short, these
are:   Dissemination of information through publication of a biannual newsletter,
monograph series and symposium abstracts;
   Administration of a postgraduate scholarship program;
   Implementation of an Exchange of Researchers Scheme;
   Organization of the Natural Products Summer School;
   Convening of the Natural Products Symposium once every two years;
   Conducting training workshops; and
   Coordination of the UNESCO's Botany 2000 program.
PublicationsThe NAPRECA Newsletter is published twice a year. About one thousand
copies of each issue are distributed free of charge to readers in various parts of

the world. Sometimes the founding of organizations by novices will lead to the

launching of some form of publication
Šinvariably designated as Volume 1,
Number 1. Too often, Volume 1, Number 2 never sees the light of day and the

new organization or association withers to oblivion! When the first issue of the

NAPRECA Newsletter came out, we were warned of such a pitfall. But, so far,

we have succeeded in maintaining our publishing schedule and we have now

distributed 24 issues of the newsletter.
Reactions to the maiden issue of the NAPRECA Newsletter were mostly
congratulatory, although some people pointed out mistakes and offered advice.

Thus Dr. M. William, Executive Secretary of IUPAC wrote:
–I was most interested to receive the Maiden Issue of the NAPRECA
Newsletter and to learn that the Network arose from the IUPAC symposium held

in Poland in July 1984–J.I. Okogun of the Chemistry Department of Ibadan University, Nigeria
wrote:NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
221Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.–the Newsletter serves its purpose to inform us all on developments in the area
of natural products.We also welcomed criticisms
Šsuch as the one by the botanist Tewolde
B.G. Egziabher, then President of Asmara University, who wrote:
There were some spelling errors in the maiden issue
– similar errors should be
avoided in the future
– I suggest that you check the spelling of every scientific
name before you print. Even if you feel you know the scientific name very well,

it is worth checking each name routinely every time.
The suggestions and criticisms of our readership greatly contributed to
sustaining the Newsletter for 12 years. Four years ago NAPRECA began

publishing a series of monographs, the first of which was a NAPRECA Year-

Book, entitled 
Eight Years of Existence and Four Years of Intensive Activities
, Z.Asfaw (Ed.), 1992.
Administration of Postgraduate Scholarship Program
A postgraduate scholarship program was born during a visit by the German
Academic Exchange Service (Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst, DAAD)

delegation to Addis Ababa in October 1987. A conference for former DAAD

fellows was taking place and on one evening during that conference, I happened

to sit beside Mr. Richard Jacob, who then headed the Africa desk of DAAD in

Bonn. I commented that international organizations like DAAD rarely support

initiatives at local levels and that such organizations more often follow the top-

down approach. I continued to narrate the story of NAPRECA and how much we

would have appreciated it if some DAAD scholarships could have been

administered by the network for the purpose of training the young in the natural
products field. He suggested that, if we submitted a convincing proposal, his
organization would offer the network five scholarships per year.
In March of 1988, the German ambassador to Ethiopia, His Excellency Dr.
Kurt Stoeckle, personally brought to the Faculty of Science a letter signed by Dr.

Berchem, President of DAAD, declaring the award of five scholarships to

NAPRECA. Since then, NAPRECA has received a similar letter from the

President of DAAD every year.
In this DAAD-NAPRECA scholarship program NAPRECA is responsible
for selecting the candidates, who must enroll in a postgraduate program in a

university outside of their own country. DAAD scholarships cover tuition,

research costs, and subsistence allowances of the fellows in universities in the

sub-region. The cost of the scholarship per student per annum varies from country

to country but is within the range of six to seven thousand U.S. dollars. The first

beneficiariesNAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
222Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.were two Ethiopians who, in September 1988, joined the MSc program of the
University of Nairobi and three Kenyans who came to Addis Ababa to join

postgraduate programs in biology and chemistry. A total of 39 scholarships have

so far been awarded to selected individuals. Of these, 15 have completed their

MSc studies; eight, including two PhD candidates, discontinued or were

dismissed on academic grounds; and 16 are still pursuing their studies.
A follow-up conference was organized in cooperation with DAAD in
November 1993. Former fellows were invited to interact with their peers and

former instructors. Despite the problems, briefly dealt with in Section 5, we faced

in implementing this program, we are of the opinion that the DAAD-NAPRECA

fellowship program was one of the most rewarding offshoots of the network.
Implementing the Exchange of Researchers Scheme
In an early issue of the NAPRECA Newsletter, we described the problems
faced by African scientists as:
"Isolation, lack of contact with each other as well as with peers elsewhere,
absence of conducive atmosphere of research, coupled with meager resources
–"We thought that an Exchange Scheme might be one of the best remedies of
these ills. NAPRECA, therefore, invested considerable energy and resources in

implementing this scheme, thanks in particular to the financial support of two

organizations, UNESCO and IPICS. Many junior as well as senior scientists have

benefited from this scheme.
Under the Exchange Scheme, a selected fellow is granted the opportunity to
spend a month or two in a laboratory within the sub-region. Preference is given to

candidates who are able to find funds for travel and then the research and

subsistence expenses are covered by NAPRECA. So far 32 individuals have

benefited from the exchange, with an average stay of one and half months in a

regional laboratory. (See 
Box 2.)Organizing the Natural Products Summer School
One of the regular activities of NAPRECA is the organization and
implementation of Natural Products Summer Schools. Six Summer Schools were

organized between 1988 and 1994. The main aim of the Summer School is to

enhance the research capabilities of participants, in particular in

chromatographic, spectroscopic, and bioassay techniques. Research scientists and

technical assistants working for various institutions in the region have used the

opportunity to improve upon their laboratory skills. Usually about a dozen
participants take part in the Summer School; half of these come from outside the
country where the program takes place.
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
223Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2 BENEFITS OF THE EXCHANGE SCHEME
One of the recent participants in the Exchange of Researchers program
was Ildephonse Murengezi, Chairman of NAPRECA-Rwanda. Our efforts to
locate him after the tragic events in that country led us to the refugee camp in

Goma on the border to Zaire. At the beginning of 1995, as soon as the Ethiopian
Airlines resumed flights to Kigali, we sent him a ticket and invited him to come to
Addis Ababa as an Exchange Fellow, where he stayed for six months working in a

natural products laboratory [See NAPRECA Newsletter, Vol. 12, No. 1]
Each Summer School was rated highly by the participants. Particularly those
researchers who had little or no exposure to modern research settings have found
this program highly beneficial.
Natural Products Symposia
As the NAPRECA concept got off the ground in an IUPAC Symposium on
Natural Products, it is only natural for the network to pay special attention to
organizing similar conferences in Africa. So far six natural products symposia

have been organized in the five member countries.
The first symposium was indeed a modest one, convened immediately after
the first meeting of the Coordinating Board in March 1988. No book of abstracts

came out of that event. As our Kenyan colleagues were very keen about

organizing a conference, the second was held quickly thereafter in Nairobi in

September 1988. Sixteen participants came from outside of Kenya to the second

symposium. We published a booklet with nearly 20 brief abstracts in advance of

the symposium. We included pictures of the speakers at the end of the book, a

feature that has been kept in subsequent symposia booklets.
The third symposium was held in Arusha, Tanzania, in May 1989. It drew
over 40 participants from outside of the host country and the local organizers
were able to publish an impressive book of proceedings, with 22 full papers and

nearly as many abstracts. The Arusha symposium set a high standard not only in

terms of the quality of the scientific presentations but also in the excellent way in

which it was organized.
In the Third Coordinating Board meeting that took place in Arusha, we
agreed to organize subsequent symposia every two years. That led to the fourth
symposium in Addis Ababa, in December 1991. The increased number of papers

required, for the first time, the holding of parallel sessions. The Symposium

Book, published prior to the conference, was of high quality with 28 papers

appearing as extended abstracts. In retrospect that was indeed a good decision.

The preparation of conference proceedings is a thankless job, because it is done

after the event is over. Extended abstracts published in advance of the

conference, make it easier to
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
224Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.put pressure on participants to submit papers of reasonable standard. This has
made the NAPRECA Symposium Extended Abstracts frequently cited sources of

information.The fifth symposium held in Antananarivo, Madagascar, in September
1993, enabled a large contingent of researchers from South Africa to participate

for the first time in a NAPRECA activity. Prior to this meeting, it was not

possible for scientists from South Africa to mingle with their counterparts from

other African countries. Nearly a dozen well known South African scientists

came to the symposium and this had an impact on the quality of the oral as well
as poster presentations. It was humorous to hear a South African professor say at
the beginning of his lecture that he was extremely pleased because he was "for

the first time in Africa." As Madagascar was a Francophone country there were

several participants who came from Francophone Africa and France, and one

parallel session was dominated by papers presented in French.
The sixth symposium that took place in Kampala, Uganda, in September
1995. This symposium attracted about 80 participants who came from various

countries in Africa, Europe and North America. The scientific meeting covered

12 general and 28 parallel session lectures, as well as 32 poster presentations. A

book of extended abstracts was published and distributed at the opening session

of the symposium. Three pre-symposium short courses on Nuclear Magnetic

Resonance (NMR), Mass Spectrometry, and Organic Synthesis were held at the
same venue. The courses were designed to upgrade the skills of young
researchers in applying or interpreting the results of these modern techniques in

their own research. A total of 27 participants coming from seven African

countries participated in the three short courses.
Participants' assessments of the symposium were very positive and some
were unreserved with their kind words of praise.
"–The very successfully organized NAPRECA's sixth symposium was an event
that one would wish to witness again
–"wrote Gizachew Alemayehu, Ethiopia.
A leading natural products chemist, Joe Connolly, Glasgow, UK,
commented:"–Congratulations for the excellently organized NAPRECA's sixth symposium
and the pre-symposium short courses
–It was great to be in Kampala with your
team."I realize how far-reaching the impact of these symposia are when a Kenyan
colleague who was sitting next to me during a session in the sixth symposium

pointed to a group of scientists from Europe, and said:
"These people did not take us seriously when we started holding such
conferences in Africa some years back, but now they listen to us attentively
when we make scientific presentations."
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
225Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Training Workshops
NAPRECA has organized four major training programs so far. The first was
the IFS-NAPRECA Workshop on NMR Techniques, which took place in Addis

Ababa in December 1991. NMR is one of the most useful methods in structure

elucidation of substances isolated from plants. It is also one of those techniques

that develops by leaps and bounds and it is therefore of paramount importance for a

chemist to keep abreast of these changes.
IFS and NAPRECA held a symposium on bioassay methods in
Antananarivo, Madagascar in September, 1993, as a pre-symposium program.

The focus of the program was on ways to screen substances for anti-malarial

activity. IFS support ensured that several participants could come from several

countries in the region.
Another two month program, held from April to June 1993, was a training
workshop on herbarium techniques, which was organized in cooperation with the

National Herbarium in Addis Ababa. As plants are the major sources of natural

products, their identification and documentation is of great importance for natural

products research. This program was designed for technicians who work in

herbaria of the region. It included lectures and practicals on botany and related

disciplines.The fourth in this series was a training program on glass blowing techniques
which was held in Uganda in January 1995. The instructor was Mr. Wodajie

Imru, senior glass blower of the Chemistry Department, Addis Ababa University.

All the 12 trainees were glass blowers serving in various research and academic

institutions in Uganda. This program speaks for the need to improve skills of

research support staff. (See 
Box 3.)Coordination of the UNESCO's Botany 2000 program
The Director General of UNESCO launched an initiative called Botany
2000, which is basically an interdisciplinary program that attempts to link three

disciplines, namely botany, chemistry, and pharmacology. NAPRECA was

designated to take the lead in coordinating the Africa Botany 2000 program. As

part of that activity, NAPRECA organized a training program for Herbarium

Technicians, supported
BOX 3 CO-FUNDING OPPORTUNITIES
Funding from one agency often opens the door for funding from another.
For example, in the first training workshop, a grant from DAAD enabled us to

bring a topnotch NMR specialist, Dr. S. Berger, to lead the one week intensive
workshop. IFS made it possible to bring some of the leading natural products
researchers of Africa, selected on the basis of their scientific output.
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
226Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.activities in documenting rare and endangered plant species of Africa, and
supported exchange programs that fall within the scope of Botany 2000.
RESULTS, IMPACTS, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Many research groups in Africa and indeed in many other parts of the world
are engaged in the isolation, characterization, and evaluation of the biological

activities of natural products occurring in plants and animals of African origin.

Currently, most of the studies on natural products from African plants and

animals are conducted by research groups based in Europe and North America,

cooperating in some cases with groups in African universities and research

institutions. Consequently, most of the scientific papers describing the output of
such work appear in scholarly journals published outside of Africa. In too many
cases researchers in the country where the plant material of the research

originated are not fully aware of the research results.
It is important to follow the literature in the field to know more about our
own resources and take measures for their sustainable use. Following progress in

the field, is also of paramount importance to ensure that the country of origin

shares in the benefits resulting from the use of natural products discovered from

African plants and animals.
There are many international natural products chemistry journals that deal
with plant constituents and their biological activities. Of these, the three with

wide international coverage are: 
Journal of Natural Products, Planta Medica, 
andPhytochemistry. These journals frequently publish research results on the study
of the constituents of African plants. We therefore dedicate one regular column in

the NAPRECA Newsletter to list all those papers on African plants that appear in

these journals. The column attracts the attention of many researchers whose
libraries do not subscribe to these journals.
A compilation of the information in this column in the period 1984
Œ1994now forms the basis of a database. In the three journals, we found nearly 1,000

articles dealing with either the chemistry, biology, or pharmacology of plants

collected from different parts of Africa. The full details of this database are now

published in Monograph Series No. 8.
In the 1,000 articles various types of compound classes are reported from the
African plants such as alkaloids, anthraquinones, flavonoids, and steroids. In

terms of utility of the products, anti-cancer, anti-fungal, anti-bacterial, anti-

malarial, anti-feedant and molluscicidal activities are by far the most prominent.

Over 56 papers give chemotaxonomy as a significant outcome of the studies and

29 deal with the culturally and commercially important essential oil bearing

plants of Africa.
The limitation of the above mentioned database is obvious, as it is based on
articles in only three international journals covering just an 11 year period.

Nevertheless, it gives an indication on the wealth of information that is coming

out in the field of natural products from Africa. The database could also serve as a

startingNAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
227Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.point in literature surveys on topics of interest to phytochemists and other natural
products researchers interested in investigating African plants for the benefit of

the peoples of Africa and elsewhere.
The publications of NAPRECA amply demonstrate that the network has
achieved some of its objectives to a satisfactory degree. These publications have

turned out to be frequently cited sources of information and ideas. NAPRECA

has helped many researchers break their isolation. The symposia, training

workshops, and summer schools organized by NAPRECA have served as

excellent fora for the exchange of ideas and information. The benefits of all of
these to promote research and development in the field of natural products
research in Africa is obvious.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
The most serious problems facing African networks are a consequence of
poor communication and lack of appreciation for promoting inter-African

contacts. Travel within Africa is indeed very difficult. Slow and undependable

mail systems and poor fax, telephone, and telex connections exacerbate the

problem. Going from one country to another requires the use of expensive air

transport and, in most instances, one also has to take into consideration stringent

visa requirements. There is very little opportunity for African scholars to visit
other countries in the region, and many get unpleasant surprises when the first
travel to another African country. We were taken by surprise when the first

DAAD-NAPRECA fellows from Kenya came to Addis Ababa and spoke of

culture shock and difficulties in adjusting to their new environment.
There is also a great deal of dependence on foreign currency. Fees to
universities and other institutions, hotel bills, and airport taxes have to be paid in

U.S. dollars. Many African scholars are accustomed to the generous travel

arrangements offered by international agencies who organize conferences in or

outside of Africa. NAPRECA could afford no luxuries. For example, a Ugandan

lecturer was sent to Madagascar on a two-month exchange scheme. He returned

home after 10 days because he felt the allowance he was given by NAPRECA

was not sufficient. On another occasion, we secured a round trip air ticket from
the Commonwealth Science Council in the United Kingdom for a senior lecturer
to come to the sixth NAPRECA Symposium in Uganda. He failed to show up at

the conference presumably because the donor did not provide him with per diem

as well. By the time we learned of his decision, it was too late to use the travel

grant.On the other hand, there were several exemplary instances where exchange
fellows did everything possible to sustain themselves with the very little we could

give them in the form of allowance. Mesfin Bogale, an Ethiopian exchange

fellow, wrote the following after his two months research visit to the Institute

Malagache de Recherches Appliqu
Ées (IMRA) in Antananarivo, Madagascar:
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
228Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.–The subsistence and housing allowance given to me was $200 per month. On
this allowance I could not afford to stay even in the cheapest inns in
Antananarivo. Since the guest houses at IMRA were still under construction, the

only option I had was to sleep in a room near the laboratory
–The laboratory
where I stayed had no facility for bathing. I could wash my hair in the laboratory
sink. But I had to wash my body on the floor using buckets of water and mop the
floor at the end.
During his stay in Antananarivo, Bogale tested forty-five samples for their
antimalarial activity. The samples he found active were further tested for other

kinds of activities. He wrote:
''The laboratory facilities and the working conditions are very good. This
research visit to IMRA enabled me to complete my thesis project. In addition it

provided me with a good opportunity to learn more laboratory techniques
–Our experience has shown that organizing programs in Addis Ababa was
much easier. This is because NAPRECA was entitled to use the guest house,

student quarters, laboratory, lecture halls, and other facilities of the Addis Ababa

University. Consequently many of the Summer School and Exchange of

Researchers programs took place in Addis Ababa.
Network programs thrive on a give and take basis. One is a host at one time
and a guest at another. He who gives in one round receives in another, and he

who responds to a request at one moment also gets a response to his call in time

of need. If we set aside the problems, network activities bring to all those

participating many moments of joy and satisfaction. For me the most rewarding

experience is the feeling of being at home whenever I am in any one of the

NAPRECA member countries.Looking back to the formative years of the network, just as there were
moments of success, there were equally many instances of frustration and

setbacks. The unprecedented tragic events in Rwanda, where many of our

colleagues lost their lives or were forced to flee their country, is by far the worst

of these setbacks.
Despite the above problems, it is gratifying for NAPRECA, in the words of
Prof. P.J.M. Ssebuwufu, Vice Chancellor of Makerere University, to have

"developed into an organization which has achieved a deservedly notable prestige

within and outside of Africa." Equally uplifting are the kind words of the Nobel

Laureate and President of the International Organization of Chemistry for

Development (IOCD), Jean-Marie Lehn, who made the following remark while

announcing a travel grant for participants of the sixth Symposium, "We believe

support given to NAPRECA and its programs can multiply the impact of our

modest contribution considerably since NAPRECA is a truly indigenous action

among natural products chemists in Africa."
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
229Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The present office bearers of NAPRECA, E. Dagne, B.M. Abegaz, and H.
Guadey of Addis Ababa University have served the network for the

constitutionally allowable two terms since 1988. The 8
th 
NAPRECA Coordinating
Board meeting held in September 1995 in Kampala, Uganda, elected for a four-

year term Drs. M.H.H. Nkunya and M.A. Kishimba of the Chemistry

Department, University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, as Executive Secretary and
Assistant Secretary/Treasurer, respectively. We believe, that the most important
task of the new officers is to ensure the continuity of the network by not only

maintaining the current tempo but also meeting new challenges and adding more

dimensions to its activities while leading it into the 21
st century.Jack Canon, the Australian scientist closely associated with NAPRECA
since its inception, reflected as follows on the challenges ahead:
"–You are certainly handing on a very smoothly running organization to
Tanzania and, as NAPRECA has now achieved a 'critical mass' of first class
research workers I am sure that it will continue to flourish. I think that it is a

reflection of the strength of NAPRECA and the goodwill existing between its
members that it has been able to cope with the tragic madness which took place
in Rwanda. I am sure NAPRECA will be able to help re-establish research in
that country when full peace finally returns
–"There are also many other issues facing NAPRECA. In light of the improved
email facilities in the region and possible Internet connectivity of several of the

member countries in the near future, the new challenge for NAPRECA will be to

tap these opportunities to advance networking among its membership and to

provide them with vital information services.
For some of us, what we have achieved in the last decade is like a dream
come true. I have witnessed that a handful of dedicated individuals can make an

impact if they are committed to a cause. The concept of NAPRECA thrives

because there are individuals who devote their time and energy for the

accomplishment of the Network's ideals. We in NAPRECA have also learned the

important lesson that we can make meaningful contributions to our respective

nations, and to the sub-region at large, only if we pool together our meager

resources for solving our common problems.
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
230Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES1. The Africans in attendance were: J.A. Ogur, Chemistry Department, University of Nairobi; M.
Gundidza of the University of Zimbabwe; A. Taha and M. Younis from Sudan; N. Matos from
Mozambique; and myself. Matos was, at the time, a Ph.D. student in Humboldt University, East

Berlin. He is now the Director of the Association of African Universities which has its

headquarters in Accra, Ghana.
2. It is interesting to note that colleagues in Cameroon and Ghana tried to establish a parallel
West African network. Despite support from UNESCO and a founding meeting held in Ghana
during the IFS and Kumasi University-sponsored scientific meeting in September 1990, the
NAPRECA parallel network failed to take off.
3. Hailu Guadey was the first Ethiopian to get a University degree in chemistry, BSc (McGill
University, Canada, 1950) and MSc (Howard University, U.S.A., 1959). He was assistant

minister of health in the Haile Selassie regime and was retired in 1974 when that government was

overthrown. He was then employed by NAPRECA as a program officer.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSFinally, it is only fair to conclude this brief account by paying tribute to all
colleagues and friends in the region and elsewhere in the world who have

supported our efforts to make NAPRECA a successful venture. Special gratitude

is also due to the donor agencies
Šin particular to SAREC (Swedish Agency for
Research Co-operation with Developing Countries), UNESCO, DAAD, IPICS,

IFS, TWAS, and IOCD who provided generous support for implementing

NAPRECA's activities and programs.
NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
231Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAPRECA AND ITS ROLE IN THE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON
NATURAL PRODUCTS RESEARCH IN AFRICA
232Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Socioeconomic Development Information
System for Botswana
by Stella Monageng
Stella Monageng is the Senior Documentalist at the National
Institute of Development Research and Documentation at the

University of Botswana. She has wide experience in the

development and management of computerized databases and

has been working in this area of expertise since 1983 
. 
 
 BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
This case study describes my experiences in developing databases at the
National Institute of Development Research and Documentation (NIR) of the

University of Botswana. I will discuss a project entitled Development Sciences

Information System for Botswana (DEVSIS-Botswana), which is the system we

created to facilitate the collection, organization, and dissemination of Botswana's

socioeconomic development information.
DEVSIS is a project that dates back to the mid-1970s, when a number of
international agencies, including the International Development Research Centre

(IDRC) of Canada, established a system that would help meet the information

needs of planners and decision-makers responsible for economic and social

development planning. The concept was never implemented as the global scheme

that had been envisaged. Instead, a number of national and regional development

information systems evolved out of the program. DEVSIS-Botswana is one

example of such a national information system. In collaboration with the Pan

African Development Information System (PADIS), the NIR launched our

project in May 1984 with the financial assistance of IDRC.
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA233
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Institute of Development Research and
Documentation (NIR)
The NIR was established in 1975 as a documentation center. In 1978, it
added a research component. Its objectives are to:
a) Coordinate and conduct research on issues of socioeconomic and
environmental development affecting Botswana;
b) Develop the national research capacity within Botswana; and
c) Publish and disseminate the results of the research conducted.
The research activities focus on agriculture and rural development;
education; environment; health and nutrition; Basarwa
1; and women and gender
issues.The Documentation Unit of the NIR implemented the project. The Unit was
established in 1975 and later developed into the present research institute. Its

main objective is to collect, process, and disseminate unpublished or grey

literature on or about Botswana. The Documentation Unit has a library through

which the information that is collected and processed is disseminated.
The Documentation Unit and its library deliver the following products,
technologies, and services:   Reference Service 
through which we assist users in accessing the library's
computerized databases.
   Selective Dissemination of Information 
through which we offer a current
awareness service to the Institute's researchers through their research

interest profiles.
   Newspaper Clipping Service 
through which we clip and file key articles
falling within the research areas of the Institute.
   Referral Service 
that links NIR with other major information centers such
as the National Library National Reference Collection, the University of

Botswana Library Botswana Collection, and several Government

department libraries.   Photocopying Service
, which is provided for a fee. This service is not only
used locally but is also used by a lot of researchers from outside Botswana.
   Computerized Databases 
maintained by the library, the first of which was
set up in 1986. Until quite recently, when the University of Botswana

Library computerized its operations, the NIR Library was the only one with

a computerized information system. This attracted a lot of researchers

because it made retrieval time shorter and helped to inform the users

whether or not certain information was available.
   Devindex-Botswana, which is an output of the computerized databases.
Documents are collected, cataloged, abstracted, and indexed and then input

into the computer. When a reasonable number of these have been

processed, an index is produced.
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA234
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Technologies used include: electronic mail, through HealthNet and
Internet; Facsimile; and CD-ROM. The Documentation Unit has been

selected as a POPLINE site for Botswana and will therefore have the

POPLINE CD-ROM database.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONHistory of the Project
In 1981/1982 many information professionals were trying to establish an
information system called the Southern African Documentation and Information

System (SADIS). The envisaged aim of the system was to assist countries in the

region to build up their information infrastructures as a basis for a coordinated
regional information system. Unfortunately, the system never got off the ground.
Botswana, however, through the initiative of the NIR, decided to set up its
own socioeconomic development information system. We approached PADIS for

assistance in computerizing our documentation system and also in acquiring

funding for the exercise. The NIR circulated a proposal among various

government ministries for comments and suggestions. The responses received
were so positive that the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning
approved the proposal and agreed to submit it to IDRC for funding.
NIR decided to maintain the momentum started by the SADIS efforts for
several reasons. First, we realized that the situation regarding the documentation

of Botswana's socioeconomic development was far from satisfactory; much

development information was generated but it was ending up in very inaccessible
places. We also found it necessary to establish such a system so that Botswana
could benefit from development information available in other countries. (See

Box 1.)Objectives of the Project
The principal objectives of the project were to organize the national
economic and social development information in support of the planning process

in Botswana and to strengthen Botswana's capacity to participate in the regional
PADIS network and in the proposed SADIS program. The specific objectives of
the project were to:
a) Collect, organize and disseminate Botswana's national information
and documentation related to its economic and social development;
b) Participate in the regional PADIS network;
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA235
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.c) Train staff in the organization and operation of a specialized
document center; and
d) Determine the computer equipment, staff and training that would be
needed in order for NIR to carry out its mandate as the primary

national focal point for all information and documentation in the

country and to prepare for it to participate in regional networks such

as SADIS and PADIS.
BOX 1 DEVSIS SOLVES INFORMATION PROBLEMS
When we were making efforts to establish SADIS, the Government of
Botswana also decided to focus its development efforts on the communal
areas; that is, those areas where land tenure and resource management still
follow the traditional communal pattern. There was a feeling that the problems

of effecting meaningful, self-sustaining improvements in the standard of living in
the communal areas were among the most intractable Botswana faced. The
Government's wanted to tackle these problems by driving for development in
these areas but they recognized that their efforts would be hampered if they
were unable to take advantage of the wealth of information that already existed.

DEVISŠBotswana was the perfect way to confront their concern.
Another objective of the project, although unstated, was to gauge the volume
of socioeconomic information being generated on or about Botswana each year.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Devindex - Botswana
Soon after the project began, the Project Coordinator, who had actually been
involved in the conception and design of the project, had to leave NIR. I had to

take over the day-to-day management of the project because identifying another

project coordinator would have delayed implementation. My initial role was

technical coordinator and I was responsible for abstracting and indexing

documents and checking on the quality of cataloging.
DEVSIS-Botswana was conceived as a national project to collect, organize,
and disseminate information related to Botswana's economic and social

development. Unfortunately, we lost track of this objective somewhat as we

implemented the project. For example, throughout the project implementation

period, there was no contact with the Government ministries nor with other

institutions that had been consulted when the project proposal was prepared. The

project, therefore, was generally regarded as an NIR one and not as the
collaborative effort that it had
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA236
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.been intended to be. We lost the potential national support that had been promised
at the initial stage.
I should, however, point out that there was no deliberate decision on the part
of NIR to exclude other important partners. We were very much conscious of this

fact but the implementation schedule of the project was such that we had to give

priority to the production of a printed version of 
DEVINDEX-Botswana. Becauseof this production schedule, there was also little time to focus on identifying new

information sources for the proposed database. We therefore had to reprocess the

documents already available in the library.
When the project started in 1984 nobody knew anything about operating a
computer. No software had been identified for the proposed database. The reason

for this, however, was that it had been decided that the computer processing of

data would be done in PADIS and this had seemed feasible until the

implementation of the project. The library was already using its own manual

information processing and retrieval system, which was tedious but very
appropriate for the collection. The form we used for information processing was
simple but adequate for our purposes. However, processing documents for the

PADIS database required that we use different and more complicated information

processing methodologies designed by PADIS. This caused long delays in the

processing of documents. We did not realize until much later that the delays were

not being caused by the methodologies we were using but because we were using

two methodologies simultaneously. The situation changed when we decided to

adapt the PADIS methodologies to suit our internal operations.
PADIS sent one of its indexers/abstractors for three weeks to assist in the
manual processing of the documents. His stay was very valuable since we did not

have any experience with processing information for a computer-based system.

The input sheets were then sent to PADIS for entry into the computer and

eventually to IDRC for the production of the first 
DEVINDEX-Botswana. Theensuing issues of the index were to be a collaborative effort between NIR and

PADIS. This arrangement had some practical problems and it was eventually
decided that NIR should do the best that it could. After a lot of trial and error, two
more indexes were produced. To date, six issues of this index have been

produced. In a way, however, this trial and error provided good training.
The information in the six indexes was not selective. Everything on
Botswana that had been processed over a particular period was included.

Initially, there was no problem with this since the collection was small but, during

the production of the sixth issue, it became clear that some criteria were necessary

for selecting what should be included in the index. The problem was not only the

size of the index but the cost of its eventual distribution. It turned out that the
problem was that the index was rather general in terms of subject coverage and
this made it difficult for us to target specific audiences.
In retrospect the manual processing of documents should have been followed
by the creation of a computerized database at NIR and the actual production of
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA237
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.printed indexes. This would have provided a practical training program that
would have included everybody in the Documentation Unit and would have

helped us avoid the number of problems that we experienced. It was not,

however, until 1987 that the first library database was created at NIR.
Specialized Databases
Research institutions and information centers tend to be subject-specific.
There are of course, big libraries in America, England, and Europe that are

interested in all the information about a country, but these are very few compared

to the subject-specific ones. I decided that the main library's bibliographic

database should be structured to enable us to produce specialized indexes and
bibliographies according to the focus areas of NIR: agriculture; education;
environment; health and nutrition; rural development; and women and gender

issues.This does not, however, mean that there are six different databases: instead,
there is one comprehensive database, subdivided by codes. I find this system

good because searching can be done on one database or across different subject

areas. The actual production of specialized indexes or bibliographies can be

subject-specific. This not only makes networking more effective but makes

marketing of the products a lot easier. 
DEVINDEX-Botswana will, however,
continue to be produced containing information about Botswana that does not fall
within the specified areas. My experience with the specialized databases shows

that there will still be some overlap.
The Meetings Database
The main purpose of this database was to collect information on forthcoming
meetings, conferences, seminars, and workshops and to disseminate this

information to users. The database focuses on meetings taking place outside

Botswana because the information about these is available through journals,

magazines, and newsletters that NIR receives. One problem we face is that the

information often reaches NIR very late and users do not have enough time to
register their interest or, more importantly, arrange for funding. The information
collected, however, still serves a useful purpose. Because we knew what

meetings are taking place, we are able to ask for reports of those meetings.

Electronic mail should make it possible for information to be obtained as soon as

it becomes available.
Newspaper Clippings Database
The Documentation Unit provides a newspaper clippings service. When the
service started, about ten years ago, articles found relevant were clipped and then
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA238
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.stored in folders, where they were seldom used. I decided that each newspaper
article should be entered into the computer to facilitate immediate and easy

access and to make it possible for one article to be used for different purposes.
BOX 2 SECONDARY INFORMATION SOURCES
It is worth noting that a lot of libraries and documentation centers do not
seem to appreciate the very important role that newspaper cuttings play as a
supplementary source of information, particularly in developing countries where
research has a very recent history.
A good example is that of AIDS, where an analysis of the issue can be made
from a variety of angles: AIDS and Women; AIDS and Youth; or AIDS in

Botswana. Computerizing the newspaper article collection has put more emphasis

on easier and quicker retrieval of information. This is actually an easy income-

generating activity since a lot of articles are requested through the photocopying

service. (See Box 2.)Mailing List Database
For a long time the library maintained a mailing list of all the institutions
with which it had any links. The main purpose of the mailing list, however, was

for exchanging information and, particularly, distributing the Institutes'

publications. The system used was a manual one, which was effective but very

tedious and time-consuming. The only way that this information could be

retrieved was by name of institution.
A proper mailing list is a very important management tool that many
organizations tend to take for granted. I came to appreciate this only after I had

computerized the library database using Micro CDS/ISIS. In its computerized

form, it is now possible to retrieve only those institutions or individuals that

should receive the NIR's publications list, for instance. It is also possible to

retrieve names of institutions and/or individuals that should receive certain

publications free of charge or only information about the availability of those
publications, so that they can decide to order.
One of our researchers had travelled overseas and desperately needed a list
of institutions with which we had exchanged agreements within the area of

health. It was possible to provide this information in the shortest time possible

because the database is structured in such a way that the computer can pull out

first those institutions with whom we have an exchange agreement with and then

narrow down the selection to the relevant subject area.
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA239
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Impact of the DEVSIS-Botswana on the Documentation Unit
The Documentation Unit felt the most immediate effect of DEVIS. Before
the project, we used a card catalog that was very tedious
Šfrom the production of
the cards to their management after they had been filed. No longer do we type the

cataloging information onto a stencil that then has to be reproduced elsewhere.

Of course, the list of possible tasks that always took priority over the production
of the cards was endless and all too often the machine was out of order. No
longer do we go through the most tedious exercise of filing the cards. Since we

were using a controlled vocabulary, we had to update the cards every time the

thesaurus was changed or updated. The automated database relieves us from all

of these clerical chores. The information can be easily updated and we can

concentrate on providing quality services to our users.
Impact of the DEVSIS-Botswana Project Outside the Institute
The impact of the project outside the NIR Documentation Unit can be
judged by the number of requests for assistance with database development that

we have been receiving and continue to receive. The following are excerpts from

some of these requests:
In terms of computerization, our center has acquired the necessary hardware and
chosen Micro CDS/ISIS software. I believe your documentation center uses this
software and therefore offers the best prospects for attachment training
– The
training program that we have in mind is one that can provide: a) an
understanding of the database concepts, and expose participants to the skills
required for the design and implementation of a database management system;
and b) skills in analyzing, designing and implementing computer based
information systems.'' (National Council for Scientific Research, Lusaka,

Zambia, 1988)

Mr. M has recently attended a short course on Improving the Effectiveness of
Small Libraries and Information Centers held at the University of Botswana,
where among other things he was introduced to CDS/ISIS software and PADIS

methodologies. From his report on the course, we are made to understand that
the National Institute of Development Research and Documentation of the
University of Botswana is one of the best and most successful national
information centers within the PADIS. It is in this regard that we would
appreciate it if you can arrange for a study visit to enable Mr. M to gain

practical experience on the application
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA240
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of various techniques of information handling, storage, retrieval, and
dissemination. (The Institute of Finance Management, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania,
1990)I would like to take advantage of my contact leave to come and visit your
Documentation Center, and have a first-hand practical experience with your
newspaper indexing project. (Mr. E.R.T. Chiware, Periodicals Librarian,

University of Zimbabwe Library, 1991)
The University of Bophuthatswana is in the process of setting up a
documentation center. I, therefore, wish to send two professional librarians, to

study your setup, especially the organization/processing of materials. (University
Librarian, University of Bophuthatswana Library, 1993)
2Through Professor Heywood I heard about your computerization project and
DEVSIS-Botswana, and I am greatly interested in paying you a visit to study
your work in this regard. (Director of the National Archives of Namibia, 1991)
The above are only samples of the many requests that we have received. As
can be seen from excerpts, however, the requests come from a variety of
countries and institutions. This, in my opinion, is a clear indication of the impact

that the project has had outside NIR. I would like to point out that, unfortunately,

it has not been possible for us to satisfy these requests due to staff constraints.

Attachment programs require a lot of time for participants to get the maximum

benefit out of them. We have, however, had some people spend one to three

months with us learning the processing and management of unpublished literature

through the use of micro CDS/ISIS.
ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Project activities should be integrated into the normal activities of the
organization. This has implications on the type of organization selected to
undertake a project such as DEVSIS-Botswana. I believe that whatever amount

of success that NIR may boast about is due to the fact that we did not have to

deviate a lot from our normal tasks in order to accommodate the project

activities.If, as was the case with the DEVSIS-Botswana project, immediate results are
expected, professional and experienced staff should be employed. In the case of
the DEVSIS-Botswana, the aim was not only to obtain immediate results, but also

to strengthen the staffing situation.
The schedule that we actually followed when implementing DEVIS-
Botswana was neither efficient nor effective. It was dictated more by

circumstance than by
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA241
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.design. If I was able to start over again, I would definitely follow a schedule that
looked more like the following:
1. Employment and orientation of a professional librarian who will be
responsible for database management.
2. Training of the professional Librarian for about three months in
computers and database management. The latter should include

thorough training in abstracting and indexing since these are very

important skills for a database manager.
3. Familiarization visit to PADIS by the Project and Technical
Coordinators. The Project Coordinator should always be someone

who was involved in the initial designing of the project. The

Technical Coordinator is responsible for abstracting and indexing of

documents.4. Putting a network in place for purposes of identifying information
sources. The sources should not only be for printed documents, but

also for information about research activities taking place. This way,

we would have ended up with two types of databases
Šabibliographic one and a research inventory database. I found that

simply tracking hard documents misses out on getting to know who

the real information generators are.
5. Collecting documents that will be processed for the project.

6. Employment of support staff, including a Data Entry Clerk. It is very
important that the latter be employed at the beginning of the project

so that data entry is given full-time attention. The mistake that NIR

made was to depend on the secretarial staff of the Institute who

always had other tasks to take care of and also never really got to
learn the library software since they did not use it all the time.
7. Training of the project staff in basic computer skills and PADIS
methodologies by PADIS.
8. Processing of documents and entering data in the computer.

9. Publicizing the project, including organizing seminars for potential
partners and policy makers and working with the press.
10. At this stage the database manager should be back from training and
can start checking on the data entered.
11. Production of printed outputs, which would include not only one
index but also some specialized bibliographies. A conscientious

document collection exercise should result in a big enough collection

to facilitate this. Two research directories would also be produced;

one on ongoing and completed research and another on research

institutions. The advantage of leaving the production of printed

outputs until the very end is that there will be very little editing to be
done.Another lesson to learn is not to allow or encourage the development of
bibliographical databases independently of the ones that have been created by the
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA242
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.library or documentation center. Work can be subcontracted to individuals to set
up these databases but the information should always be transferred to the main

database. (See Box 3
.)BOX 3 LOST INFORMATION
This mistake was made at NIR: a few databases were created as special
projects. Information was entered in computers outside the library and no
arrangements made to transfer this information back to the library. The result
was that, for a number of reasons, these databases disappeared and a lot of
valuable information was therefore lost. This was unfortunate because the
program that is used for the development of databases in the Institute has

facilities for merging different databases.
The NIR also embarked on a research program to build a database on
whatever documentation was available on the Basarwa (bushmen). I succeeded in

making this part of the existing library database. The good thing that came out of

this negotiation is that this information is not only used for the Basarwa research

program but is also used for research on the remote area development program

that is intended for disadvantaged communities, including the Basarwa/San.
This helps prove that, once information has been collected and processed, it
cannot and should not be compartmentalized. It cannot be argued that because a

database is developed on environmental issues, it will only be of interest to

environmental researchers. For example, I set up a database on energy up for the

African Energy Policy Research Network
. As I processed documents for this
database, I noted the close relationship between energy and environment.

Fortunately, I had already negotiated that the database be done as part of the

existing library database. I have tried as much as possible to check how often the

information from this database is used by other researchers outside the energy

field and there is a strong indication that merging the two databases was the best

decision.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In conclusion, I would like to recommend the adoption of the Basarwa
Database/Bibliography as a model database development project for two reasons.
First, the Documentation Unit was fully involved in the project from the

beginningŠeven though it had been conceived elsewhere. Second, this project
includes the following "main ingredients" of a database development project.
Pre-Project Consultations Among Potential Project
ParticipantsThe idea of the project came from Professor Sidsel Saugestad, Research
Facilitator for the Remote Area Development Program (RADP). The NIR

Director,A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA243
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.various officers at the Ministry of Local Government, Lands and Housing, other
individuals interested in the Basarwa issues, and I all consulted on the project. I

was involved to ensure that all the technical aspects were taken care of at the

beginning. It was very important that the Ministry was involved so that the

necessary link between NIR and Government could be established at the very

beginning.Collection of Documents for the Database
A research assistant was employed to go through the NIR library databases
and identify Basarwa-related documents so that they could be re-indexed with the

potential users of the database in mind. The research assistant also visited other

local libraries. Through visits by the research assistant and enquiries from

individuals involved in Basarwa research by Professor Saugestad, we came to

know of the existence of many documents that we would not otherwise have
known about.We are using a very interesting method for collecting documents. We try and
make contacts with researchers who have published widely in the area of the

Basarwa studies and ask them to send us lists of their published and unpublished

works and the actual publications. We have received a number of these lists and

are using them to follow up more documents. The advantage of having these lists
is that we are able to check against what has already been collected and what is
available.Provision of Funding for Production of Abstracts
Very often, organizations realize the need for information on specific
subjects but never seem to realize the need for providing funding to make this

possible. The result is that, through donor funding, databases are developed as

special projects that end as soon as funding is exhausted and printed copies of
those databases have been produced.
For the Basarwa Database, funding for the production of abstracts was
provided. This left me only with the responsibility of checking the technical

aspects of the database and editing the abstracts. Some people may wonder why I

am emphasizing the inclusion of abstracts in a bibliographic database when they

are so demanding to produce. I can only say that it is not until you provide these
that you realize just how important they are to your users.
The availability of funding made it possible for us to be selective in our
choice of abstracters. Mrs. Janet Hermans, an anthropologist with very keen

interest in the Basarwa issues abstracted about 200 documents. Then we hired

Shelagh Willet, an anthropologist and retired librarian. She also collects

Botswana documents for the Library of Congress and therefore has a lot of
experience in collecting grey literature. I therefore recommend that where the
situation allows, a specialist in the field should be employed.
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA244
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Immediate Availability of Documents
One problem we encountered when developing other databases is that
documents located in other organizations but processed by us for the database

were not retrievable by users at a later date. We could produce a fantastic

database but the service falls apart when readers are unable to locate the source

documents. All the documents that are being processed for the Basarwa database

are already available in the NIR Library. These are being consulted by the
researchers in the Basarwa Research Network, university students, government
officials, and the general public.
Formalization and Regularization of the Attachment Program
I gave examples above of the requests we receive for assistance with the
development of databases using micro CDS/ISIS. I would recommend that an

attachment program be formalized and properly and widely publicized so that

other people can benefit from our experience. Judging from the number of

requests from Botswana and outside, there would definitely be enough

participants for the program to run every year.
The program could be structured to provide practical training in information
management and micro CDS/ISIS. This would be a lot cheaper for institutions in

Africa. At the moment, we only take participants from one organization at a time.

This, I feel, is not at all cost-effective. I would recommend that the training be

done for groups of participants so that they can share experiences and learn from

each another.
Our program does not teach participants the basic concepts of computers and
information science; we require that they already have experience in running

their libraries or documentation centers. Instead, we expose them to the various

information services that we provide. We then work with them so that they get to

know the various processes involved in providing those services. Finally, we let

them work on their own like the other staff in the Documentation Unit, but with

very close supervision. That way they get to experience a lot of practical
problems and through the assistance of the staff, find solutions to those problems.
So, in conclusion, I would say that we faced and overcame many problems
in implementing the DEVINDEX-Botswana database project. We have also

managed to produce databases that are very important to our users. The lessons

we learned in this process have been put to good use as we design and implement

additional databases. Although there were a lot of problems during the

implementation stages, in retrospect, they were a very good eye-opener for me.

Dealing with the problems gave me an understanding of indigenous information

management that I would never have had otherwise.
A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA245
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES1. Basarwa is a term used in Botswana for a group of peoples known variously as the Bushmen,
Khoisan or San of Southern Africa, and for the purpose of this case study, this is the term that I
shall use.
2. Bophuthatswana is one of the "states" that was created during the apartheid era in South
Africa.A SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR BOTSWANA246
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEMRI's Management Information System
by James N. Muttunga
James Muttunga is a Senior Research Officer at the Kenyan
Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) and head of their

information systems. He carries out consultancies for research

projects in information management that have been funded by

the Commonwealth Regional Health Community Secretariat.

He is a biostatistician by profession
.BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT
The Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) was established in 1979 by
the Science and Technology Act of Parliament. Its Board of Management is

accountable to the Minister for Research, Science and Technology and it is

primarily funded by the Kenya Government. KEMRI is mandated to conduct

research in the biomedical sciences and its main objectives are to:
   cooperate with the other research organizations and institutions of higher
learning in training programs and in matters of relevant research;
   work with other research bodies within and outside Kenya carrying out
similar research; and
   cooperate with the Ministry of Health, the National Council of Science and
Technology, and the Medical Science Advisory Research Committee in

matters pertaining to research policies and priorities.
The Member Research Centers
KEMRI has about 1,200 staff members, of which about 450 are either
scientists or technical staff. They operate through eight research centers. One is in

Busia (near the Kenya/Uganda border); another is in Kisumu (in the lake Victoria
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM247
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.region). The rest are in Nairobi: four at KEMRI headquarters and two centers
near the Kenyatta National Hospital. The research centers are:
   Alupe Leprosy and Skin Diseases Research Centre (ALSDRC)
   Biomedical Sciences Research Centre (BSRC)
   Clinical Research Centre (CRC)
   Vector Biology and Control Research Centre (VBCRC)
   Virus Research Centre (VRC)
   Centre for Microbiology Research (CMR)
   Medical Research Centre (MRC)
   Traditional Medicines and Drugs Research Centre (TMDRC)
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONIn 1987, KEMRI appointed a team to write a proposal to develop our
management information system (MIS). The team suggested that KEMRI first

embark on a pilot project that would:
   Study and identify KEMRI's data processing needs and requirements;
   Provide some additional hardware to facilitate immediate processing
requirements; and
   Facilitate exchange of knowledge through training visits to institutions with
an operational information management system.
Professor Dean Haynes, then the Deputy Director of the International Center
for Insect Physiology and Ecology, an international research center located in

Nairobi, helped us by identifying consultants who had the relevant experience and

had carried out similar activities. The chosen consultant first reviewed KEMRI's

current inventory of microcomputer hardware and software. The proposal team

then reviewed the training needs for the data processing support staff, the

scientists, and administrative support staff. We interviewed scientific, technical,

and administrative support staff and asked about their present operational

systems, the available resources for information technology, and current needs

for research production.
We also arranged to train two KEMRI scientists at the Tropical Diseases
Research Center at the World Health Organization (TDR/WHO) in Geneva.

There, they were able to familiarize themselves with an operational management

information system. The training program included working visits to each

program and familiarization with the existing techniques for data capture,

automation, and analysis.
We completed the study after about six months and presented the report to
the KEMRI Board of Management for approval. Based on the initial study and

the experience from the training visits, the management board adopted the study

reportKEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM248
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and used its recommendations and identified needs as the basis for a
comprehensive proposal for the development of KEMRI's MIS. The primary

objectives of this project were to improve KEMRI's capability in:
   Data processing and information management, through the acquisition of
relevant hardware and software;
   Literature search services, through online and CD-ROM searches;
   Desktop publishing, through provision of necessary hardware and software;
and   Human resource development, by providing training aimed specifically at
scientific, technical, secretarial, library, clerical, or data entry staff.
The main project proposal underwent a number of revisions and reviews and
was not approved for financial support until the second half of 1991. This project

benefited from the technical input and support of several reviewers and

consultants who shared their opinions, concepts, and understanding with us. The

process was in itself tedious and, at times, was affected by standard bureaucratic

processes resulting in substantial delays in implementation and funding. The main

bottlenecks were mainly due to two factors:
   Lack of adequate information and understanding on the size, magnitude,
and extent of operations at KEMRI on the part of the review teams named

by the potential donors; and
   Inadequate knowledge of microcomputers systems and the costs of these
processes on the part of KEMRI staff.
The hurdles were, however, overcome and the project was finally accepted
and funded by the Carnegie Corporation of New York. The original budgets and

planned activities were, in the end, drastically reduced to facilitate a well-phased

development and implementation schedule. This allowed us to follow the strategy

of implementing the system according to the primary needs of KEMRI and then

building the secondary systems as needed and as resources permitted.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The final project provided five main initial services, which are described in
some detail below.Research Strengthening Support
The study of existing hardware revealed that computer systems of differing
capacities and types had been acquired through assorted project grants. Neither

the various systems nor the software were initially compatible with each other.
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM249
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Board of Management recommended that the equipment acquisition
process be better coordinated in order to identify the necessary systems, select

software that could be supported by the technical staff, and facilitate the

exchange, sharing, and compatibility of all new systems and software. We

therefore adopted a policy of standardizing all microcomputer systems to a

common configuration to facilitate compatibility between machines and the
exchange of data sets and software applications.
The project provided two microcomputer systems in each of the eight
centers and in the secretariat for data management, analysis, and report

preparation by scientific, technical and support staff. We also acquired a dot

matrix printer and an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) for each center. We

strengthened the central computer facilities by acquiring powerful systems that
could support KEMRI's large data management and analysis projects. The project
also installed appropriate software for data management, analysis, graphics, word

processing, utilities, communications, and desktop publishing.
We also stated that all new projects that were expected to have massive data
analysis requirements would have to include funds for the necessary equipment in

their budgets. Thus a number of projects acquired the necessary support systems.

Some of the research programs that benefited from this new policy are listed in

Table 1.TABLE 1 Research Program that Included Acquisition of Computer Equipment
DonorCenters FundedResearch Programs
JICACMR, VRC, CRC,
BSRC, MRC
Filariasis, Schistosomiasis,Hepatitis B, Acute respiratory
infectionsWellcome TrustCRC, VBCRCMalaria
WHO/TDRCRC, VBCRC,
ALSDRCClinical trials, Filariasis,
Malaria, Leprosy, and skin
diseasesRockefeller FoundationCRC, MRCReproductive health

KEMRISecretariatPersonnel, Administration

IDRCMRCPesticide use and health

CDC/Walter Reed
Army HospitalCDC, VBCRCMalariaKEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM250
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 SUDDEN DEPRECIATION
The project suffered a nearly 40 percent loss from the sudden depreciation
of the Kenya shilling against the U.S. dollar during its second year. This problem
has affected all KEMRI projects and has led us to seek authority to run two

external accounts, with one running as a straight U.S. dollar account and the
other as local external account for all projects.
We initially planned to acquire the hardware and software through local
firms that could provide the necessary support and maintenance. We learned,

however, that the prices of these systems
Ševen when ordered duty-free
Šwereexcessively higher than what we had budgeted. We decided on this strategy:

provide, first, the new technologies that were not available directly from the local

dealers. These included the CD-ROM systems for the library and the

communication hardware and all the software applications that we had identified

for use throughout KEMRI.
We acquired the other systems after attending the first meeting of the
network of Carnegie grantees in May 1992. This meeting was organized by the

U.S. National Research Council and held at the African Regional Centre for

Technology (ARCT) in Dakar, Senegal. During the meeting, I learned about

computer manufacturing firms who were selling high quality systems at

competitive prices in the United States
Šthrough a direct-mail order system
Šandwho had already supplied some to ARCT. I used this new contact to order the new

systems at prices comparable to what we had budgeted! (See 
Box 1.)The equipment acquisition process has improved gradually and we have now
identified other dealers who can provide equipment. The sourcing of new

products is presently carried out after soliciting different quotations from a few

international firms.
Documentation and Library Support
The project acquired two microcomputer systems and the hardware
accessories (UPS and dot matrix printer) for use in the library and at the central

computer facility for online literature searches and internal database

development. Two external CD-ROM drives were installed together with Small

Computer System Interface (SCSI) cards and we subscribed to MEDLINE and

POPLINE databases on CD-ROM. These databases formed the core sources for

literature searches performed by scientists at KEMRI. We did learn that the CD-

ROM drives should be dual or multiple drives to improve on easy access and to

minimize ''disc swapping." Many large databases are carried on several discs and

it is quite convenient to be able to search all the discs at one time. This is not

possible in a single drive system.
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM251
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The availability of MEDLINE on CD-ROM provided us with a unique and
unexpected opportunity. For nearly three years we had been trying, without much

success, to provide the Board of Management with a current list of publications

and of research developments from KEMRI's scientists. The scientists had

responded very poorly to our requests for copies of their published papers

because they were unable to provide us with hard copies. We decided, therefore,
to search MEDLINE and POPLINE
Šas well as our own annual medical
proceedingsŠfor information written by our own scientists. We then compiled a
book of abstracts that covers the scientific output of KEMRI staff.
In early 1993, we compiled and published the first summary, covering
material published between 1985
Œ1991. In 1994, we compiled, printed, and
circulated among scientists and institutions a second summary, covering 1980
Œ1984. These abstracts now cover the period between 1980
Œ1993, and part of
1994. They have been entered into a central database and are being edited and

formatted for eventual publication on disk and in hard copy. We hope that this
publication will be the first step toward the development of local databases.
Human Resource Development
The project has trained many staff groups. The type of training provided is
summarized in 
Table 2
.Desktop Publishing
The project supports the dissemination of research results by providing
desktop publishing (DTP) services. We have acquired software and a laser

printer, scanner, and other accessories. DTP was initially used for the production

of the proceedings of the annual scientific conference that has been convened for

the lastTABLE 2 Training Program
Type of staffType of training offeredScientific and administrative staffIntroduction of microcomputers and to
software applications for datamanagement, graphics, word processing,
and spreadsheets. CD-ROM and use of
email systems.
Secretarial staffIntroduction to microcomputers and to the
software applications for operatingsystems, database management, word

processing and spreadsheets.
Technical and support computer
operations staff
Specialized training in specific

applications, programming, and LAN and
Novell administration courses.KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM252
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 years by both KEMRI and the Kenya Trypanosomiasis Research Institute
(KETRI). This conference has improved in quality and has been expanded to a

regional "African Health Science Congress," which is now held in different

countries on a rotating basis within the African region.
The production of the conference proceedings has also improved and a new
journal, The African Journal of Health Sciences, 
has evolved. KEMRI selects
quality papers from the congress and from scientists in the region for peer review

and publication in the new journal. In addition to typesetting and producing

camera-ready copy for the journal and the proceedings, KEMRI DTP staff also
publishes the annual report and the quarterly 
KEMRI News
.Email and CommunicationsThe project has also acquired some 2400 baud modems and has installed two
telephone lines for use in electronic communication among scientists in the

centers, as well as among local and international organizations and associations.

This has facilitated the exchange of information among local scientists and with

the international scientific community.
RESULTS, IMPACTS, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
Hardware and Software
KEMRI has experienced a dramatic growth in provision and use of
microcomputer systems for various research activities. With the funding provided

by the Carnegie Corporation, we have acquired 22 new computers. In addition, a
FIGURE 1
 Percentage of Scientists at KEMRI with Access to Computers
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM253
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.number of systems have been acquired through the research activities supported
by other donors and collaborating institutions. These systems all have similar

specifications since all computer acquisitions are arranged through the technical

support group.TABLE 3 Hardware and Software Donations
Donor/Organization
No. of systems
Software packages
Carnegie Corp of NY2214
JICA32

WHO/TDR32

Rockefeller Foundation31

Wellcome Trust33

Walter Reed Army Hospital33

IDRC22

KEMRI23Standardized software has now been acquired and installed in all the existing
systemsŠirrespective of the funding source. A summary of these acquisitions and
the donor that supported their purchase is provided in 
Table 3.UsageFigures 1 and 
2 show that access by staff to computers has risen from 46
percent in 1992 to about 60 percent in 1994. Word processing is the most used

application. Use of spreadsheets (Lotus 1-2-3) and presentation software (Harvard
Graphics) has remained below 20 percent but the ability to use MEDLINE on
CD-ROM rose from 30 percent in 1992 to 46 percent in 1994. Email services

have been poorly used overall with user rate ranging between 4 percent and 12

percent. Eighty percent of the scientists are aware of the existence of MEDLINE

on CD-ROM and 64 percent have conducted a search at either the Library or the

central computer facility.
The KEMRI Library has, over the past few years, experienced a reduction in
the number of journal subscriptions it was able to carry. With the total number of

journals reduced to about 20, a shrinking budget for books and other literature
services, and inter-library loan transactions taking anywhere from weeks to
months, the scientific process had been rendered a myth. The introduction of the

MEDLINE database on CD-ROM has transformed this process. The CD-ROM

service is complemented by the traditional process of providing reprints as

requests are received by the librarian. In terms of volume, the number of requests

forwarded to the main library for reprints has declined from about 415 in 1990, to

208 in 1991, to 135 in 1992, to 83 in 1993, and to 45 in 1994.
Comparatively, the total requests for MEDLINE literature searches on CD-
ROM have shown a positive increase during the past two years with about 180
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM254
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.requests in 1993 and rising to 240 in 1994. This in itself is an underestimate as it

includes only those scientists who were assisted during the search sessions or who

had their searches printed. It excludes those scientists who conducted their own

searches or who downloaded the search results to floppy disks.
Other BenefitsThere are many other benefits of this project. These include the following:
   The tendency to use the literature available in the MEDLINE database is
contributing substantially to the production of quality papers and reports in

KEMRI.   All the reference, documentation, and library automation services, including
on-line searches using CD-ROM and the development of localized

databases, are wholly provided by the project.
   The training of the scientific, technical, and administrative support in use of
microcomputers for various operations has been provided through the

project activities.
   The project provides full support to all email, communications, desktop
publishing services that exist within KEMRI.
FIGURE 2
 Percentage of Scientists at KEMRI Able to Use Specific Software
ApplicationsKEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM255
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2 TIMING THE TRAINING SESSIONS
Before the project got fully under way, IDRC, which was funding one of
KEMRI's large, field-based diarrhoea projects, agreed to support a training
workshop for about 30 scientists in the region
Šof whom about 50 percent were
senior scientists in KEMRI. The training course content included an introduction
to microcomputers, operating systems and standard software, and online
literature searching and library information systems. The data processing staff in

KEMRI coordinated and facilitated these training workshops. However, since
KEMRI had not yet installed computer systems, the demand for computer
access that the training workshop generated could not be met. As a result, more

than half of this first group needed to be retrained four years later when the
equipment was more widely available.
   Nearly 90 percent of the software available and in use in all the centers and
computer laboratories has been provided by the project, inclusive of those

systems that were acquired and donated by the other operational projects in

the institute.ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
In the course of the project implementation, we discovered several things
that we should have done differently. First, the training of staff should ideally be

planned to take place immediately after the acquisition of the microcomputer

systems. If training is conducted prior to the availability of computers, then many

of those trained will not be able to use their new skills and will need to be

retrained. (See Box 2.)Second, we learned that hardware installation should be targeted to those
services that are generating data and reports. These services require "power

users" who have a genuine need for the technology. Some of the applications

aimed at institutional strengthening were not used as much as we expected,

simply because there was not a strongly felt need for them. We also discovered

that computer services located at a central facility help to promote usage and

access. Gradually, the access can be decentralized while the support, training, and

maintenance are centralized.
In this same vein, we learned that email services should be provided initially
to those scientists and researchers who are the most motivated to communicate

with colleagues in other countries or regions. Those who share a common interest

in a research area or in problem-solving will readily adapt to a new technology

that makes communication relatively quick and inexpensive. Their enthusiasm

encourages others to try the technology.
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM256
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.We were pleased with our early decision to establish standards for the
acquisition of both hardware and software. By setting up such procedures for

coordinated procurement, we were able to avoid incompatibility problems and by

selecting a standard suite of software, we were able to facilitate sharing and

exchange of information and data sets.
Another part of our project that worked well was the identification of a
"computer coordinator" in each department. This person acted as the link between

the users, the technical support team, and the procurement officers. The

coordinators were members of the oversight committee that managed the

implementation and development of the MIS project.
Finally, the project should have built in mechanisms oriented toward self-
sustenance. Evaluation systems need to be in place from the beginning. This

involves the identification of tangible process indicators that can be used in

measuring the impact the project.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
We are enthusiastically planning the next phase of this project. In that
phase, we will do the following:
   Install a local area network to facilitate easier access to hardware and
software by more staff.   Replace the single drive CD-ROM readers with multiple-drive machines in
order to improve search services. We will continue subscribing to

MEDLINE and other databases.   Promote the development of more local databases.
   Strengthen the desktop publishing operation in order to efficiently produce
the new journal; put these services on a self-sustaining basis.
   Install a communication system in order to promote the use of email and to
take advantage of Kenya's newly-achieved access to the Internet.
   Implement new training strategies aimed at strengthening the technical staff
with sufficient skills to support and maintain the LAN and at sensitizing

more of the staff to the available services.
The idea for this project dates back to 1987 and it seemed to take an
incredible amount of time to actually launch it. Looking back, however, we can

see that we have accomplished much since we actually began implementing the

project in 1991. The project is responsible for about 80 percent of all data

management, analysis, and report productions systems and services currently

available at KEMRI. Furthermore, the project has helped to develop an

information culture at KEMRI and this has had a positive impact on every aspect

of our activities.
KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM257
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEMRI'S MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM258
Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Ghana National Scientific and
Technological Information Network
(GHASTINET) Projectby John A. Villars
John Villars is Director of the National Science and

Technology Library and Information Center, which he helped

to found in 1964. His current interests include the

popularization of science, science education, and the

application of information technologies in support of science.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE
PROJECTThe Republic of Ghana is located on the West African coast along the Gulf
of Guinea. In 1995, it had a population of 17.1 million, with about 1.4 million in

the capital, Accra. Since attaining independence from Britain in 1957, Ghana has

experienced frequent political changes. Over the years, Ghana has had nine

governments, five of which have been military and four civilian. In November

and December 1992, parliamentary and presidential elections were held

respectively for a Fourth Republic, and a new constitution is currently being

implemented.Ghana is predominantly an agricultural country which, for a long time, has
depended rather heavily on a single export crop, cocoa. Ghana's economic

development is constrained by several factors, including the overall low level in

investment, which is estimated at about 16 percent of GDP. Of particular concern

is the relatively low investment in social infrastructure, especially in basic

education and training. The paucity of basic education and literacy is more acute

in the rural areas, which account for nearly 85 percent of Ghana's population and

which are responsible for almost all of Ghana's agricultural production.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION

NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT259Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Host Institution
The host institution of the project is the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), which was established as the National Research Council in

1958. It is a government subsidized organization that has the status of a public

organization outside the civil service. It enjoys a status similar to that of a

university institution.
The mandate of the CSIR is to implement government policies on scientific
research and development and to advise the government on scientific and

technological advances likely to be of importance to national development.

Another goal of the CSIR is to collate, publish, and disseminate the results of

research and other useful technical information. Past attempts to promote the

popularization of science and technology in the society and to market research

results have not made a very significant impact and CSIR is taking steps to
improve the situation.
The commitment of the CSIR to information activities stems from its
recognition that information constitutes an integral part of the research

enterprise. CSIR has thus established the National Science and Technology

Library and Information Centre (NASTLIC), as well as library and

documentation units in several of its institutes. There are in some institutes

various categories of officers engaged in providing, processing, repacking, or

disseminating information.The role of the CSIR in information activities is essentially a dual one of a
parent organization and a user. As a parent, it acts as promoter, supporter, and

facilitator of such activities. It plays this role by setting out broad policies;

recruiting and paying salaries of personnel; providing buildings, books and

equipment, and other physical facilities; and obtaining funding from government

and other agencies for the development of information services.
As a user, the CSIR needs information to support its research and
managerial functions. Its current mandate aims at regulating research and the

application of science and technology in development, enabling private sector

research and development activities in the Council, and encouraging

commercialization of research results. For a long time, the CSIR was perceived

as an "ivory tower" institution whose research activities have not been of direct

benefit to society. This view has changed, following the general realization that it
is ineffective mechanisms for marketing research results that create the
impression of CSIR as an ivory tower. The CSIR must show even greater

commitment to information and its repackaging and transfer.
PROJECT DESCRIPTIONThe Ghana National Scientific and Technological Information Network
(GHASTINET) project is located within NASTLIC. NASTLIC is the national

focal point of the project, which includes nine sectoral nodes and several special

resource centers. NASTLIC provides leadership through meetings, discussions,
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
260Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and guidelines and also promotes and fosters collaboration and cooperation
among network participants.
The main objective of the project is to make scientific and technological
information (STI) available in appropriately packaged forms for the benefit of

users. The beneficiaries include government officials, private enterprises,

scientific researchers, including university staff and students, and also small-scale

and cottage industries.To achieve the above objective, a number of functions and activities have
been identified for which resources are being provided. Such resources include

personnel, buildings, equipment and funding, as well as clear guidelines on

operating procedures and linkages with external agencies. These resources and

other relevant issues are discussed below.
Human Resources
The present core personnel of NASTLIC consist of eleven professionals,
three technical level staff, four administrative staff, and fifteen clerical and junior

personnel. We have plans to recruit four more staff, including two technical

support level, and two junior staff.
All the professional staff have basic academic and professional
qualifications. They have acquired other skills but could use more practical

training through attachment to similar organizations. Additional training is

required in technical areas such as database development and management,

abstracting and indexing, handling user inquiries, and information searching. All

library staff need more and better skills in using new information technologies.

Many have little confidence in the use of computers because they do not have

ready access to them.
Most senior professional staff need training in management and leadership
skills. This is particularly essential because most of them are expected to provide

liaison between the national focal point and the sectoral nodes and special

resource centers of the project. They are therefore required not only to be highly

trained professionals but also good managers with leadership skills. The technical

support staff also require more training, especially in the use of computers and in

the new information technologies. Such training, for which the present resources

are inadequate, should ideally be provided in-house.
Local training facilities are generally either not available or are inadequate.
The only school for training in library and information science has a poor

resource base in terms of teaching staff and equipment. This is particularly acute

in the area of modern information science and technology. The school has only in

the last year acquired six personal computers. Training provided tends to be

rather theoretical with relatively little opportunity for practical skill acquisition in

spite of a three week attachment program for students in working environments.
The attrition of librarians to other professions or to neighboring countries, as
experienced about a decade earlier, has ceased, mainly because of an improved
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
261Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1 STAFF MOBILITY
Staff mobility and turnover has largely been a one-way
Šfrom the public
library to the special or university library. In recent times however, as a result of a
certain degree of saturation, especially at NASTLIC, there has been some

exodus to financial institutions and to a large oil exploration company. economy
and the competitive salaries of librarians as compared to salaries of university
lecturers and researchers. (See 
Box 1.)Information and Communication Technologies
The project has received various items of equipment, most of which were
gifts. One personal computer, donated by a local computer company, developed a

problem with the motherboard after only six months and it took several months to

have it replaced. During the last three years, the project has acquired a total of

eight personal computers. The computers are mainly IBM personal computers, or

clones running MS-DOS, that have capacities ranging from 50 to 120 megabyte

hard disks. There are two laser printers and two dot matrix printers. All the

computers operate on DOS with Windows and they have VGA color monitors.

Other equipment includes a CD-ROM drive, a Telebit 1000 modem, and two

mouses.We have four CD-ROM databases namely, the CAB International Abstracts,
AGRIS, TropAg and Rural, the Maize Germplasm Databank, and a couple of

demonstration disks. We currently use standard software, including WordPerfect

Version 5.2, Lotus 123, Borland Reflex for DOS version 2.0, Dbase 4, Aldus

Pagemaker, and CDS-ISIS Version 3.1. There is also a Fidonet-based

communication software, Frontdoor, used for electronic mail exchange with the

Association for Progressive Communications in London.
The equipment and software are used for database management, word
processing, desktop publishing, accounting, and electronic mail. All the software

is user-friendly, although some observers complain that CDS-ISIS often poses

problems and that its operation is sometimes cumbersome.
1 Technical support for
the equipment has posed rather serious problems in the past, partly because of the

lack of information about local suppliers, their products, and their competence in

the repair and maintenance of electronic equipment. (See 
Box 2.)Although technical support is now available, it is rather expensive. Lately,
however, with the establishment of a repair unit in a local research institution,

there appear to be prospects for much cheaper rates and more reliable

arrangements for maintenance. Another bit of good news is that October 1995 the

import duty on personal computers was lifted.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
262Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2 REPAIRING MODEMS
We had an interesting experience with our modems. We could not find a
local company that could repair them so we took two modems across Africa to
far-away Nairobi and Addis Ababa, where we were attending conferences. We

could not repair the modems in either place, however, because they were not
accompanied by their corresponding cables. So they went back across Africa
and remained broken until, by sheer coincidence, a staff member complained

casually to a relative. This person was able to fix one of the modems merely by
inserting a pointed object into one of its pin-holes.
Attempts at developing a national policy on informatics are currently in
progress. Over the years, certain major issues have been identified as being

pertinent to a national policy on information technology. Some of the issues

include:   recognition of the importance for ministerial responsibility for informatics;
   the establishment of professional training centers for software and hardware
applications;   better methods for disseminating public information and raising awareness
about information issues;
   the need to review trade restrictions and other legislation, regarding
standardization and improvement in telecommunications infrastructure;
   the need for greater reliability of electricity supply;
   support for local manufacture and assembly of computer equipment;
   ways to promote investment in the information sector; and
   the establishment of a system for effective monitoring of trends in the
industry.Systems and Processes
The systems and procedures of the project arise from its objectives,
functions, and activities. The activities have been assigned to six sections:

Administration and Finance; Collection Development; Technical Services;

Information Technology; Marketing, Publicity and User Service; and

Reprography and Conservation. These activities ensure logical work flow and
smooth communication among the various sections.
Financial Aspects
The project is funded predominantly from central government sources but it
has benefited from funds provided by the International Development Research
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
263Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Centre (IDRC) of Canada and the World Bank. The World Bank supports the
National Agricultural Research Project (NARP), which is developing the library

and information system for agriculture
Šthe Ghana National Agricultural
Information Network (GAINS). GAINS is a sub-network of GHASTINET.
Another source of funding is from the photocopying service, but this is
rather meager and covers only the cost of paper. We also hope to cover the costs

of providing email service. In this regard, our revenue has been limited by an

increasing number of email service providers in the country, some of whom are

offering service free-of-charge
Šat least in the short term. With the installation of
desktop publishing software and a microfilm facility, we plan to generate some
additional income. There are also plans to introduce charges for literature

searches provided to industrial or commercial firms. We increasingly feel the

need for a vigorous marketing and publicity campaign to attract customers for

these services. Our effort to generate income falls squarely in line with the

CSIR's new policy directives that require all its institutes to commercialize as

much as possible.
PROJECT EXPERIENCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The first phase of the project developed, equipped, and strengthened the
national focal point to a level that enabled it to lead the gradual establishment and

growth of the entire national network. To do this, we:
   developed an efficient system for the bibliographic control of indigenous
STI;   created computerized databases for indigenous STI, ongoing research
projects, high-level scientific and technical manpower, and a union list of

S&T periodicals;   from these databases, generated and produced publications and other
promotional material;
   established a facility for microfilming indigenous STI;
   arranged training programs and workshops for network participants; and
   promoted the implementation of the network and its services.
By its various activities, the project is expected to arouse the awareness of
information personnel to the importance of science and technology information.

With the ultimate objective of providing STI to assist in the socioeconomic

development of the country, the project envisages carrying out a national survey

to find out the information needs of various user categories including the research

and academic; the government and public policy makers and planners; the private
or public commercial and industrial houses; and the small-scale and cottage
entrepreneurs and peasant farmers.
Ghanaians are innovative as reflected by the ingenuity shown among the
small-scale or cottage industrialists. Attitude to information and knowledge is

very positive, especially if the information has direct relevance to needs and if it

is cheap
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
264Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and easily accessible. There is a tendency to give up the chase if information is
hard to get or if it is not cheap. This attitude stems partly because information

may not be easily accessible
Šeither because it is not known to exist, because its
location or source is not known, or because it has not been packaged or organized

in a readily useable form. There is also a general attitude of wanting things free-

of-charge. This is even more acute in the case of information, probably because it
has always been provided free or because it tends to be taken for granted, unless
it is a matter of ''life and death." (See 
Box 3.)BOX 3 ACCEPTANCE OF TECHNOLOGY
Generally, Ghanaians as a whole value education and learning. This
attitude and the desire for high economic attainment has however seemed to
wane. In the last decade, there has been a slight drop in the respect accorded to

education and schooling. Attitude towards the new technology is positive but
not many are willing to take risks, especially among the very highly educated. A
case in point is my own attitude: for fear of it catching fire, I would not risk

leaving a computer on overnight for electronic mail purposes.
Information Transfer
In many areas of science and technology activity, especially in agriculture,
environment, and health, there are instances where information has played a vital
role in the alleviation of problems. For several years, Ghana had experienced the
problem of low-yield of local maize varieties and their high susceptibility to

serious insect attack, both onand off-farm. The role of information in alleviating

these problems is not so much in the form of publications, but rather in the form

of effective knowledge transfer and communication between the Crops Research

Institute, the Extension Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, and farmers and

maize consumers.The solutions most commonly proposed for the above problem include
knowledge transfer through effective extension and communication with farmers
whose confidence is thereby won. By this means, information and feedback are
easily obtained from experiences of the farmers who are generally illiterate and

whose attitude to research may be one of suspicion or mistrust. Other means of

solving the researchers' problems include faster and easier access to foreign

journals or publications and inexpensive communication with their peers in other

countries, as well as with other agencies like the International Maize and Wheat

Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and International Institute of Tropical

Agriculture (IITA).
Both the researcher and the farmer have interchanging roles as providers and
users of information and they therefore exhibit certain patterns in the information
life cycles in which they are involved. They both generate information either

throughTHE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
265Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.research or from experience. The farmer produces and distributes information
mainly orally and by demonstration. Researchers publish papers in journals or

other media. They may distribute information at conferences or seminars, through

invisible colleges among peers, or in electronic form on diskettes, tapes, and

CD-ROM. They can also communicate by means of electronic mail or bulletin

boards.These media also provide the means of storage and easy retrieval and
facilitate wider dissemination in a relatively short time. Modern electronic media

can be used to capture, store, and communicate the farmer's orally delivered or

demonstrable experiences. The mode of acquisition for both user types ranges

from word of mouth and demonstration for the farmer, to document procurement

by the individual researcher or a library and information center through gift,
exchange, or purchase.
User Reaction
Users who have reacted positively to the project are predominantly the
research scientists of institutes and academic staff and students of universities.

Their reaction is initially one of approbation of the objectives of the project,

especially with regard to the databases and the publicizing of the collection of

indigenous STI. The policy makers and planners in government and public
organizations who know about the project also approve of the objective of the
databases, especially those that cover ongoing research and high-level

manpower.Researchers and academic staff however express disappointment with the
poor availability of current journals and with difficulties in obtaining full-text

articles when searches are conducted from CD-ROM databases. They also

complain about the high cost of photocopies and lack of translations of materials

in foreign languages, especially French. Industrialists hardly use the services of

the project because they are not aware of it, and the small-scale and cottage
industries do not have any direct contact with the project as yet. This is partly
because they do not know about it and also because, even if they did, the

information would not be easily assimilable since it has to be repackaged. It is

also partly because of the general perception that libraries only have storybooks

and not information or technical information for that matter. This state of affairs

calls for sound information repackaging and marketing.
Information Marketing
Marketing of the services and products of the project has been minimal and
this is being remedied with the recent appointment of an Information Marketing

and Publicity Officer. So far, the only marketing methods adopted are

announcements in the project's 
GHASTINET Newsletter
. Other publication outlets
include a
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
266Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GHASTINET Brochure, a flier advertising the project, and another advertising
the electronic mail service. There is also a Ghana Science Abstracts Bulletin

issued bimonthly, in which summaries of indigenous STI are provided and

distributed to research and academic institutions. We are in the process of

planning effective marketing of the project and its services.
BOX 4 POPULARIZING SCIENCE
As part of the CSIR program to popularize science, a new radio program is
in the pipeline. This program, "From the Research Files," is expected to start in
August or September 1995. As part of the World Science Renaissance Day of

Africa, which is celebrated on 30
th 
June every year, NASTLIC participated in this
year's program. It compiled a directory from a computerized database of small-
scale industries in a suburb of Accra and distributed it to various agencies

engaged in supporting or promoting small-scale enterprises.
Popularizing Science
Following the creation of a Ministry for Environment, Science and
Technology and the concern of government for the need to market research
results and to popularize science and technology, the CSIR has embarked on
developing programs for this purpose. Accordingly, I am chairing a special

committee on science popularization and we have held preliminary meetings with

the Ghana Broadcasting Corporation (GBC) and all public relations personnel in

the CSIR. During the last six months, we have prepared a set of proposals in a

project document. The proposals have been discussed with the CSIR Director-

General and officials of the local secretariat of UNESCO. A short request for

basic equipment, including a video camera, has been submitted to UNESCO for

consideration in 1996. (See 
Box 4.)With regard to user education and training in information searching, not
much has been done. Formally, only a couple of demonstrations of CD-ROM

have been organized for selected user audiences. The major one was conducted
among all agricultural research institutions, stations, and university faculties. It
was combined with an interactive survey on user preferences and on their

perceptions and opinions on services being provided. Following a full-day

seminar and demonstration of CD-ROM to about forty researchers and academic

staff, our expectation that we would be inundated with demands for searches

proved to be a pipe dream
Šrequests for searches remained as before. We have
also taken advantage of national fairs and exhibitions to give demonstrations on

the use of CD-ROM and of electronic messaging.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
267Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 5 IMPORTANCE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The project has made an indirect contribution to the increased recognition
of research as a necessary tool for development. Science and technology
research has received considerable recognition and as a result, a Ministry of

Environment, Science and Technology has been established. Hitherto science
and technology did not have such prominence.
RESULTS, IMPACT, AND BENEFITS OF THE PROJECT
On the whole, we can say that the project has been of limited benefit to users
in the various categories targeted. More could have been achieved if we had

developed a vigorous and sustained information marketing program. The

responses we obtained during the survey of users in agricultural research

institutions indicated the benefits derived and the impact of the project, even

though the demonstration did not result in an increase in requests for CD-ROM

searches. These benefits included skills in using thesauri, abstracting and

indexing journals, and in CD-ROM searches. For many, the project provided a

first opportunity to use a computer database and for some, a first opportunity to

use printed abstracts.We are placing a great deal of emphasis on how to get science and
technology to contribute to national development objectives and on ways and

means of providing adequate funding for research. (See 
Box 5
.) The former
Minister of Science and Technology consulted with his peers and senior

personnel in other ministries to determine areas in their programs to which

science and technology could contribute. Ghana has also taken steps to establish a

National Science and Technology Fund (NASTEF). Expected contributions from

industrialists may raise the funding for research in science and technology to

close to the target of one percent of GDP by the year 2000, as suggested in the

Lagos Plan of Action. (The level of S&T funding since 1992 is only about 0.3
percent of GDP.)
As part of the effort to maximize the impact of science and technology and
the contribution it can make to society, the legislation establishing the CSIR is

being amended to give it a wider scope in commercializing research results. The

CSIR Council is also being restructured to make it less cumbersome and more

effective.A recent development was the invitation to the Director-General of CSIR
and some institute directors (including myself) to a special session with the

Parliamentary sub-Committee on Science and Technology. We discussed issues

relating to how well S&T had been covered in a Presidential Report to

Parliament. The report, which is entitled 
Ghana-Vision 2020: The First Step, 
seeks, in the President's words, "to provide a framework within which we can

realize the long-term vision of raising Ghana into the ranks of the middle-income

countries of the world."
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
268Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.One notable impact of the project at the national focal point has been the
increased awareness and the newly acquired skills of staff in the application of

new technologies, especially computers, CD-ROM, and electronic mail. They

accomplish assignments faster and their information products are more

impressive, especially the publications produced by desktop publishing. Staff

have become computer literate and their understanding of modern information
work has been heightened considerably. The information literacy of users has also
increased considerably, especially as a result of their exposure to CD-ROM and

electronic mail facilities.
It is, however, too early to determine if users' information query formulation
has also improved since rather few users are physically present during searches.

However, as a result of their exposure to these new information technologies,

both staff and users are better able to cope and feel more confident in handling

the technologies, and they have become much more aware, not only of a wider

scope and volume of information sources, but also of the potentials offered by the
new technologies.BenefitsThe users who have been exposed to services offered by the project have
benefited in a variety of ways. For example, those who have used the email

facility have been able to contact their colleagues overseas for information or for

some solution to a problem.
The project staff have benefited because they have learned new skills in
computer use, database creation and maintenance, word processing, desktop

publishing, spreadsheets, CD-ROM searching, and electronic mailing.
The CSIR as a whole has benefited from the introduction of computers into
the organization. As a result, some secretarial staff at the headquarters had their

first exposure to computers and this encouraged them to seek training in

applications of word processing and spreadsheets. CSIR now appreciates the
potential of the technology and is taking steps to have the project provide
assistance for the development of a management information systems (MIS) and

in automating accounts in the CSIR.
Nationally, the project attracted the attention of the Ghana National
Commission for UNESCO, which designated NASTLIC as the national

organization responsible for matters relating to the General Information
Programme (PGI) and the Intergovernmental Informatics Programme (IIP).
Accordingly, the CSIR Council has approved proposals by NASTLIC to set up a

Special Committee to handle issues on informatics. The Committee is expected to

be inaugurated early in 1996. NASTLIC also attracted the attention of the

government's National Development Planning Commission and as a result it is

represented on a special committee known as the Information Technology

Planning Group.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
269Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYSIS OF LESSONS LEARNED
Major Success Factors
Human, financial, and external support factors contributed to the success of
this project. Essential human factors include the perceptiveness of authorities in

the parent organization; their understanding and appreciation of the role and value

of information in their work; and the commitment and dedication of staff on the

project. Added to this is the vision for the project, with its clear and well-
articulated plan, objectives, and expected benefits. The most significant human
factor in this connection is the mutual understanding between authorities of the

parent organization and the project leader. Another factor derived from this is

good management practice, involving planning and constant review and

evaluation.Funding, especially from the Ghana government, has not been easily
forthcoming; however, the limited funding that was available and the support of

IDRC in the form of equipment and training, have contributed immensely to the

success of the project. In fact, the external support has always served as bait for
obtaining government funding and very often it has been used as a threat to
withhold external assistance if government funding was not forthcoming. In spite

of the generally weak economic situation of the country, even the rather meager

government funding can be considered as a success factor simply because it

serves as evidence of government interest in the project.
In this connection, another success factor has been the sometimes
unorthodox public relations approach of project staff, especially at the individual

level, to government officials in the funding ministry. This personal and informal

approach helped drive home more effectively the not easily recognizable
principle that STI is a vital ingredient to national development. My persistent
reference to the importance of information at virtually any meeting of CSIR

directors often led to remarks like "Oh yes, there goes the information man."
The issue of funding is directly related to external support factors that have
contributed to the success of the project. The quality of any organization's library

and information services is a reflection of the importance and commitment
attached to such services. So, while the general economic and political situation
had an adverse impact on the project, as evidenced by the delay in its take-off and

in the occasional hiccups, it can still be said that the project has benefited from

the generally enabling environment in the CSIR and the government. This was

partly due to the timing of the project, which may be described as propitious, and

also partly due to my persistence and the many years of sustained effort from me

and my colleagues.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
270Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ProblemsThe problems that have prevented the project from reaching its full potential
can be traced to the general lack of a sufficiently strong conviction and realization

of the importance of STI in all spheres of national development. This is also

partly due to the inability of the project, like many a library or information

project, to adopt a more aggressive marketing, user education, and publicity

approach. The weak marketing itself derives from an apprehension that the
resulting demand for information may not be adequately met and will, therefore,
lead to loss of confidence in the system. There have been a few examples of this,

especially with regard to the email service, which broke down because of faulty

equipment that could not be repaired quickly.
Lack of personnel has been a problem to the project. Special services, such
as literature searches on CD-ROM, and the personal touch in carrying out such

services, could not be sustained simply because the skilled staff were not

available. There has also been a tendency for some staff to be apathetic due to

insufficient motivation because of low wages.
Funding, as already mentioned, has been a perennial problem. Not only is it
insufficient, but it is not always guaranteed. A case in point was when there was a

one-year ban on construction works in public organizations. The most recent

example was the freezing of allocations made for equipment in the 1995 approved

budget estimates. It is also partly due to the relative low priority accorded to

library and information projects. The limited funding may be partly due to our
inability to articulate more forcefully and effectively the importance of the
project. We need convincing and concrete evidence to justify our very existence

and continued support.
Equipment repair and maintenance has also been a serious problem. The
story of the faulty modems is a typical example. We have also lost large volumes

of data due to faulty equipment, interruptions in the power supply, and dust

collecting in computers.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
One solution to these problems is the intensification of user education,
especially among the senior personnel in CSIR. They need to better understand

the real value of information in their work as researchers and as decision makers.

Training at all levels of information workers needs to be strengthened and we

believe that the project should set up a special unit to conduct all training
programs.We should explore avenues of collaborating with the media and with other
professional societies and organizations. We need to develop guidelines and

standard procedures and begin services for systems reporting and evaluation.

Good management practice is paramount.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
271Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Generally, the GHASTINET Project may be described as a success story
because it has provided the stimulus and acted as a catalyst in creating awareness

and arousing interest in STI generally. It has taken about thirty years to get this

far and the little that has been achieved needs to be sustained and improved

further. There is the urgent need to re-examine the project in the light of new

circumstances and to intensify collaboration with agencies that generate or
disseminate information in one form or the other.
There is further need to create the awareness that information management
is not the exclusive prerogative of the librarian or other information

professionals. Information is a resource that practically everyone needs and that

practically everyone handles and uses in one form or another. There is a need for

an STI culture in Ghana as part of a science and technology culture.
Finally, I recommend that external agencies, be they international or
bilateral, be aware of the need to relate aid programs to STI where relevant and to

emphasize information technologies and services as integral components of

assistance programs.
NOTE1. We are consoled by the fact that many information centers in Africa and the developing
country members of UNESCO use it and it has become a 
de facto 
standard. Its use might promote
uniformity and compatibility and therefore facilitate information transfer and data exchange.
THE GHANA NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION
NETWORK (GHASTINET) PROJECT
272Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ConclusionCOMMON PROBLEMS
ŠINNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS
These sixteen case studies tell very compelling and specific stories about the
introduction of selected information and communication technologies into
African institutions. They also demonstrate that considerable progress has been
made since the 1989 Nairobi conference, organized by the National Research

Council, at which the participants identified problems and gave recommendations

for their resolution. The case study authors demonstrate that, while many of these

problems still remain, they have taken positive steps to resolve others.
Those information technologies and services that had been identified in
Nairobi as most appropriate
ŠCD-ROM, desktop publishing, electronic
networking, and the collection, management, and dissemination of local

information resources
Šare beginning to be adopted across the continent and
their benefits can be seen throughout the research community. As the services and

technologies become more readily available and easier to use, others are

encouraged to experiment with them. Information and communication

professionals in Africa are discovering many opportunities to develop innovative

and effective information systems. As they do so, the link between information

and communications and economic development becomes more clearly

established. The importance of ICT, networks, and linkages among institutions

becomes even more evident to project managers and to the directors and

ministers to whom they report.
The sixteen case study authors recount that they still face common problems
and barriers. Some problems, such as incompatible equipment, poor access to

consumables (such as paper and toner) or peripheral equipment, a shortage of

repairCONCLUSION273Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.options and spare parts, and poor institutional coordination, were very obvious in
1989. While difficulties with these certainly remain, they seem to be of less

importance to the case study authors. Other problems identified in 1989 are still

present and the authors suggest a number of innovative solutions. These problems

include: a shortage of funds; communication difficulties; a lack of institutional

capacity to train personnel; poor collection, management, and dissemination of
local information resources; and an absence of an enabling environment.
Shortage of Funds
Many countries in Africa are experiencing fiscal shortages and most of the
case study authors write that their projects face a shortage of funds. Some of them

resolved this problem by designing smaller, more manageable projects from the

beginning. Look, for example, at the experiences described by Albina Kasango,

Ermias Dagne, and James Muttunga. Others, such as Charles Musisi, Moussa
Fall, and Paulos Nyirenda, have implemented cost-recovery systems that spread
the costs of a service throughout the user community. Agnes Katama and Alex

Tindimubona discuss their efforts to put their scientific presses on a sustainable

footing by instituting sound business practices. Public/private partnerships are

another solution for chronic funding problems and Neil Robinson discusses how

ZAMNET was developed as a private company to provide Internet services.
Communication Difficulties
Communication difficulties, another problem identified in 1989, are still
present in Africa. Maintenance of the telecommunication systems has suffered

and, in many countries, it is often easier to telephone internationally than across

the capital city, since the international service is usually the most profitable part

of the service. The telecommunication monopolies in most countries still operate

on the basis that they make their profits from international calls and from their
services for a small number of large subscribers at relatively high cost, rather than
from a large number of small local subscribers at low cost.
However, local networking initiatives are gaining ground in many African
countries. Emerging as a logical path in the development of full Internet

connectivity are a series of grassroots electronic networks that use robust and

appropriate hardware and software tools. Fidonet systems that are able to use

even poor dial-up telephone lines can provide electronic mail access to the

Internet. Such systems are helping to build the local user base in many African

countries and are proving to be highly effective feeder roads into the Internet.
Because there have been few public subsidies for these grassroots developments,
these networks have to be fully self-sustaining and capable of operating with only

the simplest micro-computers, modems, and ordinary dial-up lines. Lishan

Adam, Moussa Fall, Charles
CONCLUSION274Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Musisi, Paulos Nyirenda, and Neil Robinson each describe how they have
achieved success in overcoming communication problems.
Shortage of Trained Personnel
Each case study author discusses the problems faced in training personnel.
As the computer revolution creates a demand for computer-literate and

specialized personnel, more and more people need to be trained. Training in the

broadest sense, including computer literacy and consciousness-raising, is needed

at all levels. Several authors remarked that the lack of training for senior level

managers is limiting the adoption of newer technologies. The lack of training

affects information systems in several ways: it limits the effectiveness with which
new technologies are used and it causes users to lack confidence in their ability to
master the technology. Training programs can help ''demystify" information and

communication technologies.
Most of the authors found that they had to provide their own training
programs when they introduced a new information service or technology. John

Newa and John Villars describe their consciousness-raising efforts with senior

management. Helga Patrikios, James Muttunga, and Xavier Carelse describe the

more indepth and targeted programs they had to provide. Each of the networking

authors faced an uphill battle to educate their users. Each found that the training
burden would rest on their own shoulders since so few other options were
available.Poor Collection and Dissemination of Indigenous Information
ResourcesThe intellectual output of many African countries is not being captured or
deposited in a location where it can be maintained and made available to others.

The research efforts of African scientists are not reported in the literature since

the journals in which they publish are not indexed by the major bibliographic

sources. The authors describe many solutions to these problems.
Stella Monageng maintains a program that systematically collects records
for inclusion into a local database. Regina Shakakata and Helga Patrikios collect

records from their own countries and contribute these to the 
African Index
Medicus. They and James Muttunga also publish digests of relevant material that
are disseminated to the research communities in their countries. Since African

scientists face diminishing avenues of publication, Xavier Carelse, Alex

Tindimubona, Albina Kasango, and Agnes Katama tackled this problem by

improving the quality of local publishing houses through desktop publishing.
John Villars and Ermias Dagne take a slightly different approach in their
case studies. The former discusses his efforts to launch a nationwide network for

the dissemination of scientific information relevant to decision makers. The latter

describes his discipline-oriented approach to uniting scientists interested in

natural products.
CONCLUSION275Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lack of an Enabling Environment
One of the most serious problems faced by the case study authors was the
lack of an enabling environment within which they could begin to build an

effective information service. Many felt they were working in isolation because

the "computer culture" in their regions was so poorly developed. There was no

support networkŠno back-up, no documentation, no service, nor any spare parts
Šand they often resorted to trail and error to get a project off the ground. While
this experimentation eventually resulted in successful projects, it proved very
frustrating along the way.Several authors report that they had trouble dealing with vendors. Often they
did not know exactly what to ask for
Šas a consequence they were given older,
more complicated, or inappropriate technologies. Other times, they had difficulty

communicating with vendors who did not respond to faxes or email, or who did

not understand the situation in Africa. James Muttunga turned to mail order; Neil

Robinson finally found a vendor who would deal with Zambia, and Helga

Patrikios got the right combination of software and hardware only through
perseverance. The ability to attend international trade shows and conferences
improved the authors' understanding of the technology and allowed them to

establish personal relationships with the vendors.
Another problem that was identified only by a few authors was the shortage
of good, easy-to-use software in local languages. Lishan Adam reports that

Ethiopia is one of the oldest countries using its own script. Generic native-

language software interfaces that allow easier storage and retrieval of textual

information in local languages and scripts are not well developed. Some new

programs have features for processing data in all languages simultaneously but
these are not readily available in Ethiopia.
Another manifestation of the poor information environment was the
discovery that many researchers had little incentive to use information services.

In some cases, they were unwilling or unable to pay for information even though

they valued the information service. In other cases, they had little understanding

of the value of electronic information resources as compared to more traditional
information products. The deterioration of libraries due to poor storage conditions
and lack of foreign currency to maintain journal subscriptions contributed to a

serious underuse of information resources.
Such low expectations on the part of researchers had to be overcome by
aggressive marketing techniques. Some of these are described by Regina

Shakakata, John Newa, and James Muttunga. Helga Patrikios reports that the

introduction of the CD-ROM improved the status of the library staff. By being in a

position to provide better service, her staff was better able to interact with the

requestor on a professional level. Using information technologies in an
"everyday" setting demonstrates to the users that these technologies need not be
feared, that instead they can be manipulated to give the user the information

wanted.CONCLUSION276Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Despite these adverse conditions, the case study authors found unique and
innovative ways to create enabling environments within which their own projects

could thrive. Many of the authors credit one or two individuals for helping and

inspiring them. These experts served as support groups and as objective sources

of advice
Šoften filling in the gap caused by a shortage of journals, other
literature, and conferences and exhibits. Other authors credit the donors,
especially the Carnegie Corporation of New York, for having the vision to fund
projects that involved new, untested technologies. Organizations such as the

National Research Council and the American Association for the Advancement

of Science also played enabling roles by helping with proposal writing, providing

technical advice to the authors, and convening frequent meetings so project

managers could learn new skills, share ideas, and foster collaboration.
LESSONS LEARNED
An examination of the case studies as a whole reveals several common
conclusions that can be summarized quite briefly here.
   Pilot or demonstration projects play a critical role in the introduction of
information and communication technologies. They allow for

experimentation and demonstrate the use and costs of CD-ROM, desktop

publishing, electronic mail and computer conferencing, and software

development using personal computers and off-the-shelf database

management software. They provide a low-risk, non-threatening

environment in which users can try new services.
   Training programs
Šboth for information providers and for organization
directors and managers
Šare still badly needed throughout Africa. Training
should include broad overviews of microcomputers and networking, as

well as consciousness raising about the importance of information. It should

include formal instruction through high-quality schools as well as shorter-

term workshops, seminars, and computer-based instruction. Improved

documentation and manuals will also help fill the training gap.
   The most sustainable projects are those that start small and follow a logical
growth pattern. Local networks seem to be a prerequisite for the successful

introduction of the Internet.
   The successful implementation of STI systems and services often relies
upon a combination of technologies. Libraries need to offer both CD-ROM

and network access. Publishers need desktop publishing and access to local

information. No single technology will solve all the information needs of

the research community and a suitable and coordinated mixture of

technologies seems to help all parties.
CONCLUSION277Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The informal networks, personal contacts, and user groups that have been
formed in Africa have been very helpful in providing information about the

costs and suitability of different technologies. Networks and professional

associations are also good mechanisms for sharing information about

innovative outreach and cost-recovery programs.
   The development of indigenous databases through the collection and
publication of locally-produced material is extremely important. Local

databases provide resources for solving local problems by assuring that the

scientific research of a country is being captured and entered into a

database to which others in the country have access. Once such databases

exist, project managers must make major efforts to disseminate information

about their availability to researchers in the country and region.
Many of the lessons learned by the case study authors should be self-evident
but the fact that projects are still being designed, implemented, and managed

without much though to these lessons proves that more active dissemination

activities are needed. 
Bridge Builders 
takes an important first step in outlining
remaining problems and barriers to the introduction of information and

communication technologies. It also demonstrates that innovative solutions to

these problems are available.Still needed are venues at which these lessons can be identified and
discussed with others. Networks, professional associations, trade shows, and

other events provide an appropriate meeting ground where project managers can

discuss the choice of suitable technologies, get help in defining needs for

information products and services, offer technical assistance to others, and share

information about information services and technologies.
By reading these case studies, donors, government ministries, and project
managers alike should be encouraged to see just how much can be accomplished

with relatively small amounts of funding. Echoing the strongest recommendation

from the 1989 Nairobi conference is this advice from the case study authors:

small amounts of funds can be highly leveraged and can provide a low-risk

environment that allows for experimentation and innovation.
The advisory committee sincerely hopes that 
Bridge Builders 
will help
counterbalance the "afro-pessimism" that pervades the halls of policy- and

decision-makers in both the United States and Africa. These people might choose

to dwell on the institutional weaknesses, poor economic environment,

inadequately trained manpower, cultural and attitudinal values, and generally low

levels of technological awareness that work together to prevent the further
development of effective STI systems and services in Africa.
CONCLUSION278Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Or they might look at the efforts of these few, representative individuals and be
inspired by how their activities and efforts have helped to overcome these

barriers. They too might find that the possibilities and the opportunities are

limited mostly by their own imaginations; they too might be infected by the

pioneering spirit demonstrated by these case study authors.
Then, perhaps, they will choose to help by working with these "bridge
builders" and the many, many others whom they represent.
CONCLUSION279Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSION280Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
List of Authors
Lishan Adam
, UNECA - PADIS, P.O. Box 3001, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
lishan@padis.gn.apc.orgDr. Xavier Carelse
, Department of Physics, Electronic Instrumentation and
Design, University of Zimbabwe, P.O. Box MP 167, Harare, Zimbabwe

xcarelse@zimbix.uz.zwDr. Ermias Dagne
, NAPRECA Ethiopia, Department of Chemistry, Addis
Ababa University, P.O. Box 1176, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Chemistry_AAU@padis.gn.apc.orgMoussa Fall
, Operatuer de Systeme, Enda-Tiers Monde, P.O. Box 3370,
Dakar, Senegal 
moussaf@endadak.gn.apc.org
Albina Kasango
, Publications and Publicity Officer, Economic and Social
Research Foundation, 51 Uporoto Street, Ursino Estate, P.O. Box 31226, Dar es

Salaam, Tanzania 
esrf@costech.gn.apc.orgAgnes Katama
, Manager, ICIPE Science Press, P.O. Box 72913, Nairobi,
Kenya ICIPE@cgnet.comAPPENDIX A
281Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stella Monageng
, Librarian, National Institute of Research, University of
Botswana, Private Bag 0022, Gaborone, Botswana
Charles Musisi
, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7062, Kampala, Uganda
cmusisi@starcom.co.ugJames Muttunga
, Senior Research Officer, Kenya Medical Research
Institute, Mbagathi Road, P.O. Box 54840, Nairobi, Kenya

jmuttunga@ken.healthnet.org
Dr. John Newa
, Director, University Library Services, University of Dar es
Salaam, P.O. Box 35092, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 
lib@unidar.gn.apc.org
Dr. Paulos Nyirenda
, Head, Department of Physics and Electronics,
University of Malawi, Chancellor College, P.O. Box 280, Zomba, Malawi

nyirenda@unima.wn.apc.org
Helga Patrikios
, Medical Library, University of Zimbabwe, P.O. Box MP
45, Mount Pleasant, Harare, Zimbabwe 
patrikios@healthnet.zwNeil Robinson
, ZAMNET, University of Zambia, Box 32379, Lusaka,
Zambia 
neil@zamnet.zmRegina Shakakata
, Medical Librarian, Medical Library, University of
Zambia, Box 50110, Lusaka, Zambia 
rshakakata@unza.zmDr. Alex Tindimubona
, Chairman, African Science and Technology
Exchange (ASTEX), P.O. Box 10382, Kampala, Uganda

ASTEX@mukla.gn.apc.orgDr. John Villars
, GHASTINET, Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, P.O. Box M32, Accra, Ghana 
jvillars@ghastinet.gn.apc.orgAPPENDIX A
282Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BList of Acronyms and Abbreviations
AASAfrican Academy of Sciences, Nairobi, Kenya
AAASAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science,
Washington, D.C.
AHILAAssociation for Health Information and Libraries in Africa
AIMAfrican Index Medicus
APCAssociation for Progressive Communications, United Kingdom
ARCTAfrican Regional Centre for Technology, Dakar, Senegal
BBSBulletin Board System
BITEBringing Internet To Ethiopia
BOSTIDBoard on Science and Technology for International

Development, National Research Council, Washington, D.C.
CABECACapacity Building for Electronic Communication in Africa
DTPDesktop PublishingEAIAEast Africa Internet Association
ELCIEnvironmental Liaison Centre International, Nairobi, Kenya
ENDAEnvironment and Development Action in the Third World
ESANETEastern and Southern Africa Networking Project
ESAPEconomic Structural Adjustment Program
FRDFoundation for Research and Development, South Africa
FTPFile Transfer Protocol
GIIGlobal Information Infrastructure
GnFidoGreenNet/Fidonet hub
ICTInformation and Communication Technology
IDRCInternational Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada
APPENDIX B
283Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IFSInternational Foundation for Science, Sweden
IGCInstitute for Global Communications, United States
IIPIntergovernmental Informatics Programme (UNESCO)
ILLInter-library Loan
ISDNIntegrated Services Digital Network
LANLocal Area Network
LEOLow-earth Orbiting Satellite
MGMegabyteMHzMegahertzMISManagement Information SystemOCROptical Character Recognition
OIAOffice of International Affairs, National Research Council,
Washington, D.C.
NGONon-Governmental Organization
NMRNuclear Magnetic Resonance
NRCNational Research Council, Washington, D.C.
PABXPrivate Area Branch Exchange (switchboard)
PADISPan African Development Information System, Addis Ababa,

EthiopiaPGIGeneral Information Programme (UNESCO)
PPPPoint-to-Point Protocol Connection
PVOPrivate-Voluntary Organization
RAMRandom-access MemorySANGONETSouthern Africa Non-Governmental Network
SARECSwedish Agency for Research Co-operation with Developing

CountriesSDISelective Dissemination of Information
SLIPSerial Line Internet Protocol
STIScientific and Technological Information
TCP/IPTransmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
TDRTropical Disease Research
THFThe Health Foundation
TIFFTagged Image File Format; also .TIF
TWASThird World Academy of Science, Trieste, Italy
UNECAUnited Nations Economic Commission for Africa
USIAUnited States Information Agency
VSATVery Small Aperture Terminal
WAISWide Area Information Server
WHOWorld Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
WWWWorldwide WebAPPENDIX B
284Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
GlossaryBAUDRATEThe transmission speed of an asynchronous communications channel.
Technically, it refers to the maximum number of changes that can occur per
second in the electrical state of a communications circuit. Often baud is used
interchangeably with 
bits per second
.BIT/BYTEAll computer data is composed of tiny electrical pulses called 
Bits  (short for
binary digits). Each pulse represents a single digit of data. A group of eight
bits is called a byte. Bytes are measured in units of a thousand, thus kilobyte.
BULLETINBOARDA system with a computer, modem, and phone line that acts as a central
point for information exchange. It can be used for electronic mail and for
storing files that can be downloaded.
CD-ROMStands for compact disc/read-only memory. A high density storage medium
on which electronic data is etched and read by a laser beam.
COMPUT-ER CON-FERENCEA form of computer-based communications that emulates a face-to-face
conference where people meet to discuss issues of common concern.
Computer conferences
APPENDIX C
285Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. include a ''messaging" module to simulate the private discussions that often
take place at meetings but they also permit communication among multiple

users and allow flexible treatment of conference comments.
DATABAS
E MAN-
AGEMENT
SYSTEMS
(DBMS)Databases are organized collections of information. They are used to file,

search, and retrieve data.
DESKTOP
PUBLISH-
ING (DTP)
Publishing by means of a personal computer. DTP is the product of

technological advances in personal computing, print graphics, and

computer-generated typography. It synthesizes the capabilities of

typesetting, graphic design, book production, and platemaking in one

integrated, cost-effective hardware and software configuration.
ELEC-
TRONIC
MAILComputer-based messaging. The transmission of letters and messages from

computer to computer over a network.FIDONETA robust network of individual computerized bulletin board services that

uses regular dial-up phone lines and high-speed modems to move electronic

messages.FILE
SERVERA high-performance personal computer that serves all the users of a local

area network. It provides access to files and software.
FLOPPY
DISKA magnetic storage medium. The floppy disk is compact, light, and portable.

You can input or output data or software applications between a floppy disk

and the computer.
FTPFile Transfer Protocol. Allows users to exchange files between their

workstations and remote computers connected to the Internet. It is most

useful for retrieving files from public archives that are scattered around the

Internet.GATEWAYA device that connects two dissimilar LANs or that connects a LAN to aWAN, a server, or a mainframe. It reformats the data so that it is acceptable

for the new network before passing it on.
APPENDIX C
286Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HARD
DISKA hardware component used for storing software, applications, and data. It

has a higher capacity and faster speed than a floppy. Hard disks are sealed

units not usually meant to be removed from the computer.
HARD-
WAREThe central processing unit, monitor, keyboard, mouse, printer, and other

equipment associated with a computer system.INTERAC-
TIVEUsed to refer to applications that engage the computer user by prompting for

certain responses and then reacting to those responses in what seems like

original ways.INTERNETA system of interconnected computer networks. Provides access tocomputers, electronic mail, bulletin boards, databases, and discussion

groups, all using the TCP/IP protocol.
LEASED
LINEA dedicated private telephone line between two locations. Leased lines are

often used to connect mid-sized local networks to an Internet service

provider.LOCAL-
AREA
NETWORK
(LAN)A method of connecting computers, peripherals, and communications

equipment within a restricted locality, such as a building or campus.
MEGA-
HERTZ
(MHz)A unit of measurement, equal to one million electrical vibrations or cycles

per second, commonly used to measure the clock speeds of computers.
MICRO-
PROCES-
SORHardware component responsible for the basic elements of computer

processing: arithmetic, logic, and control. The microprocessor is an

integrated circuit chip
Ša dense network of microscopic electrical pathways
etched into highly refined sand, or silicon.
MODEMA device that connects a computer to a telephone line and converts the

digital data from the computer into analog (sound) frequencies. The modem

sends the sounds through the phone line to a receiving computer's modem,

which then turns the sounds back into a digital form that can be displayed on

the receiving computer's screen. (MODEM is a contraction of 
modulator/demodulator.)APPENDIX C
287Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MONITORThe video display terminal (VDT); the part of the personal computer system

that looks like a TV screen. It allows the user to see text and graphics as it is

entered into the computer.
MS-DOSAn operating system for microcomputers. Short for 
Microsoft disk operating
system, DOS has been perhaps the most common set of programs for
controlling the microcomputer.
NETWORKIndividual computers linked in such a way that users can share software andhardware (for example, printers) and communicate with each other.
ONLINEThe "state" of being connected, either via a modem or a dedicated line, to a

distant database or to another computer.
OPERAT-
ING SYS-

TEMSThe master program that controls the computer hardware and applications.

Also called the system software.
PACKETA "bundle" of data. In some types of electronic communications, data is

broken into small chunks that traverse the networks independently.
PACKET-
SWITCH-
ING
NETWORKA wide-area network that achieves high data transmission speeds by dividing

information into sections, called 
packets. The packets are then transmitted by
the most efficient route and reassembled at their destination.
PERIPH-
ERALSHardware components that are not essential to the basic operation of the

computer but that may be necessary to perform certain applications.

Peripheral hardware includes printers, scanners, and modems.
POINTThe lowest level of the Fidonet hierarchy. Points are connected to hubs and

hubs to hosts in order to move mail through the system.
APPENDIX C
288Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLLA method by which a central computer calls or "polls" another computer to
see if that computer has electronic messages to transmit. Polls can be set up
to automatically call another computer when the rates are lower or when
traffic is minimal.
RANDOMACCESSMEMORY(RAM)The computer's short-term memory or the electronic "work space" in which
software, programs, and data reside while they are active.
RESOLU-TIONA measurement, usually expressed in linear dots per inch (dpi), of the
sharpness of an image generated by an output device such as a printer or
monitor.ROUTERA device that connects networks that use the same protocols together and
passes information among them.
SCANNERHardware device that allows the transfer of photographs, graphic images, or
text to the computer. Scanners convert the image to a form than can be
manipulated and stored by the computer.
SOFT-WAREThe applications, data, and operating systems associated with computer
systems.SPREAD-SHEETSAn electronic means of organizing, storing, and presenting numeric
information in formats that allow for easy calculations. The most common
means of handling numeric information.
TCP/IPTransmission control protocol/Internet protocol. Connotes a full-time,
interactive Internet connection.TELNETThe Internet standard protocol for remote terminal connection service used
for logging into and searching other computers connected to the Internet. It

allows your computer to interact with a remote timesharing system at another
site as if your terminal were connected directly to the remote computer.
APPENDIX C
289Bridge Builders: African Experiences With Information and Communication TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNINTER-
RUPTIBLE
POWER
SUPPLY
(UPS)Device that insures a steady and clean supply of electricity to the computer. Asudden loss of or change in power can destroy data and cause damage to acomputer. UPSs give the user time to exit from all active applications and

save all current data in the event of a power outage.
UNIX An operating system for a wide variety of computers, from mainframes topersonal computers. It supports multi-tasking and is suited to multi-user

environments.VIRUSA program designed to enter a computer without the user's knowledge and

perform tasks that can be destructive to the data and software stored in the

computer.WINDOWA rectangular, on-screen frame through which you can view a document,

worksheet, or other application.
WINDOWS A windowing environment and application program interface for MS-DOSthat brings to IBM compatible computers some of the graphical user interface

features of the Macintosh computers.
WORD
PROCES-
SORThe single most universal application for personal computers. Word

processing programs convert computers into writing and editing machines.

Word processing easily allows revisions, formatting, and corrections.
WYSIWYG Pronounced wizzy-wig, an acronym for What You See is What You Get. Aterm used in desktop publishing that means that what you see on the

computer screen is exactly what you get on paper when you print.
APPENDIX C
290