DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/5504Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data250 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-05635-9 | DOI 10.17226/5504Committee on Issues in the Transborder Flow of Scientific Data, NationalResearch CouncilBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEiCommittee on Issues in the Transborder Flow of Scientific DataU.S. National Committee for CODATACommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.  1997BITSOFPOWER






Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW ¥ Washington, DC 20418NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of
Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the
committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation (under grant no. INT-9507279), the National Library of Medicine (under purchase orders 467-FZ-501994, 467-MZ-600631,
and 467-FZ-402090), the Defense Technical Information Center (under purchase order no. D-03-94and award no. SP060096P0470), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (under purchaseorder S-73093-Z), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (under contract no.
50SBNB6C9118), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (under grant nos.NA56EC0622 and 56-DKNA-7-95101), and the Department of Energy (under grant no. DE-FG02-96ER30277).Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataBits of power : issues in global access to scientific data / Committee on Issues in the
Transborder Flow of Scientific Data, U.S. National Committee for CODATA, Commission onPhysical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications, National Research Council.p.   cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.ISBN 0-309-05635-7
1. Communication in science.  2. ResearchÑInformation services. 3. Database
management.  4. Information technology.   I. U.S. National Committee for CODATA.
Committee on Issues in the Transborder Flow of Scientific Data.
Q223.B58  199797-4836
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data is available from the National Academy
Press, 2101 Constitution Ave., NW, Box 285, Washington, DC  20055 (1-800-824-6242; http://
www.nap.edu).Cover photo courtesy of Peter Arnold, Inc., New York, N.Y.Copyright 1997 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiCOMMITTEE ON ISSUES IN THE TRANSBORDER FLOW OFSCIENTIFIC DATAR. STEPHEN BERRY, University of Chicago, ChairSHELTON A. ALEXANDER, Pennsylvania State University
BETH E. ALLEN, University of Minnesota
MARION BAUMGARDNER, Purdue University
ANNE W. BRANSCOMB, Harvard University
JOLIE A. CIZEWSKI, Rutgers University
MARTIN W. DUBETZ, Washington University
GERALD R. FAULHABER, University of Pennsylvania
JOANNE I. GABRYNOWICZ, University of North Dakota
PAUL H. GINSPARG, Los Alamos National Laboratory
WILLIAM E. GORDON, Rice University
RICHARD E. HALLGREN, American Meteorological Society
DONALD W. KING, King Research
MICAH I. KRICHEVSKY, Bionomics International
THOMAS F. MALONE, Sigma Xi
JERRY M. MELILLO, Marine Biological Laboratory (through May 1996)
JEROME H. REICHMAN, Vanderbilt University
B.K. RICHARD, TRW
ETHAN J. SCHREIER, Space Telescope Science Institute
DIETER S–LL, Yale UniversityJACK H. WESTBROOK, Brookline Technologies
RONALD L. WIGINGTON, American Chemical Society (retired)National Research Council Staff
PAUL F. UHLIR, Study DirectorJULIE M. ESANU, Program Associate
DAVID BASKIN, Project Assistant

ALEXANDRA C. SPAITH, Project AssistantBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivPREFACEivU.S. NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR CODATADAVID R. LIDE, JR., National Institute of Standards and Technology(retired), ChairSTANLEY M. BESEN,* Charles River Associates, Inc.
LOIS BLAINE, American Type Culture Collection
WILLIAM BONNER, University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
EVAN BUCK, Union Carbide Corporation
NAHUM D. GERSHON, MITRE Corporation
ALI GHOVANLOU, Department of Energy
BRUCE GRITTON, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
JULIAN HUMPHRIES, Cornell University
MICAH I. KRICHEVSKY, Bionomics International
DAVID MARK, State University of New York at Buffalo
GOETZ OERTEL, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
STANLEY RUTTENBERG,* National Center for Atmospheric Research(retired)PAMELA SAMUELSON,* University of California at BerkeleyNational Research Council Staff
PAUL F. UHLIR, DirectorJULIE M. ESANU, Program Associate
DAVID BASKIN, Project Assistant
ALEXANDRA C. SPAITH, Project Assistant* Term ended June 30, 1996.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEvvCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES, MATHEMATICS, ANDAPPLICATIONSROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation, Co-ChairW. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, Co-ChairPETER M. BANKS, Environmental Research Institute of Michigan
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, University of Pennsylvania
RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University
JOHN E. ESTES, University of California at Santa Barbara
L. LOUIS HEGEDUS, Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University
RHONDA J. HUGHES, Bryn Mawr College
SHIRLEY A. JACKSON, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota
KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory
MARGARET G. KIVELSON, University of California at Los Angeles
DANIEL KLEPPNER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company
MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. PRINCE, California Institute of Technology
NICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory
L.E. SCRIVEN, University of Minnesota
SHMUEL WINOGRAD, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
CHARLES A. ZRAKET, MITRE Corporation (retired)NORMAN METZGER, Executive DirectorPAUL F. UHLIR, Associate Executive DirectorBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in

1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-
ment on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the

National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of out-
standing engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of
its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility
for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also

sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.
Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academyof Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.

Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was established by the National Academy ofSciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology
with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineer-
ing communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the

Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.viBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
Science is perhaps the most truly international of human enterprises, notbecause it is based on cooperation among nations but rather because its practitio-
ners collaborate and compete in an endeavor in which nationality tends to be
irrelevant.  Since Galileo corresponded with Kepler and Leeuwenhoek sent his

observations to the Royal Society in London, the internationalization of science
has grown steadily, with post-World War II travel and fellowship support, grow-
ing numbers of opportunities for academic exchanges, and, most recently, elec-
tronic information exchange and the end of the Cold War.  Financial support for

science, especially by governments, has been crucial in enabling this interna-
tional interchange.At the same time, such support has made possible a manyfold expansion ofscience, in numbers of scientists, institutions, and publications.  The amount of

scientific data has grown both because there are more scientists and because with
technological advances, each of them can produce more data than ever before.But as new technologies and working styles rapidly supersede older ones,altogether new problems are appearing that affect how data are handled and used.
Some of these are technical; others are directly related to the substance of the
science itself.  Still others involve legal, economic, and social dilemmas that arise

when the work of scientists is integrated into the daily life of the larger society.
One such issue that is particularly important for science concerns the exchange of
scientific data, especially exchange across national boundaries.  Factors affecting

exchange of data in the natural sciences, and the significance of important changes
affecting access to data, are the central topic of this report.In 1994 the U.S. National Committee for the Committee on Data for ScienceviiBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEand Technology (CODATA),1 organized under the Commission on Physical Sci-
ences, Mathematics, and Applications of the National Research Council, estab-
lished the Committee on Issues in the Transborder Flow of Scientific Data to
investigate the changing environment for the international exchange of scientific
data in the natural sciences.  The results of the study committee
Õs deliberationsconstitute the substance of this report.  Its aim is to examine the current state of

global access to scientific data, to identify strengths, problems, and challenges
that exist today or appear likely to arise in the next few years, and to recommend
actions to build on those strengths and ameliorate or avoid those problems.  The

focus is on data in the natural sciences, because that is the primary subject-matter
purview of CODATA, but this should not be interpreted as implying that the
committee considers engineering or social science data to be less important.
Although many of the issues identified in this study pertain to those other disci-
pline domains as well, they involve different contexts and problems that require
additional study.The committee included practicing scientists who both contribute to and usethe data resources needed in international scientific efforts, computer scientists
and engineers who create and maintain the means for such exchange, economists
who interpret how the scientific enterprise sustains itself in the larger society, and
lawyers who specialize in scientific data problems.  Learning to talk with each

other and to understand different perspectives was a necessary step toward reach-
ing some agreement on important issues and crafting recommendations to ad-
dress them.  In all of these efforts, the focus was on understanding how to ensure

global access to the data required to conduct basic research in the natural sci-
ences.  The committee
Õs specific recommendations are presented in the relevantsections of the main text and are listed together in the summary that begins this
report.R. Stephen Berry, ChairPaul F. Uhlir, Study DirectorCommittee on Issues in theTransborder Flow of Scientific Data1CODATA is an interdisciplinary committee of the International Council of Scientific Unions.CODATA is concerned with all types of quantitative and qualitative data resulting from experimen-
tal measurements or observations in the physical, biological, geological, and astronomical sciences.Particular emphasis is given to data management problems common to different scientific disciplinesand to data used outside the field in which they were generated.  The general objectives are the

improvement of the quality and accessibility of data, as well as the methods by which data areacquired, managed, and analyzed; the facilitation of international cooperation among those collect-ing, organizing, and using data; and the promotion of an increased awareness in the scientific and
technical community of the importance of these activities. Additional information about CODATA isavailable on-line at <http://www.cisti.nrc.ca/programs/codata/welcome.html> or from the CODATASecretariat, 51 Boulevard de Montmorency, 75016 Paris, France.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixAcknowledgments
The study committee is very grateful to the many individuals who played asignificant role in the completion of this study.  The committee held its first

meeting on January 20-22, 1995, and extends its thanks to the following individu-
als who provided briefings and other information from the studyÕs sponsoringagencies:  Gerald Barton and Christopher Miller of the National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration; William Blanpied of the National Science Founda-
tion; Joseph Bredekamp of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration;
Kurt Molholm of the Defense Technical Information Center; John Rumble of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology; and Elliot Siegel of the National
Library of Medicine.  At this meeting, the committee also received background

briefings from other federal agency representatives, including Gesina C. (Cynthia)
Carter, Wanda Farrell, and Jay Snoddy of the Department of Energy; Paul
Kanciruk of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory; and Dorothy Bergamaschi of
the Department of State.The committee also extends its thanks to the issue area experts who briefedthe committee at its September 22-24, 1995, meeting:  Gershon Sher of the

National Science Foundation, Gregory van der Vink of the Incorporated Re-
search Institutions for Seismology, Carlos Gamboa of the Pan American Health
Organization, Amy Gimble of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, and Lane Smith of the U.S. Agency for International Development
participated in a roundtable discussion of data access issues in less developed
countries; Hal Varian of the University of California at Berkeley discussed eco-
nomic aspects of data transfer on the Internet; John Baumgarten of Proskauer,
Rose, Goetz, and Mendelsohn, Mary Levering of the Library of Congress, Ed-ixBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACExACKNOWLEDGMENTS1An edited compilation of the responses to the committeeÕs ÒInquiry to Interested PartiesÓ is
available on the U.S. National Committee for CODATAÕs World Wide Web site at <http://www.nas.edu/cpsma/codata.htm>.ward Malloy of the State Department, Pamela Samuelson of the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley, and Peter Weiss of the Office of Management and Budget
participated in a discussion concerning intellectual property issues; and Richard
Greenfield of the National Science Foundation provided an update of the World
Meteorological OrganizationÕs data exchange policy.The committee is very appreciative, as well, of the contributions of the morethan 200 individuals who responded to the committeeÕs ÒInquiry to InterestedPartiesÓ (see Appendix D of this report)
1 and of the many data experts who
responded to specific requests for information used in the body of the report. In
addition, the committee would like to express its gratitude to the members of the
U.S. National Committee for CODATA, who provided oversight of this study,
and the following ex officio members, who provided liaison with other relevant
activities:  David R. Lide, Jr., consultant and chair of the U.S. National Commit-
tee for CODATA; Francis Bretherton, of the University of Wisconsin, chair of
the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on Geophysical and EnvironmentalData; and Ferris Webster, of the University of Delaware, chair of the CODATA
Working Group on Data Access.  The committee also wishes to acknowledge the

assistance of Anne Linn, director of the Committee on Geophysical and Environ-
mental Data, and Wendy White, director of the Committee on International Orga-
nizations and Programs.Finally, the committee would like to recognize the invaluable contributionsof the National Research Council staff without whom this report could not have
been completed:  Paul F. Uhlir, associate executive director of the Commission

on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications, who served as study direc-
tor; Julie M. Esanu, for the program and research assistance provided to the
committee; David Baskin and Alexandra Spaith for the staff support to the com-
mittee; and editorial consultant Roseanne Price, who edited the final manuscript.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiContentsxiSUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION17
Charge and Scope of Study, 19
Underlying Assumptions and Concerns, 21
Notes, 222TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY24
Overview of Technical Trends, 24
Specific Technical Concerns, 35
Data Access Issues in Developing Countries, 40
Recommendations on Issues in Information Technology, 43
Notes, 443SCIENTIFIC ISSUES IN THE INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE
OF DATA IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES47

Types of Data and Their Use in Different Disciplines, 49
Data Trends, Opportunities, and Challenges in the Natural Sciences, 57
Discipline-Specific Data Issues, 68
Access to Scientific Data in Developing Countries, 90
Recommendations on Data Issues in the Natural Sciences, 100
Notes, 103Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiPREFACE4DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCH
ÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE110

The Trend Toward Markets:  Good or Bad for Science?, 111

Determinants of the Structure of Scientific Data Distribution, 114
Privatization:  When Does It Make Sense?, 116

Pricing Publicly Funded Scientific Data, 124
Electronic Access and Internet Congestion, 126
Recommendations Regarding Economic Aspects of Scientific Data, 128
Notes, 1295THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY  RIGHTS:  A POTENTIAL THREAT TO

PUBLIC-GOOD USES OF SCIENTIFIC DATA132

Salient Features of the Predigital Status Quo, 135
Digital TechnologyÑDisrupting the Balance of Public andPrivate Interests, 139The Drive for Legal Protection of Noncopyrightable Databases, 145
Charting a Well-Considered Course in the New Era, 161
Recommendations Regarding Legal Developments AffectingAccess to Data, 171Notes, 172APPENDIXESAABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS191
BGLOSSARY196

CEXAMPLES OF SUCCESSFUL INTERNATIONAL DATA
EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES205
DINQUIRY TO INTERESTED PARTIES ON ISSUES
IN THE TRANSBORDER FLOW OF SCIENTIFIC DATA220
INDEX227
xiiCONTENTSBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiiiThis study is dedicated in fond memory ofGesina C. (Cynthia) Carter,
director of the U.S. National Committee
for CODATA
 from 1978 to 1991.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivPREFACEBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY115SummaryIn todayÕs technological world, sustaining science as a source of new knowl-edge and innovation has become as important to modern society as maintaining
the nationÕs capabilities in manufacturing, trade, and defense. The extent to which
public funding in the developed world supports science is testimony to societyÕs
recognition that basic as well as applied research must be carried out to advance
the public interest.Science itself is a living enterprise.  With few exceptions, acquisition of
scientific knowledge is a cumulative process that depends on researchersÕ con-
tinuing ability to collect and share data.  This capability has been strengthened by

the advent of information technology, which is supplying powerful new tools and
enabling new styles of working.  However, far-reaching changes involving com-
plex technical, economic, and legal issues also have begun to alter the conditions
for exchange of data among scientists, especially across national boundaries.To help understand the impact of such changes and to learn what actions areneeded to ensure full and open exchange of scientific data1 worldwide amongresearchers in the natural sciences, the Committee on Issues in the Transborder
Flow of Scientific Data undertook a study responding to the following charge:¥Outline the needs for access to data in the major research areas of current
scientific interest that fall within the scope of CODATAÑthe physical, astro-
nomical, geological, and biological sciences.¥Characterize the legal, economic, policy, and technical factors and trends
that have an influenceÑwhether favorable or negativeÑon access to data by the
scientific community.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2BITS OF POWER¥Identify and analyze the barriers to international access to scientific datathat may be expected to have the most adverse impact in discipline areas within
CODATAÕs purview, with emphasis on factors common to all the disciplines.¥Recommend to the sponsors of the study approaches that could help over-come barriers to access in the international context.This study addresses issues in effective access to data in numerical, symbolic,and image forms by scientists for scientific research purposes, rather than to
bibliographic or purely textual information.  The focus is on digital rather than

analog data, since practically all scientific data are now collected and stored
digitally, and most older data are being transferred to digitized electronic formats.
The scope of inquiry also is limited to data in the natural sciences, which is the
principal subject-matter focus of CODATA.2Because the sponsors of the study are U.S. federal government science agen-cies, the committee has emphasized those trends, issues, and barriers that have an
impact on international access to data collected and used in publicly funded, basic
research programsÑthat is, scientific research conducted as a public good.  De-
spite this emphasis, the committee took into account the continua between funda-
mental and applied research, between raw data and processed information, and
between public and private uses of scientific data.  Indeed, the most vexing public

policy issues facing the international scientific community in the exchange of
data involve defining the appropriate balance of divergent interests.Underlying the committeeÕs approach, however, and informing its conclu-sions and recommendations, is the principle that full and open exchange of scien-
tific dataÑthe Òbits of powerÓ on which the health of the scientific enterprise
dependsÑis vital for advancing the nationÕs progress and for maximizing thesocial benefits that accrue from science worldwide.COMPLEX DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING ACCESS TOSCIENTIFIC DATARecent Trends and Emerging ConcernsFreedom of inquiry, the full and open availability of scientific data on aninternational basis, and the open publication of results are cornerstones of basic
research that U.S. law and tradition have long upheld.  For many decades, the

United States has been a leader in the collection and dissemination of scientific
data, and in the discovery and creation of new knowledge.  By sharing and

exchanging data with the international community and by openly publishing the
results of research, all countries, including the United States, have benefited.
Today, however, many rapid changes portend significant consequences, some
possibly adverse, for the conduct of basic research in the natural sciences.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY3In broad terms, the challenges of greatest import for full and open globalsharing of scientific data are those associated with two quite recent trends:1.The need for scientists to adapt to conducting research with data that
come in rapidly increasing quantities, varieties, and modes of dissemination,
frequently for purposes far more interdisciplinary than in the past; and2.The worldwide trend toward imposition of increasing economic and legal
restrictions on access to scientific data gained from publicly funded research.The former obliges scientists to reexamine how they carry out their calling.  Thelatter impels the scientific community to become more involved in understanding
the significance of public policies and legislative activities that can have a pro-
found impact on their work.Chief among recent developments affecting access to scientific data is thewidespread use of powerful new technologies for data acquisition, storage, and
communication, as well as their inevitable consequence, the rapidly growing
quantity of data that scientists are generating, preserving, and distributing.  More-

over, because of increasingly diverse applications for the results of scientific
research, these data are becoming ever more useful and valuable in many sectors
outside the specific areas of research that generate them.  Finding ways to distrib-

ute such information to all who want itÑequitably, reliably, and in keeping withthe principle of full and open exchange as a sine qua non of progress in scienceÑis the greatest challenge this committee identified while conducting its study.Although scientific interchange was an important stimulus for developmentof the Internet and initially represented one of its greatest uses, commercial
activities and entertainment now far surpass scientific use of the network and
may be expected to dominate policymaking for the electronic exchange of infor-
mation.  This development raises questions about the scientific community
Õscontinuing capability to utilize what has clearly become a beneficial and versatile
tool for scientific exchange and interaction.  The economic framework for a

global information system and legal models for dealing with conflicting interests
are increasingly influenced by stakeholders who have no long-term responsibili-
ties for, or concern about, sustaining publicly funded scientific inquiry.  Simulta-

neously, the government science agencies expected to assume long-term respon-
sibilities for sustaining scientific inquiry are questioning their capacity to continue
to invest at traditional levels in the creation, preservation, and dissemination of
scientific data.Issues in Information TechnologySome technical trends and developments have had a significant, largely posi-tive impact on the management and international exchange of scientific data.
These include the steadily decreasing cost of computing and communication;Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4BITS OF POWERgreatly enhanced capabilities for collecting scientific data, for example, fromremote sensors; increasing exploitation of broadband networks and capabilities
for transmission of video data over networks; the advent of digital wireless com-
munication; increasing support for collaborative work by long-distance commu-
nication; growing capabilities for natural language processing; increasing recog-
nition of the importance of standards in data structures and in networked
communication; growing acceptance of the need for cooperation in monitoring
and controlling network activity; and increasing use of intranets.Associated with advances in, and increasing reliance on, information tools andinfrastructure are a number of problems that present barriers to access, including
the growing congestion of the Internet and consequent constraints on scientific
communication and research; the storage and distribution of data that are inad-
equately described or indexed for significant numbers of potential users; the rapid
obsolescence of electronic information-processing tools and storage media; the
vulnerability of electronic networks and data repositories to accidental or deliberate
damage; and the growing competition for use of currently limited network re-
sources.  Another difficulty
Ñthe current lack of adequate access to scientific datain developing countriesÑnevertheless has the potential to improve quickly.Data Issues in the Natural SciencesThe natural sciencesÑincluding the physical, astronomical, geological, andbiological sciencesÑface a number of trends, opportunities, and challenges af-fecting researchersÕ capabilities for sharing data.  The most obvious involves
dealing with the exponentially growing volume of accumulating scientific data,
which now, as a result of expanding computational power, also includes elaborate
simulations that often incorporate animation as well as quantitative information.
With the end of the Cold War has come declassification of some data that are now
providing many new opportunities for researchers, particularly in the Earth sci-
ences.  In addition, because of the breadth and scale of major interdisciplinary,

global-scale research efforts such as the International Geosphere-Biosphere
Programme, the Human Genome Project, and the Hubble Space Telescope
project, data from individual disciplines have become important to understanding
and progress in other fields.  Making data available, comprehensible, and useful

across disciplinary boundaries has become a far greater imperative than before
these projects existed.  This task, however, is complicated by the fact that scien-

tific data do not constitute a uniform, easily accessible body of information.For example, scientific data may be categorized in many ways: by form orcoding (numeric, symbolic, still image, animation, or other); by content; by means

of generation; by level of quality and complexity; by the source of support for the
data-accumulating activity; by time and space, in the case of observational,
geospatial records; and by the institutional structures through which the data are
distributed and stored.  Certain of these characteristics, such as level of quality
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY5(including degree of review and certification) and institutional origin, have givenrise to additional complications associated with the increasingly pervasive elec-
tronic distribution of scientific data.Some data issues are more discipline specific.  Perennial problems affecting
access to data in the observational sciences, for example, include gaps in quality
control, incompatibility of data streams, inadequate documentation of data sets, and
difficulty in meeting the requirements for long-term retention of data.  In the

biological sciences, the variety of attributes and qualifiers included with each ob-
servation and differences in terminology and usage put a heavy burden on any
supplier of data to identify and specify the character of the data precisely enough to
prevent misinterpretation.  In the laboratory physical sciences, as in many other

branches, fragmentation of data into numerous, autonomous, and often incompat-
ible databases with different formats and levels of quality is a chronic problem.Putting scientific data to use rapidly in sectors outside the immediate disci-pline of origin poses additional challenges to the longer-term effort to provide
full and open access.  In the observational environmental sciences, for instance,

massive archives and reliable institutional memory are necessary to keep the data
accessible and intelligible.  Simultaneously, however, data also must be available

to meet the publicÕs need for warnings of natural hazards and disasters and forcommercial use by the private sector.  In addition, availability of data can be

affected by governmental concerns related to national security, foreign policy,
and international trade.  Newly adopted or proposed restrictions on previously

open and unrestricted data have caused particular concern in the Earth science
communities, for example.Another significant concern regarding full and open access to scientific datais related to commercialization of electronic publication and electronic databases.
Science operates according to a ÒmarketÓ of its own, one that has rules and values
different from those of commercial markets.  While protection of intellectual

property may concern a scientist who is writing a textbook, that same scientist,
publishing a paper in a scientific journal, is motivated by the desire to propagate
ideas, with the expectation of full and open access to the results.  To commercial
publishers (including many professional societies), protection of intellectual prop-
erty means protection of the rights to reproduce and distribute printed material.
To scientists, protection of intellectual property usually signifies assurance of
proper attribution and credit for ideas and achievements.  Generally, scientists are

more concerned that their work be read and used rather than that it be protected
against unauthorized copying.  These conflicting viewpoints pose challenging

problems for science and the rest of society.  Current discussions are seeking a

balance between protecting publicly supported activities that advance the public
welfare and strengthening individual rights to intellectual property.Associated with the internationalization of scientific data collection and usehas been the growth of data centersÑdedicated, stable institutions supportingcollaborative data sharing across international boundaries and providing verifica-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6BITS OF POWERtion, documentation, archiving, and dissemination of large, accumulating datasets.  The scientific community is increasingly dependent on these data centers
Ñon their skills in data management and distribution and on their capacity to
support international scientific efforts.Finally, an important concern in global access to scientific data is the need toimprove capabilities for electronic communication by researchers working in
developing countries.  A two-way communication capability is needed:  scientists

in developing countries, like scientists everywhere, generate data that are just as
important to science as the data they acquire.  Finding ways to help less devel-

oped nations acquire affordable electronic network services is an effort that can
and should be undertaken by concerned national and international organizations
with the help of the telecommunications sector.The constraints caused by inequalities among nations in access to scientificdata are especially damaging to those sciences concerned with inherently interna-
tional issues, such as food production, biodiversity, the prevention and cure of
communicable diseases, global climate change, and other Earth system processes.
Each of these sciences requires the generation of globally compatible, accessible,
and usable data sets related to terrestrial ecosystems, the physical environment,
and human activities.  Collaboration among members of the scientific communi-
ties in every nation, rich and poor, in developing global observational data sets
and in ensuring the subsequent full and open availability of those data is impera-
tive; its importance cannot be emphasized too strongly.Economic Aspects of Scientific DataAs the quantities and uses of scientific data have expanded, and as nationsÕdiscretionary budgets have become increasingly constrained, some governments
have begun to privatize activities previously delivered by the public sector and
have sold some products and services on a commercial basisÑincluding thegeneration and distribution of scientific data.  This development has stimulated

fears that scientific data may become priced beyond the means of the scientific
communities, even in the more developed countries, despite the fact that the
conduct of basic scientific research, like other government activities related to
public health and safety, serves the public welfare and thus is appropriately
supported by government funding.Although economists may initially see privatization as a positive develop-ment for science, careful analysis suggests that a market model different from
that of ordinary commerce is more appropriate for scientific activity for several
reasons.  First, the conduct of some scientific research is itself tightly tied to the

collection, maintenance, and distribution of the data generated by that research.
In particular, in the observational sciences, whose databases can be massive,
separating the gathering, archiving, and maintenance of data from their distribu-
tion is likely to be more costly and inefficient than keeping them integrated.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY7Second, the contributors of scientific data, particularly in basic research, arefrequently also the consumers of such data, and nonmonetized exchange of data
may be most efficient in such cases.  Third, in many situations, the market for

scientific data is not large enough to support more than a single commercial
supplier, if that.  Finally, most basic research is necessarily funded from public

sources.  Privatizing the distribution of those data would mean that the funds now

provided in grants to institutions supplying data would be channeled instead (if
such funds were still available) to grants to individual scientists as users of data.
Such funds in small grants to individuals are likely to be vulnerable to even the
slightest budgetary pressure, thus potentially compromising the long-term health of
science.  Direct appropriation or block grant support to institutions with broad

responsibilities for data management, preservation, and distribution, while not as-
sured of continuity, is typically more stable and secure and is fortified by institu-
tional memory that recognizes and supports the continued utility of archived data.At issue now is whether or when the government should remove itself en-tirely as a distributor of scientific data.  (There is no question here regarding the

continued support by government of data generation; it is a part of the process of
doing basic research that falls outside the charge of this study.)  Largely because
of the possibility of monopoly control and the potential threat to the principle of
full and open availability of data, the government should not remove itself as a
primary distributor of the scientific data that its funding has produced, without
adequate safeguards as discussed below.3The concern that privatization, accompanied by high prices and legal restric-tions, would limit scientistsÕ access to data needed for their work is paralleled by
a similarly serious concern among economists about the possibilities for unre-
stricted monopolization, particularly by any party whose objectives do not in-
clude advancing the public interest.  Whether they are private or governmental in

nature, profit-making monopolies would endanger science, whereas privatization
structured so as to encourage competition in supplying value-added data to mul-
tiple user communities could well represent good public policy.Any pricing policies that bear on the availability of scientific data shouldreflect this informationÕs characteristics as a public goodÑa resource that is bothnondepletable (cannot be diminished by repeated use) and indivisible and nonex-
cludable (once having been supplied to some, cannot easily be denied to others).
Because there is no social cost from repeated use, price differentiation may be
justified in many situations, to ensure that the needs of the scientific community
are met.  Pricing of government-funded data in a differentiated system should

ensure that data are available at no cost to those who provide them or otherwise
contribute substantively to any given data set; for others, including commercial
users, prices for data should cover the costs of serving those users.  Because there

is a cost associated with repeated distribution, marginal pricing has been the
policy in many of the sciences.  It allocates the smallest nonzero cost to users and

thus is consistent with the principle of full and open exchange of data.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8BITS OF POWERInternet congestion, a growing problem for transnational exchange of scien-tific data, has obvious economic aspects and will be resolved only if participating
nations and network providers work together.  For the scientific community, a

partial solution may involve the creation of separate intranets.Intellectual Property Rights in Data:Legal Constraints on Full and Open Access?The emergence of a new intellectual property rights model that protects thecontents of electronic databases as well as those in print has the potential to signifi-
cantly affect the international flow of scientific data.  The problem has reached a

crux with the current attempts, national and international, to establish a legal frame-
work that threatens to subordinate the needs of data users working in the public
interest to the desires of those seeking protection of investments in creating and
maintaining databases.  Unfortunately, and until very recently, the input into this

legislative process at all levels by the scientific and educational communities has
been all but nonexistent.  Sustained action by those sectors is needed to avert

possible restrictions on the full and open exchange of scientific data.The U.S. Constitution articulates the legal protection of technological inven-tions and of literary and artistic works through the patent and copyright systems,
which attempt to balance incentives to create against the public interest in free
competition.  Any publicly disclosed technology or information that does not

meet the eligibility requirements for protection under U.S. patent and copyright
laws becomes public domain matter that anyone can appropriate freely.  More-

over, the special needs of libraries, educators, and researchers for access to the
copyrighted literature has been recognized under the concept of fair use.4But this traditional balancing of private and public rights has become morecomplex in the information age.  Many information goods with commercial

value, notably the contents of most electronic databases, are not eligible for
patent or copyright protection, and database producers consequently face the
threat of rapid duplication by free-riding competitors who do not contribute to the
costs of collecting, managing, or disseminating the relevant data.  In its 1991

decision in Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co.,5the U.S.Supreme Court raised the threshold of eligibility for copyright protection, requir-
ing significant original and creative authorship in the selection and arrangement
of contents and not simply industrious compiling efforts.  Earlier, the Commis-

sion of the European Communities (CEC) had started to develop a new protection
framework for databases to encourage their commercialization in Europe.  This

culminated in the formal adoption of a new European Directive on Databases by
the CEC in March 1996, which reflected influences by the Feist decision, as well
as other concerns in Europe.  In May 1996, legislation similar to the final Euro-

pean Directive, but even more protective, was introduced in the U.S. House of
Representatives (H.R. 3531), and in August 1996, a proposal almost identical toBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY9the proposed U.S. legislation was placed before a Diplomatic Conference underthe auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) with a view
to adopting a new protocol to the Berne Convention that would protect non-
copyrightable databases in a tailor-made legal regime.  Action on this proposal

has been postponed until later in 1997.Scientific data already largely compiled and distributed in electronic formconstitute one of many types of data and information that will be affected by the
legal framework now evolving in response to conflicting needs.  Although new

forms of legal protection may be needed to attract private investment to finance
the creation and maintenance of electronic databases, including those for use in
science and technology, current European and U.S. initiatives would confer a
monopoly on database developers far broader and stronger than is needed to avert
market failure.  The pending legislation would create exclusive, monopolistic

property rights of virtually unlimited duration, but without public policy limita-
tions.  If adopted in their current form, these legal proposals could jeopardize

basic scientific research and education, eliminate competition in the markets for
value-added products and services, and raise existing thresholds to entry into
insuperable legal barriers to entry.If put into practice, such measures could restrict the full and open access todata on which scientists and educators have depended.  Neither the already adopted

European Directive on Databases nor the proposed WIPO protocol and pending
U.S. legislation would provide adequate fair use safeguards that recognize the
needs of the scientific and educational communities for unrestricted access to data
at affordable prices.  They take little or no cognizance of the public-good character

of scientific data for research and educational purposes.More generally, such an approach ignores the contribution of basic scienceto the ability of U.S. firms to predominate in markets for technology and informa-
tion goods.  Despite a general consensus on the need for sustained levels of

investment in research and development, the proposed database laws could change
the status quoÑwithout anyoneÕs wanting it to happenÑby elevating the price ofthe one raw material to which U.S. researchers have always had ready access.  If
less available scientific information were to translate to fewer applications of
economic importance, the end result would be a loss of U.S. technological com-
petitiveness in an integrated world market.It is therefore essential to retain a Òfair useÓ zone in cyberspace and in other
media to protect the strong public interest in ensuring that certain uses and certain
users, including the scientific and educational communities, are neither priced
out of the market nor forced to cut back the basic research that has played a
crucial role as a public good in the economic and technological growth of the
United States.  The pending legislative proposals, which the committee considers

to be precipitous and radical attempts to alter the terms and conditions under
which scientific data may be accessed and used on a worldwide basis, have the
potential to do severe damage to the scientific enterprise. The scientific commu-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10BITS OF POWERnity and its defenders must step in quickly to insist on further, open debate beforethese changes reach implementation.RECOMMENDATIONSGeneral GuidelineBased on its deliberations and understanding of the issues involved, thecommittee believes that the following overarching principle should guide all
policy decisions concerning the management and international exchange of sci-
entific data in the natural sciences:  The value of data lies in their use.  Full and
open access to scientific data should be adopted as the international norm for the
exchange of scientific data derived from publicly funded research. The public-
good interests in the full and open access to and use of scientific data need to be
balanced against legitimate concerns for the protection of national security,
individual privacy, and intellectual property.Recommendations on Data Issues in the Natural Sciences1.Governmental science agencies and intergovernmental organizations
should adopt as a fundamental operating principle the full and open exchange of
scientific data.  By 
Òfull and open exchangeÓ the committee means that the data
and information derived from publicly funded research are made available with
as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than the
cost of reproduction and distribution.2.The International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), together with the
scientific Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, the Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development Megascience Forum, and the national
science agencies and professional societies of member countries, should consider
developing a distributed international network of data centers.  Such a network

should draw on the strengths of successful examples of international data ex-
change activities as described in Appendix C of this report, including, in particu-
lar, the ICSU World Data Centers, and become a prominent part of the global
information infrastructure that has been proposed by the ÒGroup of SevenÓ na-
tions.  To facilitate the international dissemination and interdisciplinary use of

scientific data, all public scientific data activities, including the network of data
centers, should plan for and commit to providing human and financial resources
sufficient for carrying out the following functions:a.Involve experts from the relevant disciplines, together with information
resource managers and technical specialists, in the active management and
preservation of the data;Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY11b.Develop and maintain up-to-date, comprehensive, on-line directories
of data sources and protocols for access;c.Provide documentation (metadata) adequate to ensure that each data
set can be properly used and understood, with special attention given to
making the data usable by individuals outside the core discipline area.  This

problem is particularly acute within the biological sciences, in which
imprecision and variations in taxonomic definitions and nomenclature pose
significant barriers to communication, even among the biological
subdisciplines.  The committee suggests that the CODATA Commission on

Standardized Terminology for Access to Biological Data Banks be enhanced
into a true international consultative body and that similar mechanisms be
developed for other disciplines, as needed;d.Incorporate advances in technology to facilitate access to and use of
scientific data, while overcoming incompatibilities in formats, media, and
other technical attributes through vigorous coordination and standardization
efforts;e.Institute effective programs of quality control and peer review of data
sets; andf.Digitize all key historical data sets and ensure that every important
condition for the long-term retention of data be met, including the adoption
of appropriate retention and purging criteria and the timely transfer of all
data sets to new media to prevent their deterioration or obsolescence.3.The ICSU and other professional scientific societies should encourage the
study of, and publication of peer-reviewed papers on, effective data management
and preservation practices, as well as promote the teaching of those practices in
all institutions of higher learning.4.All scientists conducting publicly funded research should make their data
available immediately, or following a reasonable period of time for proprietary
use. The maximum length of any proprietary period should be expressly estab-
lished by the particular scientific communities, and compliance should be moni-
tored subsequently by the funding agency.5.As a corollary to recommendation 2.a above, publicly funded scientific
databases should be maintained either directly or under subcontract by the gov-
ernment science agencies with the requisite discipline mission and need.  In the

United States, the Office of Science and Technology Policy should develop an
overall policy for the long-term retention of scientific data, including a contin-
gency plan for protecting those data that may become threatened with the loss of
their institutional home.6Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12BITS OF POWER6.With regard to improving access to scientific data in developing coun-
tries, the committee makes the following recommendations:a.International development organizations, together with professional
societies, should provide targeted training programs for scientists in the use
of computers, with emphasis on the management of digital data in specific
disciplines.b.Foreign aid agencies should (i) make available to individual scientists
in developing countries more direct, peer-reviewed grants that include su-
pport for access to data, and (ii) facilitate the involvement of scientists in
such nations in their own countriesÕ capacity-building initiatives, research
policy decisions, and national database construction efforts.c.Scientists in developing countries should be encouraged to organize
to promote the policy of full and open access to scientific data in their own
countries, as well as to make their data available internationally.d.The ICSU, together with funding agencies and nongovernmental
bodies, should strengthen its efforts to assist developing countries in under-

taking their own scientific studies and encourage scientists engaged in such
studies to take active roles in the international scientific community, where
their efforts can be appreciated and used.  Legal and procedural protocols

must be developed to provide for fair and equitable sharing of any resulting
intellectual property.e.Until affordable and ubiquitous electronic network services are avail-
able, national and international scientific societies and foreign aid agencies
should establish or improve their existing efforts to send extra stocks of
scientific publications to libraries and research institutions in developing
countries that need them.7.Finally, the ICSU, together with the principal national and international
scientific organizations mentioned in Recommendation 2 above, should convene
a series of major international meetings to initiate meaningful action on these
recommendations.Recommendations on Issues in Information Technology1.The principal scientific societies and the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) should begin a long-term planning effort to assess the carrying capacity
and distribution capability of the Internet, using projections of storage and trans-
mission capacity and of demand and taking into account the next generation of
Internet protocols.  Scientific societies should encourage their publication com-

mittees to maintain contact with the IETF and keep their members abreast of
advances in technologies useful for scientific information management.  One

option that scientific societies and government science agencies should evaluateBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY13is the creation of dedicated international science networks, such as the Internet IInow being developed.2.To improve the technical organization and management of scientific data,
the scientific community, through the government science agencies, professional
societies, and the actions of individual scientists, should do the following:a.Work with the information and computer science communities to
increase their involvement in scientific information management;b.Support computer science research in database technology, particularly
to strengthen standards for self-describing data representations, efficient
storage of large data sets, and integration of standards for configuration
management;c.Improve science education and the reward system in the area of
scientific data management; andd.Encourage the funding of data compilation and evaluation projects,
and of data rescue efforts for important data sets in transient or obsolete
forms, especially by scientists in developing countries.3.U.S. government science agencies, working with their counterparts in
other nations, should improve data authentication and apply security safeguards
more vigorously.  They also should continue funding for research and develop-

ment in information technologies that are important to the pursuit of science.4.A consortium of intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,
including the International Telecommunications Union, the World Bank, the Spe-
cialized Agencies of the United Nations, the International Council of Scientific
Unions, and other concerned bodies, should mount a global effort to reduce
telecommunications tariffs to scientists in developing countries through differen-
tial pricing or direct subsidy.5.Foreign aid to developing countries in the form of computers, computer
networks, and associated software, coupled with the training and resources nec-
essary to operate and maintain those technologies, should be given high priority,
on the basis of the potential for long-term socioeconomic returns.  The communi-

cation systems must have adequate carrying capacity to meet growing demand.Recommendations Regarding Economic Aspects of Scientific DataThe committee recommends that the economic aspects of facilities for stor-age and distribution of scientific data generated by publicly funded research be
evaluated according to the following criteria:Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14BITS OF POWER¥Does the scientific research depend on a substantial public investment
in one or more facilities that generate the data of interest?  If so, the data
distribution facilities are most likely to benefit by being vertically integrated with
the observational or experimental facilities themselves.¥Does the (non-facilities-based) distributed scientific research involve
coordination among researchers, possibly in different countries?  If so, then data
distribution becomes a means of communication among contributing scientists,
and for this community, the price of the data alone should be zero.  If the

distributor subsequently adds value to the data, then the price should be no higher
than the marginal cost of adding value.7¥Is the community of users roughly the same as the community of
contributors?  If so, then data distribution should be priced at zero (or at marginal
cost, if value is added).  If there are many users who are not contributors, such as

commercial customers, then some form of price discrimination to ensure zero or
low prices to contributing scientific users, with possibly higher prices to others,
may be appropriate.¥Is the user community large enough to support more than one datadistributor?  If so, then privatization of data distribution may be a viable policy
option.  If not, then privatization should occur only if the contractual arrangements

are adequately protective of the needs of the scientific community.  Necessary
Ñbutnot necessarily sufficientÑconditions for privatization to be desirable are asfollows:ÑThe distribution of data can be separated easily from their generation.ÑThe scientific data set is used by others beyond the researchcommunity.ÑIt is easy to price discriminate/product differentiate between scientificusers and other users, and it is easy for the government to contractually mandate
low prices to scientific users for government-funded data.ÑPrivatization will not result in the unrestricted monopoly provision ofthe data.The appropriate price ceiling for nonscientific users of scientific data gener-ated through government research is incremental cost, as defined in the section
titled ÒPricing Publicly Funded Scientific DataÓ in Chapter 4.  The price of
scientific data to the contributing scientific community should be zero, or at most
marginal cost.Recommendations Regarding Legal DevelopmentsAffecting Access to DataThe new proposals supporting an overly protectionist property rights regimefor the contents of databases and for on-line transmissions of data and other
scientific information have reached an advanced stage of legislative consider-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY15ation at both the national and the international levels.  The committee believes
that these legislative changes do not reflect adequate consideration of the poten-
tial negative impacts on scientific research and education and that they have been
proposed for implementation at an unnecessarily precipitous pace.  The commit-
tee therefore recommends that the Office of Science and Technology Policy,
leaders from the science agencies and professional societies, and all those con-
cerned with sustaining the health of the scientific enterprise should immediately
take the following actions:1.Present to all relevant legislative forums the principle of full and open
exchange of scientific data resulting from publicly funded research, and clarify
the importance of sustaining such exchange to the nationÕs future whenever theseforums consider laws that would apply to exchange of scientific data.2.Demand that national and international legislative processes now in
progress slow to a rational pace, and that the deliberations become more public to
allow the scientific and educational communities to present their views and con-
cerns to lawmakers.3.Advocate the incorporation of equivalents of 
Òfair useÓ as part of any
regulatory structure applying to databases as such, or to on-line storage and
transmission of data and other scientific information. As a corollary, ensure that
the public-good aspects of scientific data are preserved and promoted in laws and
regulations governing intellectual property on the Internet and in any future
electronic networked environments.4.Work with Congress and the official U.S. representatives to the World
Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization to ensure
that the nationÕs interests in maintaining preeminence in science and technologyare not undermined.5.Pursue these issues not only within the United States, but also internation-
ally through international scientific organizations and U.S. foreign-policy chan-
nels as they deal with trade and other agreements affecting intellectual property
protection.NOTES1.By 
Òfull and open exchangeÓ the committee means that data and information derived from
publicly funded research are made available with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondis-
criminatory basis, for no more than the cost of reproduction and distribution.  This definition isadapted from a basic tenet regarding availability of scientific data in global change research.See ÒPolicy Statements on Data Management for Global Change ResearchÓ (July 1991), Office
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16BITS OF POWERof Science and Technology Policy, DOE/EP-0001P, Washington, D.C., and National ResearchCouncil, Committee on Geophysical and Environmental Data (1995), On the Full and OpenExchange of Scientific Data, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 2.2.Throughout this report, the term 
Òscientific dataÓ refers to data in the natural sciences.
3.The Landsat privatization effort, described in Chapter 4, is one example of unrestricted mo-
nopolistic data distribution under which the scientific community suffered loss of access.  Nev-

ertheless there may be situations in which the scientific community would benefit if a body ofdata were distributed either by a competitive set of private firms or by a single adequatelyconstrained private source.4.Before the electronic era, copyright evolved as a protection for authors and their assignees;
under copyright, a document could be reproduced only with the approval of the copyrightholder, under whatever terms that person chose.  Copying machines made possible, even easy,

violations of this protection. A doctrine of Òfair useÓ then evolved to allow very limited copy-
ing by scholarly, educational, scientific, and other not-for-profit users, but not by any whowould make commercial use of the copies. The fair use doctrine has become a principal protec-
tion of the right of the publicÑand thus of the scientific communityÑto have ready, low-costaccess to copyrighted material; its economic and cultural justification rests on the nature ofinformation as a public good that benefits users.5.Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 111 S. Ct. 1282 (1991).6.See the recommendations in National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data onOur Physical Universe: A New Strategy for Archiving the NationÕs Scientific Information Re-sources, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.7.By 
Òadding valueÓ in this case is meant any transformation of the data beyond that necessary
for scientific research that increases the value of the information for some or all potential users
of the data.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION171715IntroductionBasic scientific research fuels most of our nationÕsÑand the worldÕsÑprogress in science.1  Society uses the fruits of such research to expand the
worldÕs base of knowledge and applies that knowledge in myriad ways to create
new wealth and to enhance the public welfare (see Box 1.1).  Yet few people

understand how scientific advances have made possible the ongoing improve-
ments that are basic to the daily lives of everyone.  Fewer still are aware of what
it takes to achieve advances in science, or know that the scientific enterprise is
becoming increasingly international in character.Freedom of inquiry, the full and open availability of scientific data on aninternational basis, and the open publication of results are cornerstones of basic
research that U.S. law and tradition have long upheld.  For many decades, the

United States has been a leader in the collection and dissemination of scientific
data, and in the discovery and creation of new knowledge.  By sharing and

exchanging data with the international community and by openly publishing the
results of research, all countries, including the United States, have benefited.  In

this centuryÕs dramatic growth of scientific knowledgeÑan expansion motivated
by a combination of forces including military, commercial, public benefit (espe-
cially health), and purely intellectualÑa necessary component has been the wide
availability of scientific information, ranging from minimally processed data to
cutting-edge research articles in newly developing fields.  This information has

been assembled as a matter of public responsibility by the individuals and institu-
tions of the scientific community, largely with the support of public funding.Data are the building blocks of scientific knowledge and the seeds of discov-ery.  Activities in the recording, analysis, and dissemination of data are motivated
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18BITS OF POWERtoday by the same forces that have impelled humans for thousands of years:curiosity to understand the natural world; desire to pass that understanding to
succeeding generations; self-aggrandizement; and personal or national power.2Data challenge us to develop new concepts, theories, and models to make sense
of the patterns we see in them.  They provide the quantitative basis for testing and

confirming theories and for translating new knowledge into useful applications
for the benefit of society.  The assembled record of scientific data is both a history

of events in the natural world and a record of human accomplishment.3 The
international availability of these scientific data for fundamental research on a
full and open basis and issues associated with ensuring global access are the
primary concerns of this report.Technological advances in recent years have led to an exponential increasein the amount of data collected, stored, and transmitted.  New, ever more sophis-

ticated sensors record observations on objects ranging from the smallest particles
of matter to the largest objects in our known universe.  It is now commonplace to

control such large instruments as telescopes remotely, during the observation of
an event, from a point hundreds or thousands of miles from the instrument.
Satellites in orbit around Earth provide us with electrooptical observations, col-
lecting billions of bits of data about our planet on a daily basis.  Powerful ma-

chines unravel genomes to reveal the genetic code of life and help us decipher the
secrets of heredity.  In addition, rapid advances in computing, data processing

and storage, and, most recently, in global telecommunications have given us the
power to communicate and share the information produced by these remarkable
observational and experimental tools, almost as quickly as it is generated.  The
BOX 1.1Examples of Benefits Derived from Scientific Research
New scientific understanding and its applications are yielding benefits such asthe following:¥Improved diagnoses, pharmaceuticals, and treatments in medicine;
¥Better and higher-yield food production in agriculture;
¥New and improved materials for fabrication of manufactured objects, build-
ing materials, packaging, and special applications such as microelectronicsin the production arts;¥Faster, cheaper, and safer transportation and communication;

¥Better means for energy production;
¥Improved ability to forecast environmental conditions and to manage natural
resources; and¥More powerful ways to explore all aspects of our universe, ranging from the
finest subnuclear scale to the boundaries of the universe, and encompass-ing living organisms in all their variety.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19exponential accumulation of these electronic dataÑthese bits of powerÑand ourexpanding capacity to manipulate them are in turn changing the nature of scien-
tific inquiry and its application to the great challenges facing mankind.As in the past, generating data in the natural sciences is only the first step inthe process of creating, organizing, and applying knowledge.  Other elements of

this endeavor include discovery of new principles, integration of information
across disciplines, dissemination by formal and informal education, and applica-
tion by many sectors of society.  Today, however, larger interdisciplinary re-

search efforts such as the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme,4 the
Human Genome Project,5 and other international 
ÒmegascienceÓ research pro-
grams6  are creating new frameworks of knowledge not only about the universe
and what constitutes it, but also about living organisms, human behavior, and
their mutual interaction.  In addition,  traditional disciplinary research continues

in field studies, the laboratories of individual scientists, and at large joint facili-
ties.Increasingly, all forms of research involve both formal and informal interna-tional scientist-to-scientist contact and exchanges of data.  This increase in interna-

tional collaboration is owing partly to changing political and economic conditions
and also to the growing availability of electronic communication.  Whether carried

out on a large scale under cooperative agreements or less formally among indi-
vidual researchers, these collaborations have become integral to the search for
scientific understanding.  Their successÑas well as progress in achieving the pub-lic benefits of scienceÑdepends on the full and open availability of scientific data.CHARGE AND SCOPE OF STUDYThe purpose of this report is to describe and develop new insights into thetrends, issues, and problems that are shaping the transnational exchange of scien-
tific data.  Specifically, the Committee on Issues in the Transborder Flow of

Scientific Data was charged with the following tasks:¥Outline the needs for access to data in the major research areas of currentscientific interest that fall within the scope of CODATAÑthe physical, astro-nomical, geological, and biological sciences.¥Characterize the legal, economic, policy, and technical factors and trendsthat have an influenceÑwhether favorable or negativeÑon access to data by thescientific community.¥Identify and analyze the barriers to international access to scientific datathat may be expected to have the most adverse impact in discipline areas within
CODATAÕs purview, with emphasis on factors common to all the disciplines.¥Recommend to the sponsors of the study approaches that could helpovercome barriers to access in the international context.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20BITS OF POWERPerhaps the most obvious aspect of this charge is its wide scope.  The broadnature of the committeeÕs inquiry precluded a comprehensive analysis of all theissues and trends in all the disciplines and across all geographic areas.  Moreover,

many activities beyond the sphere of science impinge on the transnational ex-
change of scientific data, a fact that required the committee to establish practical
limits on its treatment of these topics.This report focuses primarily on issues pertaining to scientistsÕ effective
access to data in numerical, symbolic, and image form, rather than bibliographic
or purely textual data, for research in the natural sciences.  However, the commit-

tee is acutely aware that distinctions among these categories of data are fading.
Most of the discussion concerns digital rather than analog data, since practically
all scientific data are now collected and stored digitally and most older data are
being transferred to digitized electronic formats.With regard to the needs for data in the physical, astronomical, geological,and biological sciences, the report incorporates by reference the more detailed
and thorough analyses of research strategies produced in recent years by the
National Research Council for the various natural sciences.  The importance of

data for fundamental research across these disciplines is described in a summary
overview at the beginning of Chapter 3 and is highlighted in various examples
throughout the report.Because the sponsors of the study are U.S. federal government science agen-cies, the committee has emphasized trends, issues, and barriers that have an
impact on international access to data collected and used in the context of pub-
licly funded, basic research programs.  Despite this emphasis, the committee took

into account the continua between fundamental and applied research, between
raw data and processed information, and between public and private uses of
scientific data.  Indeed, the most vexing public policy issues facing the interna-

tional scientific community involve defining the appropriate balance of compet-
ing interests.In addressing the international aspects of data exchange, the committee con-ducted a widely disseminated informal inquiry to develop at least an anecdotal
sense of what data issues trouble the international scientific community today.7The issues were broadly divided into those affecting the economically most devel-
oped nations, defined as the countries belonging to Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development, and those confronting the developing countries.  The

committee recognizes, however, that the developing countries encompass a wide
spectrum of economic and technical capacities; illustrative examples of major is-
sues are provided with reference to specific regions, countries, or institutions.Finally, in its deliberations the committee discovered certain matters thatwere central to the subject but were not explicitly included in its charge.  Al-

though expressly requested to provide its advice to the agencies that supported
this study, the committee became aware that many of the issues and barriers
pertinent to global access to scientific data could only be addressed collectivelyBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION21by the worldÕs international scientific community in concert with a broad rangeof national and international governmental and nongovernmental bodies.  There-

fore the committee considered it necessary to make several recommendations of
broader scope in keeping with these concerns.UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS AND CONCERNSSeveral assumptions underlie the committeeÕs work.  The first is that interna-
tional collaboration enhances scientistsÕ capacity to better understand the naturalworld and thus strengthens the science base that is a source of important benefits
to society.  From this assumption, the rest follow.
Science is one of the most internationally cooperative of activities.  Today,
the improving means and ease of communication and travel, as well as their
decreasing costs, have made transnational interactions a normal, daily part of
carrying out scientific research.  National boundaries are invisible in scientists
Õdaily interactions, whether they are engaged in face-to-face discussion in a single
laboratory or across great distances by electronic mail.  Joint multinational au-

thorship is common, and many funding institutions have encouraged such efforts.
With the end of the Cold War, international collaboration can be expected to
increase further.The handling of scientific informationÑone of the results of such collabora-tionÑhas also changed dramatically.  In fact, the distinction between ÒdataÓ andÒinformationÓ has itself become blurred.  Data now include not only numerical
data, but also symbolic data and images, and, for many scientists, textual data.
Much of this convergence is the consequence of powerful electronic capabilities
affecting the acquisition, storage, and exchange of scientific data.  Primary data

collected by a detector now frequently go directly into a computer for storage and
processing before the person who generates the data ever sees them.  In such an

experiment, how are ÒprimaryÓ data to be defined?  Fortunately, the integration
of electronic methods has occurred so naturally that this question is unimportant
to the working scientist, who might ask instead, ÒIs this the best way to collectand analyze the data?ÓThe storage and exchange of scientific data have been more problematic thantheir collection.  Even within the particular communities that generate and ini-

tially use data, their storage and dissemination traditionally have required atten-
tion and expense.  Moreover, many scientific data have value outside the commu-

nity of origin.  Entire institutions have evolved to provide data services, among

them public and private data centers.  Electronic media have changed the means,
costs, capacities, and time scales associated with the handling of scientific data.
Some of these changes are already well established, some are evolving, and some
are still only imagined.  What is certain is that change will continue and that our

management and use of scientific data in 10 years will differ from current prac-
tice.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22BITS OF POWERAnother of the committeeÕs assumptions is a corollary of the first and reflectswhat the committee believes is virtually a consensus of the global scientific
community:  that the most valued goal of scientists is that other scientists should
learn of their work and use it.  The common interests of all scientists, of science,
and indeed of society in general thus are best served by as full and open an
exchange of scientific information as possible, consistent with the preservation of
scientistsÕ capacity to continue their investigations.  This assumption can some-
times put scientists at odds with other sectors of society, as discussion and ex-
amples in this report illustrate.  Because the scientific community is not the only
sector with an interest in the handling of scientific data and information, scien-
tists need to remain involved in the current policy debate that will affect the
prospects for continuing open, global access to scientific data.This study has been motivated by a concern for ensuring the continuingstrength of the scientific enterprise as a source of international well-being and
progress; hence the analysis and recommendations reflect that motivation.  The

extent to which the committeeÕs recommendations are adopted may require bal-ancing this motivation against the motivations of others, whose objectives are not
necessarily the same.The chapters that follow (a) describe the information technology tools andcapabilities that are transforming the handling and use of scientific data, and
some of the principal impacts on data exchange arising from these technological
developments; (b) summarize the underlying factors in international scientific
data exchange, how scientists use data, and what data issues confront them as
they carry out their research; (c) examine the economic aspects of data obtained
from publicly funded research; and (d) analyze the conflicts arising from infor-
mation technologyÕs impact on the domain of intellectual property law that regu-lates scientistsÕ access to data.  Technical terms and acronyms are defined, and
examples of successful data exchange activities given, in the appendixes.NOTES1.Basic, or fundamental, research may be defined as research that leads to new understanding of
how nature works and how its many facets are interconnected.  See John A. Armstrong, 
ÒIsBasic Research a Luxury Our Society Can No Longer Afford?,Ó Karl Taylor Compton Lecture,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, October 13, 1993.2.J.H. Westbrook, (1992), 
ÒA History of Data Recording, Analysis, and Dissemination,Ó pp. 430-
460 in Data for Discovery: Proceedings of the Twelfth International CODATA Conference, P.Glaeser, ed., Begell House, New York.3.National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data on Our Physical Universe: ANew Strategy for Archiving the NationÕs Scientific Information Resources, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.4.See the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
Õs World Wide Web site at <http://www.igbp.kva.se/index.html>.  Note: In keeping with the subject and message of this report,
the reader will find, in addition to references to texts and personal communications, manyBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION23references to sites on the World Wide Web.  Most of these are uniform resources locators, or
URLs; a few are uniform resources names, or URNs.  Although the validity of all of these Web
addresses was determined at the time of publication, the reader is cautioned that URLs some-
times change, and that one of the shortcomings of the current state of electronic communicationis inadequate tracking capability to lead someone from an old to a new URL when the addresschanges.  The replacement of URLs by URNs is a likely solution to this problem in the coming
years, but it has not yet happened.5.For additional information about the Human Genome Project, see the National Human Genome
Research InstituteÕs Web site at <http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/HGP>.6.Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Megascience Forum
(1993), Megascience and Its Background, OECD, Paris, France.7.The inquiry is reprinted in Appendix D, and the results are summarized separately on the
USNC/CODATA Web site at <http://www.nas.edu/cpsma/codata.htm>.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24BITS OF POWER2425Trends and Issues in
Information Technology
Advances in information technology offer unprecedented opportunities aswell as new challenges in the international exchange of scientific data.  Rapid

improvements have led to ever greater computational speed, communication
bandwidth, and storage capacity at costs within reach of even small-scale usersÑ
a trend that appears likely to continue well into the future.1  Moreover, technicaladvances in satellites, sensors, robotics, and fiber-optic and wireless telecommu-
nications are extending the range of technologies affecting the acquisition, refine-
ment, analysis, transmission, and sharing of scientific data.In this chapter, the committee examines some of the concerns that rapidchanges and growing reliance on information technology have raised with re-
spect to the exchange of scientific data.  Table 2.1 frames some of the profound

advances in technology that are having an impact on access to and exchange of
scientific data and thus on research-related capabilities.  The committeeÕs over-

view of associated technical trends provides some context for its discussion of six
barriers to and concerns regarding global access to scientific information, includ-
ing access by scientists in developing countries.  Its recommendations for techni-

cal improvements to facilitate the international sharing of scientific data are
addressed to a range of participants.OVERVIEW OF TECHNICAL TRENDSThe committeeÕs discussion focuses on 10 trends (Table 2.2) that representmajor forces of change in data and information technology.  These trends interact

with and reinforce each other, often further accelerating change and complicatingBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY25TABLE 2.1Advances in Technologies Relevant to the Generation and Exchange of Scientific Data and Information
TechnologyRelevancePrognosis
High-density storage andmemoryEncryption/authenticationPacket asynchronous transfermode (ATM) communicationsSensorsSmall satellites (and inexpensivelaunches)Wireless (space and ground)communicationsHigh-performance computerprocessorsRobotics for exploration and fortechnology data transmission,
from or to inaccessible placesCapacity to deal with large volumes of data and highrates of transmission for todayÕs science demands.Ability to protect copyright, the privacy ofindividuals, and data integrity.Support for high-speed, flexible transmission of videoand images.Extension of the range of that which can be observed(more precision, more spectral range, higher sampling
frequency, less calibration effort).Lowering of barriers to entry for remote sensingapplications.Capability to enhance communication in remote areasor areas where post, telephone, and telegraph have
limited capability/capacity.Enhanced capability for computationally intensivescience activities (e.g., models, transformation of
large data sets).Improved autonomy of vehicles for ocean andatmosphere studies and for planetary missions.Precipitous drop in cost.  Holographic and high-density optical memory
technology will enter market.aImbedded encryption in numerous products expected to make privacy andsecurity applications manageable.  Widespread application of public-key

encryption.Long-term steady growth in ATM applications over high-speed fiber-opticlinks.  Use of ATM within local area networks, competitive with other

local area network (LAN) technologies (e.g., 100-Mbps Ethernet)New multispectral sensors, improved resolution, smaller and morenumerous satellites.  Additional terrestrial applications (e.g., agriculture).
Increased space and ground remote sensing activity.  Broader array of
applications.bWorldwide access to voice and high-speed data transmission within 5years.  Wireless systems filling in to meet communications needs that

ongoing investments in fiber cable or wireline systems have been unable to
accommodate.More expensive fabrication processes expected to cause reduction insupplier alternatives.c Potential for Òsingle-electronÓ circuits.
d  Moore
Õslaw applying through 2005, or longer.New frames for small submarines and pilotless aircraft (driven in part bymilitary applications); ÒdownholeÓ oil, gas, and geologic exploration;
micro-electromechanical systems (MEMs) applications.e(continues)Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26BITS OF POWERTABLE 2.1Continued
TechnologyRelevancePrognosis
Hybrid analog/digital computersLanguage processing bycomputerDatabase technology (includinginformation retrieval,
ÒknowbotsÓ)Fiber-optic communicationsCapacity for new sensing and reasoning power,helping machines to do ÒintelligentÓ work.
Assistance in getting relevant information to scientistson time.  Capability for speakers of different

languages to improve collaboration.Capability to deal with the extremely complex varietyof information in natural sciences and medicine;
support in organizing relevant, current information.Vastly increased capacity to accommodate rates ofmany gigabits per second.Potentially rapid advancement portended by breakthroughs in computationand neural science research.fImproved filtering and organizing of information in response to the WWW
information glut. Many graphical tools have capabilities to deal with
special fonts and 16-bit character sets.  Limited to 
ÒmajorÓ language pairs
in the near term.Object-oriented databases entering the market; massively parallelrepresentations (e.g., Paradise at University of Wisconsing).  Widespread
use of electronic agents to assist research.New, erbium-based systems expected to reduce power and improvereliability.h  Improved connectivity using undersea cables.iaDemetri Psaltis and Fai Mok (1995), ÒHolographic Memories,Ó Scientific American, November:70-76; Praveen Asthana and Blair Finkelstein (1995), ÒSuperdense Optical Storage,Ó IEEESpectrum, August:25-31; Robert F. Service (1995), ÒPushing the Data Storage Envelope,Ó Science, July 21:299-300.bK.C. Cole (1996), ÒNASAÕs Mission: Think Small,Ó  Los Angeles Times, January 21:1.cA discussion of the increasing cost of semiconductor production capability is provided in G. Dan Hutcheson and Jerry D. Hutcheson (1996), ÒTechnology and Economics in theSemiconductor Industry,Ó Scientific American, 274 (1):54-62.dChappell Brown (1996), ÒElectron Switching Simplified,Ó EE Times, January 8:35.eMEMS are nanoscale machines.  Applications include instrumentation within living tissue.  See <http://mems.isi.edu/>.
fR. Colin Johnson (1995), ÒMead Envisions New Design EraÑAnalog and Digital Techniques to Create a New ÔArt FormÕ,Ó EE Times
.gDavid J. DeWitt, (1994), ÒThe Trend Toward Object Oriented DBMS,Ó briefing to NASA.  See <http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oss/aisr/1994_minutes.html>.
hGeorge Gilder (1997), ÒFiber Keeps Its Promise,Ó Forbes ASAP, April 7:90-94; and Frank J. Denniston and Peter K. Runge (1995), ÒThe Glass Necklace,Ó IEEE Spectrum, October:24-27.iSee <http://www.teleport.com/~simoriah/scow/sub.htm> for more information on undersea cables and plans.  Also, AT&T has announc
ed support of ÒAfrica One,Ó a $1.9 billion project
intended to link coastal countries in Africa.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY27application choices.  Each is discussed below, and their actual or potential effecton international scientific data exchange among the member countries of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) is broadly
characterized.  The impact of these technical trends on access to scientific data in

developing countries is also discussed.Decreasing Cost of Computing and CommunicationsThe cost of owning and operating increasingly powerful computers hasdropped dramatically over the past several decades.  Today
Õs personal comput-ers, for example, offer the processing speed of workstations of fewer than 5 years
ago at a fraction of the cost.  The availability of information technology products

with ever-increasing computing, communication, and storage capability has con-
tributed to the ubiquitous assimilation of computers into modern daily life, and
complex applications taking advantage of continually improving computer per-
formance have emerged.  Among other uses, information technology is being

applied increasingly to product development, manufacturing, and distribution, as
well as to new financial services such as debit/credit transactions and investment
portfolio management.One effect of this phenomenon is an opportunity for Òtechnology leapfrog-gingÓ: late entrants to the use of information technology can enjoy the immediateadvantage of low-cost systems, without having had to make earlier investments
in more expensive and less capable technologies and then carry the burden of
depreciation of that investment.  Modern computing technology is thus increas-

ingly accessible to low-budget endeavors as prices fall also to the press of mass
production and competition.2Even though the pace of change can be daunting to information technologynewcomers, in general it should become easier and cheaper with time to obtain
technology to participate in the global sharing of scientific information. In the
context of the natural sciences, this means that scientists and other users in
developing countries or in economically depressed regions such as those in East-
ern Europe and the former Soviet Union are increasingly able to acquire new
computing and communications tools for carrying out their work.Enhanced Capabilities for Collecting Scientific DataThe natural sciences produce prodigious amounts of data.  Earth observation
and weather systems lead the way, with the potential for collecting terabytes3 per
day. The same trends in low-cost microelectronics that are fueling the informa-
tion and network revolutions also are driving the development of low-cost sen-
sors and (relatively) low-cost storage systems.  Major 
Òbig scienceÓ efforts such
as the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the Human
Genome Project involve the collection and distribution of large volumes of dataBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28BITS OF POWERTABLE 2.2Summary of Technical Trends Affecting Exchange of Scientific Data and Information
TrendDescription
Decreasing cost of computing andcommunications;  ÒtechnologyleapfroggingÓEnhanced capabilities for collectingscientific and other dataIncreasing exploitation of broadbandnetworks and emerging dominance of the
video data type in networksAdvent of digital wirelesscommunicationsFollowing MooreÕs Law, the cost of computing, data storage, and communication has fallen consistentlyfor more than 25 years.  Developing countries and the newly independent states of the former Soviet
Union have, in some cases, been able to acquire modern communications and computing equipment.
New users have been able to avoid substantial capital expense and the burden of depreciation of thatinvestment.The collection power of their instruments enables major scientific enterprises such as the HumanGenome Project, climate modeling, and satellite remote sensing studies to generate very large volumesof data.The investment in fiber-optic cable over the past two decades is increasingly being exploited to supportdemanding new applications with high-capacity or real-time delivery requirements (video, medical
imaging, large-scale science). The entertainment industry and new applications such as videoteleconferencing, movies on demand, and interactive television have attracted substantial investment andwill be the dominant factors in the development of networks in the next 10 years.  Voice

communication will require a minor share of telecommunications capacity.Wireless networks are rapidly connecting the world in new ways, and at low cost.  Ground-based
wireless systems are creating modern infrastructure in cities that have had unreliable phone systemswith inadequate capacity.  Proposed satellite ventures will provide data and voice connections on a
global basis.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY29Shifting dominance in data networksfrom primarily science/defense tocommercial/entertainment applicationsIncreasing facility in collaborative workIncreasing capabilities for languageprocessingIncreasing recognition of the importanceof standardsGrowing acceptance of a need forcooperation in monitoring andcontrolling network activityIncreasing use of intranetsThe Internet was developed to support advanced science and technology activities.  Recent changes (in
particular, the advent of World Wide Web browsers) have transformed the Internet into a tool for a vastarray of both commercial and noncommercial applications (including shopping, entertainment,
education, and general publication).Teams of scientists (remote from each other and often in different countries) are able to work togetheron a project, facilitated by high-performance communication for active, real-time interaction with eachother using data and other information resources.Machines using natural language processing techniques are helping to organize the vast amount ofinformation available in electronic form.  New tools are providing transparent access (via rudimentary
machine translation) for speakers of the worldÕs major languages.Standards provide the means for interoperability and help to support competition and product evolution.Recognition of the role of standards (whether de facto, industry driven, or supported by formal national
or international bodies) has grown, further accelerating the acceptance and applications of standards.Mechanisms have been built into authentication systems, retrieval systems, and networks to account forspecific activities of users and to support flexible billing systems.  Public-key encryption technology is

increasingly accepted as a means to protect data and authenticate users.  This activity is being driven
primarily by the needs of commercial users of the network.The use of dedicated networks, particularly among private firms, is growing.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30BITS OF POWERand data products.  Other observational science and engineering projects
4 involv-
ing large-scale models, simulations, or sampling volumes also produce enormous
quantities of data.  NASA
Õs Earth Observing System (EOS) is perhaps the bestknown example of a high-volume, long-term scientific observational system.5EOS is expected to collect a terabyte per day of satellite sensor data by the
beginning of the next century.The desire to collect, manage, and preserve scientific information alwaysappears to exceed the financial and technical capabilities to do so, even in the
wealthiest nations.  Scientific communities must organize themselves better to

select information for acquisition and for retention.Advent of Digital Wireless CommunicationsWireless communications received a major boost from the effort to developmobile communications systems in the United States.  Interest and investment

also have been stimulated by the possibility of creating competition in local
telephone service, heretofore a 100-year monopoly.  Moreover, the end of the

Cold War has forced aerospace companies to seek new markets for satellite
technology, including direct-broadcast television and satellite-based cellular tele-
phony.  Wireless communications links are being installed worldwide, enabling

mobile communicationÑand, for developing countries and other nations withhistorically weak telecommunications infrastructure and rapid growth, avoidance
of much of the capital cost of a wired communication infrastructure. New compe-
tition will drive down the cost of telephony and offer new applications.  Video

broadcast from space or from fixed terrestrial sites may offer new ways to deliver
data in interactive communications systems.Increasing Exploitation of Broadband Networks and Capabilities forTransmission of Video DataCommercial providers believe that new applications such as videoconferencing, interactive television, and the ability to access movies on demand
from a large archive will be the dominant factors in the development of networks
over the next 10 years.  Voice communications will require an ever smaller share

of telecommunications capacity.The widely discussed convergence of personal computers and television hasbeen accelerated through the widespread licensing of new tools for interactive
World Wide Web (WWW) applications and through emerging standards by which
cable television companies can provide high-speed Internet access.  Much of this

activity is driven by the goal of providing interactive access to large video data-
bases in Òreal timeÓ (at least 1 megabit per second).
New, higher-bandwidth protocols such as the high-performance parallel in-terface (HIPPI), the first gigabit-per-second standard begun at Los Alamos Na-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY31tional Laboratories in the early 1990s, and the MBone (a virtual multicast back-bone network for delivery of audio and rudimentary real-time video across the
Internet) are being developed.  In the short term, however, the impact of high-

bandwidth applications will be negative (especially for high-data-rate users in
OECD countries), since the need for higher bandwidth has already been outpac-
ing bandwidth improvements, both on major backbone networks and on bridges
between them (see the section below titled ÒSpecific Technical ConcernsÓ).Shifting Dominance in Data NetworksThe international public infrastructure for data communications is builtaround the Internet.  Originally developed in the United States by the Department

of Defense, the National Science Foundation, and other agencies to support sci-
entific and technical collaboration,6 the Internet now serves a much wider range
of purposes.  In recent years, it has become a high-visibility source of entertain-

ment as well as an indispensable tool for many commercial and noncommercial
applications (e.g., catalog sales, news, social interaction, dissemination of com-
pany and product information).  Advertisers use the Internet to promote them-

selves and their wares as Òhigh techÓ and, moreover, view the current demo-
graphics of Internet users (who have disposable incomes that are typically much
higher than average) as extremely favorable.In 1995, the total number of commercial (Ò.comÓ) sites on the Internet grewto exceed the number of educational and government sites for the first time, and
this continues to be the sector of most rapid growth.  For example, the percentage

of Web sites on the Internet running from the Ò.comÓ domain in the United States
increased from 1.5 percent in June 1993 to 50 percent in January 1996.7This trend toward commercial use of the Internet could have a significantimpact on the scientific community.  What has been until now a government-

subsidized activity could become a significant cost factor to scientists as net-
works become privatized.  Further, the scientific community originally played a

major role in developing the technologies and standards for the Internet, but this
is no longer the case.  Scientific activity will have to follow (and potentially

benefit from or suffer because of) the standards and pace set by others.Increasing Technical Support for Collaborative WorkScientists are increasingly aware of the importance of information technolo-gies that facilitate collaborative work. The electronic messaging capabilities of
operating systems used widely in the context of the ARPANET and in private,
commercial messaging systems, as well as text retrieval systems such as IBMÕsSTAIRS, System Development CorporationÕs ORBIT, NASAÕs RECON,BattelleÕs BASIS, and the work at Cornell University by Gerard Salton onSMART, provided much of the early technical framework for knowledge man-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32BITS OF POWERagement and sharing.  In recent years, electronic mail (e-mail) systems, mailing
lists, and bulletin boards have enabled rapid information sharing among groups
of people distributed throughout the world. Other commercially available com-
puter-based tools and technologies have enhanced collaborative work by facili-
tating cooperative research involving, for example, the use of remote instru-
ments, and electronic data publishing that speeds the dissemination of research
results.8  Indeed, the success of many complex scientific investigations now is
predicated on bringing the capabilities of diverse researchers from multiple insti-
tutions together with state-of-the-art instruments.  In addition to the purely tech-

nical issues raised by these requirements, however, the research agenda for creat-
ing such ÒcollaboratoriesÓ must address fundamental psychosocial questions.
9Desktop video conferencing is a next logical step in the use of collaborativetools and may be as widely available within 10 years as e-mail is currently,
provided that adequate bandwidth can be supplied.  Users can now obtain rudi-

mentary desktop video conferencing systems for as little as $100 using the CU-
SeeMe software from Cornell University;10such systems provide crude servicetoday but offer great promise.  The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and

several universities are using the MBone to broadcast symposia and conference
events worldwide.11 Video conferencing systems based on integrated services
digital network (ISDN) services and asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) are now
available commercially, offering high-quality images and advanced application-
sharing features.12 ÒPlain oldÓ telephone service (POTS)-based video confer-
encing is expected to be available with the next release of major PC operating
systems.The low cost of desktop video conferencing equipment and the ability tooperate over a variety of media types will enable scientists who have access to
these technologies to communicate more readily.  These types of technologies

can help improve the efficiency of scientific fieldwork, especially in remote
areas, but only if they are supported by links with sufficiently high bandwidth.
Investment in commercial products that support information sharing and
workflow has accelerated as vendors recognize the importance of multiuser sup-
port to acquiring and sustaining market share.Growing Capabilities for Natural Language ProcessingNatural language processing has been an active branch of artificial intelli-gence for decades.  Recent approaches and products have significantly improved

automated document subject classification.13  In addition, the Internet has greatly
increased interest in capabilities for indexing and locating knowledge, thus con-
tributing to the rapid growth of the text retrieval industry. Users can now gain
more rapid access to a wider base of scientific information.14 Moreover, numerous
products (e.g., Fulcrum, Context, Limbex, InQuizit, Excaliber, Excite, Systran) and
services (e.g., Digital EquipmentÕs Alta Vista, Yahoo, Lycos, Dejanews, InfoSeek)
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY33are now using natural language processing capabilities to help organize informa-tion.  More advanced products from the U.S. government
Õs Tipster project arematuring for Òinformation robotÓ (ÒknowbotÓ) applications, such as agent-basedinformation gathering, data overload filtering, and extracting key facts from raw
text. These new tools accelerate work by reducing the volume of information that
needs to be evaluated.Slow but steady advances in machine translation are already beginning toproduce acceptable levels of quality for some applications.  New applications in

handwriting and voice recognition as well as voice synthesis promise to bring the
worldÕs information resources within reach of many who previously had beenexcluded because of language differences or disability.  The development of new

language-processing capabilities is increasingly important as the historical domi-
nance of English in data networks gives way to multilingual communications.The ability to perform automated language translation, though still crude,facilitates global data and information access by helping users with native lan-
guages other than English to participate in scientific activities.  Although current

investment is limited to a small number of the languages most widely used for
political and economic purposes (e.g., English, French, Chinese, Japanese, Spanish,
Russian, German), advancing techniques in language processing and computer
power will make extension to new language domains less costly and time consum-
ing.  Some databases, such as the European Dictionaire Automatique, have been

developed explicitly to facilitate machine translation and semantic analysis.Increasing Recognition of the Importance of StandardsStandards play a major role in the evolution of  telecommunication networks
because of the importance of interoperability of these networks, which also must
provide for continuous paths for improvement without disruption of existing
infrastructure.  In computing, vendors put substantial effort into proprietary ap-

proaches to protect market share.  But the U.S. government
Õs championing ofÒopen systemsÓ and the Portable Operating System Interface for Computer Envi-
ronments (POSIX) standards has allowed a new class of vendor to emerge and
create entirely new market forces with many suppliers in every niche of comput-
ing.  IBMÕs decision to make the PC an open, standard product provided anothermajor force toward standardization in computing.  Standards for products and for

the representation of information have advanced rapidly over the last decade.
Industry standards such as Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/
IP), Simple Message Transfer Protocol (SMTP), Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP), X.400, Standard Generalized Mark-up Language/HyperText
Mark-up Language (SGML/HTML), and easy-to-use browser products such as
Netscape and Mosaic were necessary for the rapid expansion of the Internet.
Companies still use proprietary approaches to gain short-term market advantages,Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34BITS OF POWERoften with the hope that their products will become the standard (e.g., MicrosoftÕsOLE).  Sun
Õs Java language is an interesting example of a company-sponsoredeffort that is becoming a standard through rapid expansion of licensing agreements.The marketplace today often converges rapidly on one or a few standards, thestandard for a high-density CD/ROM (and, more recently, digital versatile disks)
being an excellent example.15  The music and entertainment community realized
that competing standards would risk an expensive competitive battle.  Other ex-

amples include, among many others, the widespread application of HTML.Technical standards increase competition and product availability, while re-ducing price.  The downside is that standards themselves evolve and can contrib-

ute to a kind of industry-driven obsolescence.  Also, when multiple standards

apply in the same area, buyers are forced to try to choose prospective winners and
losers (recall the battle for consumer support of the Beta and VHS standards).Within the scientific disciplines, there is increased attention to systeminteroperability in terms of both data and software.  In the astronomy community,

for example, the interchange of data has become fairly simple because of effec-
tive coordination in the United States and internationally.  Radio astronomers

developed a voluntary standard format for data interchange (the flexible image
transport system; FITS) that was widely adopted in the astronomy community
during the 1980s.  This standard is maintained by an international committee,

with support from several organizations, including NASA.  There are related

standard formats for planetary data, as well as a trend toward the development
and adoption of a few comprehensive data analysis systems that could be used
with a variety of types of astronomical data from different observatories and
instruments and different subdisciplines. Sharing of analysis software and com-
mercially developed computing tools among the different systems is encouraged.Of course, the need for standards for effective data exchange is not confinedto telecommunications, computer languages, and storage media.  Even within a

narrow discipline or subdiscipline, true data exchange with proper interpretation
of numbers, symbols, words, and graphics depends on standards for data struc-
tures, database management systems, and even terminology.Cooperation in Monitoring and Controlling of Network ActivityThe rapid growth in networks over the last 15 years has led to the need forappropriate levels of cooperative monitoring and control.  Initial ad hoc activity

in developing protocols such as SNMP has given way to more elaborate stan-
dards and tools today. Authentication systems, retrieval systems, and networks
can now account for specific activities of users and can support flexible billing
systems.  Public-key encryption technology is increasingly accepted as a means

of protecting data and authenticating users.  Such developments are being driven

by needs associated with the network as a market place.Version 6 of the Internet Protocol (developed by IETF and often referred toBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY35as the Internet Protocol Next Generation)16 includes the necessary technical
components to support security, authentication, delivery of multimedia, and the
continuing growth of the Internet.  Several implementations of the proposed

standard are now available.17 As with telephones, circuit and switch technology
readily supports network control and accounting during connection creation and
breakdown. The ATM forum18is leading much of the work in this area.  These
initiatives will help applications developers to implement the functions necessary
to make networks commercially viable.The functionality provided by fine-grain network control will support addi-tional penetration of network equipment and services into the market, which
should in turn drive down equipment costs and provide an infrastructure to sup-
port community services such as network access to the public libraries.  The

technology also can be used to protect proprietary information and allow publish-
ers and others to make better use of the Internet.Increasing Use of IntranetsTools for searching and creating HTML pages, internetworking hardware(e.g., routers), and strong dependency on electronic mail have supported the rapid
growth within corporations of private networks known as intranets.  These net-

works provide reliable service, high-performance access, and information protec-
tion not afforded by the public Internet.  Today, sales are brisk for intranet

products such as browsers, servers, and search engines for internal corporate
applications.  A high-profile example is the Hewlett Packard intranet, which links

more than 110,000 PCs and workstations and transfers over 5 terabytes of data
per month.  Hewlett Packard also supports public bulletin boards with company

or product information that dispense over 15 terabytes of data per month.19The interest in intranets is also evident in initiatives to support priority re-search and education needs.  Prominent among these is the Internet II project,

which initially is connecting approximately 100 universities over a private, re-
served backbone with 622-Mbps links.20 This type of network could be used
more broadly by the scientific community and extended to reach international
partners to solve specific needs for bandwidth and for real-time control.SPECIFIC TECHNICAL CONCERNSTable 2.3 summarizes six major technical barriers to the international trans-fer of scientific data and information within the context of the trends discussed
above.  These are cases in which the trend, while generally favorable, produces a

negative consequence or side effect.Internet Congestion Becoming a Serious Problem21The scientific and technical community once dominated the Internet andBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36BITS OF POWERcollectively dictated its priorities and use.  Today, the network is available for a
wide range of activities, which sometimes significantly reduce or block access by
scientists.  Even scientific events, such as the Shoemaker-Levy Comet
Õs crashinto Jupiter, have caused such high lay public interest and associated high-vol-
ume transfer of images that scientific access to research resources has been im-
peded or blocked.  Requirements for carrying out scientific research, the results

of which are often at the service of the world community on an urgent basis, now
are not being served with responsive mechanisms that give them priority.TABLE 2.3Summary of Major Technical Barriers to International Transfer
of Scientific Data and InformationConcernImpact
Internet congestion isbecoming a serious problem.Description and indexing ofdata are inadequate to supporttheir use by others.Electronic storage media havelimited life spans.Tools for authentication andprivacy are immature.  Data
and networks are vulnerable.Scientific requirements forcomputer technology could be
left unsatisfied by prioritysupport for other larger marketneeds (e.g., entertainment and
business).Few international networkssupport real-time data.Scientific activities are disrupted through lack of controlof network capacity.  High-bandwidth applications are

impeded or blocked, and urgent communications areslowed.Data must be transformed, recomputed.  Data cannot be
located, and there is potential for error.  Cost and delay in
performing scientific work are generally increased.Data are lost or rendered unusable in the absence of long-term commitments for transferring them to new media on
a regularly scheduled basis.Valuable assets (data and infrastructure) could be lost orcorrupted; intellectual integrity could be compromised.  If
tools depend on restricted (for export) encryptiontechnology, barriers to free, protected exchange of
information could emerge.  Encryption technology for
digital identification, authentication, and privacysafeguards might remain inconsistent from country tocountry, limiting information commerce.  Alternatively,
data would remain unprotected.Increased expense to scientists for equipment specificallytailored to research needs (e.g., supercomputers).  There is

the risk that specific requirements will not be met.Lack of support for conferencing and collaborative work,large file transfer, or shared scientific infrastructure.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY37Generally, the rate of international exchange of scientific information hasrisen steadily as the means to carry out such exchange have improved.  Now

scientists on different continents commonly share ideas and data daily, or even
hourly.  A researcher in one country can remotely connect to a computer in a

different country to perform calculations and data analyses and sometimes com-
plete experiments.  When linking to a remote computer, one expectsÑor at leasthopesÑto transfer information between the local and remote computers at ap-proximately the rate at which data move in the local computer alone.  As the

Internet developed in its first decade, it usually operated in this way.But as the InternetÕs popularity and use have grown, more people are expect-ing to get instantaneous service for all their activities.  These include using the

Web as well as linking to a distant site to extract data of all sorts (from accumu-
lated electronic mail to numerical tables to animations) or to run programs and
obtain the results remotely.  As the speed and efficiency of computers have

improved, scientists using them have generated and have expected to obtain ever
more complex kinds of data.  Images, particularly animations, require extremely

large data sets if they are to be transmitted electronically.22 In fact, the burgeon-ing interest in images and video animation has led to a dramatic increase in the
amount of information people want to transmit over the Internet, especially as
more people use the Web and as the Web serves more commercial and entertain-
ment functions.This explosion of use has strained the carrying capacity of the Internet,particularly for many of the most heavily used intercontinental links.23 Direct
trans-Atlantic links between the United States and Germany, for example, func-
tioned virtually as efficiently as local area networks until sometime in 1993 or
1994.  Then delays began to occur at about 12:00 or 1:00 p.m. GMT when users

on both sides of the Atlantic are active.  The delays have grown ever longer, as

has the time period during which delays occur, so that now, from about 8:00 a.m.
until midnight GMT, delays can be so lengthy that the user is Òtimed offÓ by the
system in the middle of a (delayed) transactionÑnot once, but many times.  This
problem apparently can occur even with data exchanges such as e-mail, which
computers transmit whenever the lines are open.  In nations with very limited

network or gateway facilities, e-mail may take a day or more to be transmitted to
or from some countries.  Since the inception of this study network congestion and

delays have become severe.If the Internet were to become saturated, it would be rendered ineffective asa means of transmitting scientific information directly.  Although there are sev-

eral satellite and undersea fiber-optic cable systems currently being developed
that may be expected to supply sufficient transmission capacity worldwide, some
near-term remedies will be necessary to ensure that scientists and others with
professional needs will be able to continue using the Internet with at least moder-
ate efficiency, until the new systems become operational.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38BITS OF POWERInadequate Description and Indexing of DataResponses to the committeeÕs ÒInquiry to Interested PartiesÓ (see Appendix D)
revealed the lack of common representations for data to be the primary technicalchallenge for international scientific exchange.  Interdisciplinary, collaborative work

builds on shared understanding and agreement on terminology.  Standards for

representation of data, including units and formats, as well as description (metadata),
are vital.  Effective directories and navigation tools are needed to help scientists

locate relevant information.  Shared understanding of the operation of algorithms is

important to the application of information.  This understanding must also evolve

coherently over time as algorithms, standards, and collection instruments are devel-

oped.  For all scientists, the lack of shared understanding can lead to duplicated

effort, additional work to ÒnormalizeÓ data, or limited capability to integrate re-
search results.  In extreme cases, information collectors duplicate each other
Õsinformation, because they have no a priori agreement on effective data representa-
tions.  Problems of data compatibility and integration, even within the United States

alone, were reviewed in some detail in a 1987 CODATA conference from three
different perspectives: government, geography, and technology.24Rapid Obsolescence of Electronic Storage MediaThe media on which scientific data are stored are vulnerable to decay andobsolescence.  The standard  lifetime of a particular disk or tape appears to be less

than a decade; the data stored on these media must be copied or refreshed at
regular intervals.  A recent National Research Council study
25discussed the ef-fects and implications of long-term commitments in scientific data management,
with respect to both selection of data for long-term retention and media obsoles-
cence.  Further (and paradoxically), data collected before the advent of computers

and stored on Òarchival mediaÓ (paper) must be put into electronic form to be
used widely and effectively today.  Such data can add enormous value to research

efforts, particularly for studies examining long-term trends, but are costly to
transform.26Valuable records may fail to be transferred to new media or transformed toelectronic form because of a lack of resources (funds or appropriate equipment)
or lack of motivation. Scientists without long-term support commitments will
face the discouraging fate of losing precious data assets over the long term.  With

the extraordinary volumes of data being collected, transferring data to new media
and managing high-value data sets for active use will increasingly challenge the
scientific community, particularly since the time frames for rescuing old, deterio-
rating data are frequently quite short.  Examples include scientific publications

printed on high-acid paper and data sets stored on magnetic tapes that are crum-
bling, some after only a score of years.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY39Vulnerability of Electronic Data NetworksSome scientific data must be treated with special care to ensure their dis-semination only within a prescribed community (e.g., to protect the privacy of
individuals, to allow for verification of results, or to maintain the proprietary
advantage of a private enterprise).  Today, tools for authentication and for pro-

tecting privacy of data are difficult to use, do not follow widespread standards,
and, in some cases, involve encryption technologies that cannot be universally
distributed.  Such tools, however, can help researchers to maintain control over

the research environment.  Because effective use of authentication and privacy

measures involves the collaborative effort of numerous scientists or institutions,
Òtop-downÓ leadership in standards setting across the scientific community may
help speed the acceptance and use of emerging tools designed primarily for
electronic commerce on the Internet.Beyond the basic issue of protecting information privacy and integrity, thescientific community must prepare itself for disruptions of basic network and
computing infrastructure.  The complexity of software and networks, the large

number of users, the dynamic changes in staff, and the relative sophistication of
programmers worldwide leave networks vulnerable to attack and catastrophic
accidents.  We already have experienced large-scale disruption of the Internet

and telephone systems.  International scientific data collection and dissemination

activities are similarly vulnerable to both intentional and unintentional disrup-
tions.  A proper balance thus needs to be maintained between open, but vulner-

able, access and secure, but not overly rigid, control.Scientific Requirements for Computer Hardware Potentially UnmetThe demands of entertainment (in particular, interactive multimedia, anima-tion creation, and delivery of large numbers of simultaneous video channels) are
driving the frontiers of computer and communications technology.  It is possible
that computers and networks will be optimized for entertainment applications,
making it difficult for some scientific endeavors to have access to cost-effective
computer power.  For example, a computer optimized for video streaming might
not be suitable for running a large chemical model or ocean simulation.  In the

past, scientific applicationsÑand funding for the advanced computers to supportthemÑhave driven computer design.  Advances such as floating point and vector
accelerators, massively parallel computers, gigabit networks, large-volume stor-
age media, and visualization software were developed because of scientific needs.
Continued funding on an international basis for research leading to these kinds of
advances is necessary if vendors are to respond to the technical needs of science.
The goal is to incorporate advanced features for scientists within commercially
available products.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40BITS OF POWERLack of Sufficient International Real-Time Data NetworksScientists increasingly need real-time communications capabilities for col-laborative scientific activities and optimal use of major experimental and obser-
vational facilities.  Advanced networking and computing services can make large

file transfers practical and provide for remote access to (and control of) large-
scale scientific and medical facilities.  However, even with the growth of new

telecommunications capacity, the availability of high-bandwidth circuits to data
acquisition and analysis sites and to the desktop will continue to lag behind
demand.  Also, the Internet protocols that are now in wide use do not effectively
support time-synchronized activity.  Circuits to the  developing countries will be
limited to the relatively low speeds of voice circuits until new (submarine and
extension fiber) cable connects all corners of the world and affordable capacity
becomes available.  Wireless communication systems will operate at lower speed

than comparable wired services for the most cost-effective use of spectrum.  In

some countries the existence of outmoded government-operated facilities could
impede the development of new, high-speed or alternative-capacity links because
government-run post, telephone, and telegraph ministries (PTTs) are used to
subsidize nontelecommunication governmental activities and maintain monopo-
listic control over access and use.DATA ACCESS ISSUES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESAlthough at first sight, the gap between the ÒhavesÓ and 
Òhave notsÓ for
access to scientific data and information seems to widen each day, the long-term
outlook for such access in developing countries is far better than it was before the
advent of electronic communications, primarily because the cost of the technol-
ogy continues to decline even as the capabilities improve.  It is potentially more

cost-effective to buy computers, networks, and mirror sites of the libraries and
data centers in developed countries than to try to maintain autonomous libraries
with up-to-date collections of books, journals, and data compilations.As scientists in developing nations obtain computers with connections tonetworks linking them to international collections of scientific information, they
greatly increase their research capabilities.  Low-cost computers and modern

software approaches are available to help developing countries ÒleapfrogÓ mul-
tiple generations of equipment and approaches.  Satellite ventures are planned to
provide worldwide access for short messages, voice telephony, and broadband
digital links.27  Direct-broadcast television also is having an impact by offering
hundreds of channels of high-quality video to a growing percentage of the worldÕspopulation.Many of the developing countries may soon be expected to be the beneficia-ries of a broadly distributed modern telecommunications infrastructure.  Scien-

tific efforts in these countries will be supported, even in remote areas.  For
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY41example, the planned Teledesic wideband satellite communications system haspledged to give excess capacity to developing countries for a variety of uses,
including applications in education, science, and medicine.28 Direct broadcast
television could serve to raise education levels.  The anticipated low cost of

desktop video conferencing equipment and the ability to communicate with mul-
timedia functions, as described above, can enable scientists and others in the less
developed countries to participate more fully in global scientific research, subject
to the availability of high-bandwidth transmission capabilities and the mitigation
of local cost barriers.  Hardware and software for electronic communication in

the sciences therefore offer particularly high leverage for return on investment in
foreign aid to developing nations.Unfortunately, many of these technologies are not yet widely available in themost developed nations, much less in the developing countries.  For example,

roughly half the nations now served by some form of Internet connection have
access only to electronic mail.29 Even in those countries with at least one full-
service Internet node, the proportion of users actually accessing all services is
low.  In addition, as noted throughout this report, full Internet service does not

automatically mean full access to information.For example, the University of Chile has high-speed Internet service.  Two
components of the U.S. National Institutes of HealthÑthe National Library ofMedicine and the National Cancer InstituteÑprovide Chilean researchers withexcellent Internet access to abstracts from journals through outreach programs.
Although requests for search results are answered quickly, the journals them-
selves usually are not in the Chilean libraries.  Thus the researchers frequently

must wait for months to receive the full-text reprints of published papers.  This

situation is improving, however, and the system will become truly effective with
full-text on-line access to journals.  Nevertheless, most scientists in less devel-

oped nations now have little or no access to the Internet and the World Wide Web
and still must depend on inadequate library facilities for full-text access to scien-
tific data and literature.There are various other reasons for low Internet usage in developing nations,aside from the lack of infrastructure.  These include internal institutional policies

stipulating the placement of computers in administrative offices rather than in
laboratories, governmental restrictions on the free flow of information, poor-
quality telecommunications systems, and, most commonly, lack of funds for use
of whatever communications infrastructure does exist.  The costs of telephone

services, for example, generally bear an inverse relationship to the per capita
income of a country.  International calls that cost $1.00 when originating in the

United States frequently cost many times that when originating in a less devel-
oped country or a country where the tariffs are a general source of revenue for the
government.  For example, a call from Nairobi or Moscow to Washington, D.C.,
can cost seven times as much as the same call originating in Washington, with the
higher costs often being borne by those least able to afford them.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42BITS OF POWERVarious strategies can help mitigate these differences or eliminate the enduserÕs cost entirely.  The Internet itself, by institutionalizing communications
facilities, can make the costs transparent to the end user.  However, persons in

developing nations often must limit their Internet use or drop their subscriptions
to list servers because of cost.30 One biologist in Indonesia who dropped his
subscription observed that the communication costs per month were considerably
more than his salary and that his institution was passing these costs on to the end
users.  A number of Kenyan scientists have obtained calling cards from U.S.

providers and are directly dialing the United States.  The billing is to their Kenyan

address.  People in other countries also have adopted this strategy.
One current approach to reducing communication costs in African countries isthe use of the message-forwarding Fidonet system, a low-cost network of indi-
vidual computerized bulletin board services that uses regular dial-up telephone
lines and high-speed modems to transfer electronic messages.31 Although most of
Africa currently lacks direct TCP/IP Internet and WWW connections,32 individu-
als can send and receive electronic mail via the Fidonet service of the Association
for Progressive Communications, a U.S. nongovernmental organization dedicated
to bringing low-cost communications to developing nations throughout the world.33On other continents, the situation is somewhat better with respect to directInternet access.  However, even where Internet connections do exist, access still

tends to be spotty in all but the most prestigious or centrally located institutions.For scientists in developing countries, another difficulty is competition foraccess to large remote data sets, which is made even more difficult by the increas-
ing volume of data, particularly from new observational sensors.  In addition,

given the vast amount of data being collected, small data sets that they might
contribute may be viewed as less important, limiting the ways in which research-
ers in the developing countries can participate in the scientific community.  One

result of such disparities is the perception by some scientists in developing coun-
tries that the OECD countries take information but seldom return it on an equi-
table basis.Currently, developing countries severely lag the OECD countries in band-width for emerging applications.34 If the majority of communication in develop-ing countries is wireless, end users may not be able to take advantage of the more
bandwidth-intensive applications.  Moreover, as noted above, problems arise

even after advanced communication capabilities are installed. Transoceanic and
intercontinental communication and exchange of scientific information must com-
pete with all the other electronic trafficÑincreasingly business and entertain-ment. Unless bandwidth is improved, the Òinformation superhighwayÓ becomes
the electronic equivalent of many urban highways during rush hour.  Further-

more, in many of the developing nations, the decreasing costs and increasing
bandwidths that might be available generally are not passed on to the scientific
end user by the government communications monopolies.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY43RECOMMENDATIONS ON ISSUES ININFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBased on the areas of concern discussed above, the committee makes thefollowing recommendations for improving technical support for the international
flow of scientific data and information.1.The principal scientific societies and the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) should begin a long-term planning effort to assess the carrying capacity
and distribution capability of the Internet, using projections of storage and
transmission capacity and of demand and taking into account the next generation
of Internet protocols.  Scientific societies should encourage their publication

committees to maintain contact with the IETF and keep their members abreast of
advances in technologies useful for scientific information management.  One

option that science societies and government science agencies should evaluate is
the creation of dedicated international science networks, such as the Internet II
now being developed.2.To improve the technical organization and management of scientific
data, the scientific community, through the government science agencies, pro-
fessional societies, and the actions of individual scientists, should do the
following:a.Work with the information and computer science communities to
increase their involvement in scientific information management;b.Support computer science research in database technology, particularly
to strengthen standards for self-describing data representations, efficient
storage of large data sets, and integration of standards for configuration
management;c.Improve science education and the reward system in the area of scientific
data management.  Provide incentives and recognition for papers dealing with
data representation standards, archiving strategies, data set creation, data evalu-

ation, data directories, and service to users.d.Encourage the funding of data compilation and evaluation projects,
and of data rescue efforts for important data sets in transient or obsolete
forms, especially by scientists in developing countries where substantial
cadres of highly educated scientists exist who are underemployed and rela-
tively inexpensive to support.3.U.S. government science agencies, working with their counterparts in
other nations, should improve data authentication and apply security safeguards
more vigorously.  They should implement the means to protect data, including

safe storage of data copies, and support policies that make it easier to exchange
encryption technology.35Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44BITS OF POWERGovernment science agencies also should continue funding for research anddevelopment in information technologies that are important to the pursuit of
science.  Examples include high-performance computing and communications,

advanced database technology, higher-density storage media, and basic research
in microelectronics.4.A consortium of intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations
concerned with the international exchange of scientific data and informationÑincluding the International Telecommunications Union, the World Bank, the U.N.
Environment Programme, U.N. Industrial Development Organization, U.N.
Commission on Economic Development, and other Specialized Agencies of the
United Nations, as well as the International Council of Scientific UnionsÑshouldmount a global effort to reduce telecommunications tariffs to scientists in developing
countries through differential pricing or direct subsidy.  This reduction in tariffs

would have to be coupled with more timely access to new telephone lines in some
countries.  The result would be increasing rates of scientific data transfer in the

developing countries and a significant improvement in their research capabilities
and economic development.5.Foreign aid to developing countries in the form of computers, computer
networks, and associated software, coupled with the training and resources
necessary to operate and maintain those technologies, should be given high priority,
on the basis of the potential for long-term socioeconomic returns.  The

communication systems must have adequate carrying capacity to meet growing
demand.NOTES1.Moore
Õs Law, named for Intel founder Gordon Moore, predicts that the density of microproces-sors will double every 18 months, thus halving the price.  The by-product of this long-lived

phenomenon has been the doubling of processor speed in the same 18-month period.  Moore
ÕsÒLawÓ is in fact a representation of the speed of change of the microelectronics industry over
the last 20 years.  It is expected to continue to apply to technology change for at least the next 5

to 10 years.  See Ashley Dunn (1996), 
ÒThe Demise of MooreÕs Law Signals the DigitalFrontierÕs End,Ó New York Times, August 14, at <http://www.nytimes./com/library/cyber/surf/0814surf. html>.  See also <http://www-us-east.intel.com/product/tech briefs/man_bnch.html>.
2.See Brian Grimes (1995), 
ÒModeling and Forecasting the Information Sciences,Ó Knowledge
Science Institute, University of Calgary, at <http://ksi.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/articles/BRETAM/InfSci/> for a discussion of exponential change in the performance of these technologies and its
impact.3.One terabyte is 10
12 bytes, or 1,000 gigabytes. It is roughly the equivalent of 40,000 4-drawer
files holding 500 million pages of paper documents.4.Oryx Energy Co. estimates that in petroleum prospecting a three-dimensional seismic survey of
a 3-square-mile block in the Gulf of Mexico involved hundreds of gigabits of data, requiringthree months of supercomputer time to digest. See J. Dubashi (1990), ÒImages and Imagina-tions,Ó Financial World, 24 (July):8.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND ISSUES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY455.See NASA
Õs EOS Project Science home page at <http://eospso.gsfc.nasa.gov/> for additionalinformation and related sites.6.For a description of the origin of the Internet, see Vinton Cerf (1996), 
ÒComputer Networking:Global Infrastructure Drive for the 21st Century,Ó On the Internet, 1(5):18-27.7.See Matthew Gray of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1996), 
ÒWeb Growth Sum-mary,Ó at <http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/mkgray/net/web-growth-summary.html>.
8.National Research Council (1993), 
National Collaboratories: Applying Information Technol-ogy for Scientific Research, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C.9.Richard T. Kouzes, James D. Myers, and William A. Wulf (1996), 
ÒCollaboratories: DoingScience on the Internet,Ó IEEE Computer, 29(8):40-46.
10.See the Cornell University CU-See Me Welcome Page at <http://cu-seeme.cornell.edu>.

11.See the MBone Information Web home page, sponsored by ICAST Communication, Inc., at
<http://www.best.com/~prince/techinfo/mbone.html>.12.See the Bits Scout Software home page at <http://www.bitscout.com/>.

13.Kenneth W. Church and Lisa F. Rau (1995), 
ÒCommercial Applications of Natural LanguageProcessing,Ó Communications of the ACM, November:71-79. See also the home page of theAmerican Society for Information Science at <http://www.asis.org>.14.A recent prototype is the Net Advance of Physics, a master hierarchical index of on-line review
articles in physics.  It is hoped that this free service eventually will be expanded to include the
entire content of the physics e-print archives (see Science 272 (1996):15-16).
15.A technology going beyond CD-ROM is HD-ROM (high density-read only memory), originally
developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory, which gets much greater storage density than
conventional CD-ROMs at a fraction of the cost.  It uses an ion beam to etch pins of stainless

steel, iridium, or other similarly long-lasting materials.  The etching is done in a vacuum, which
allows the high densities, but the reading can be done in air.  It is now in the process of commer-
cialization.  The DVD standard is being supported by Sony 
and Toshiba.  See 
<http://www.islandtel.com/newsbytes/headline/dvddisputeen/dsincompro_350.html>.16.See the IP Next Generation (IPng) home page, developed by Robert Hinden of Ipsilon Net-
works, Inc., at <http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/ipng-main.html>.17.See the implementations IPng home page at <http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/ipng-
implementations.html>.18.See the ATM Forum Communications home page developed by Raj Jain
Õs group at Ohio StateUniversity in Columbus, Ohio, at <http://www.cis.ohio-state.edu/~jain/atmforum.htm>.19.Caryn Gillooly (1996), 
ÒBlazing a Trail in Intranet Usage,Ó Information Week (September 9):
98-102; additional information on Intranet products can be found on the Internet Design maga-zine home page at  <http://www.innergy.com>.
20.See White House Press Release, 
ÒBackground on Clinton-Gore AdministrationÕs Next-Genera-tion Internet Initiative,Ó Office of the Press Secretary, October 10, 1996, Washington, D.C.
21.The economic aspects of Internet congestion are discussed in Chapter 4 in the section titled
ÒElectronic Access and Internet Congestion.Ó22.Text is far less demanding;  for example, the 20-volume 
Oxford English Dictionary is available
now as a single CD-ROM.  However, storing a full-length movie on a single CD-ROM will be
feasible only when the new, high-density CDs, with much greater storage capacity than the
current variety, become available.23.See <http://www.nlanr.net/ISMA/Report/#background> for the results of the NSF-sponsored
workshop on Internet-statistics measurement and analysis; also the Corporation for National
Research InitiativesÕ home page at <http://www.cnri.reston.va.us>, and ÒThe Interminablenet,ÓThe Economist, February 3, 1996, pp. 70-71.24.L.J. Allison, and R.J. Olson, eds. (1988), 
Piecing the Puzzle Together: A Conference on Inte-grating Data for Decision Making, U.S. National Committee for CODATA, Integrated DataBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46BITS OF POWERUsers Workshop, National Governors Council, published by the National Governors Associa-tion, Washington, DC: 264 pp. plus Appendices.  For a more recent study regarding the barriers
and issues inherent in data integration efforts, see National Research Council (1995), Findingthe Forest in the Trees: The Challenge of Combining Diverse Environmental Data, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.25.National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data on Our Physical Universe: ANew Strategy for Archiving the NationÕs Scientific Information Resources, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.26.W. Grattidge, J.H. Westbrook, C. Brown, and W.B. Novinger (1987), 
ÒA Versatile Data Cap-ture System for Archival Graphics and Text,Ó Computer Handling and Dissemination of Data,ed. P.S. Glaeser, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North Holland), CODATA;  W. Grattidge,
W.B. Lund, and J.H. Westbrook (1990), ÒA Data Capture System for Printed Tabular Data,ÓProc. 11th IntÕl CODATA Conf.: Scientific and Technical Data in a New Era, P.S. Glaeser, ed.,
Hemisphere Press, Karlsruhe, FRG, 302-306; W. Grattidge, W.B. Lund, and J.H. Westbrook(1992), ÒProblems of Interpretation and Representation in the Computerization of a PrintedReference Work on Materials Data,Ó Computerization and Networking of Materials Databases,Vol. 3, ASTM STP 1140, Thomas L. Barry and Keith W. Reynard, eds., American Society for
Testing and Materials, Philadelphia.27.See the Norwegian University of Science and Technology Department of Computer Systems
home page at <http://www.idt.unit.no/>.28.Patrick Seitz (1995), 
ÒFirms Battle for Spectrum,Ó Space News, November 27:1.29.International Internet connectivity levels improve constantly and cannot be generalized about.
For a continuously updated report, see the Internet Connecting Chart, copyright by LarryLandweber 1995, at <http://www.infopro.spb.su:8000/info/internet/table_eng.html>. See also
the International E-mail Accessibility home page compiled by Oliver M.J. Crepin-Leblond at<http://www.ee.ic.ac.uk/misc/country-codes.html>; e-mail access information is based on In-ternational Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard 3166 names.  For a survey of
International Internet and K-12 Connectivity done by the NASA Science Internet Program,compiled by Antony Villasenor, see <http://nic.nasa.gov/ni/survey/survey.html>.30.See, generally, the series of articles in 
ÒEye on Emerging NationsÓ in 
On the Internet, theInternet Society, Reston, Va.31.National Research Council (1996), 
Bridge Builders: African Experiences with Information andCommunication Technology, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  See also the AfricanAcademy of Sciences/American Association for the Advancement of Science (1993), Elec-tronic Networking in Africa, AAAS, Washington, D.C.32.See the U.S. Agency for International Development
Õs Africa Link home page at <http://www.info.usaid.gov/alnk/connect/conmap.html> for a detailed description of Internet and othertypes of network connectivity on the African continent.33.See <http://www.apc.org/about.html> for more information about the activities of the Associa-
tion for Progressive Communications in Africa and other regions of the world.34.See Trudy Bell, John Adam, and Sue Lowe (1996), 
ÒCommunications,Ó IEEE Spectrum (Janu-
ary):40.35.See National Research Council (1996), 
CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Soci-ety, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES474735Scientific Issues in the InternationalExchange of Data in the Natural SciencesScience is the process and the product of discovering the cumulative body ofknowledge and understanding through which we humans comprehend the tan-
gible universe.  Its cumulative nature is a key to the uniqueness of the knowledge

gained in the natural sciences. This knowledge is sometimes reorganized at a
profound conceptual level when a field undergoes a shift of paradigmÑfor ex-
ample, the change from the caloric fluid to the kinetic theory of heat or from the
continuum of classical mechanics to the discreteness and duality of quantum
mechanics.  Yet the facts of science and the links among them remain; we may

change the way we interpret those links, but the body of scientific data continues
to accumulate.Data in science are like bricks, and the theoretical concepts are the mortarthat connects them to give a subject its structure.  Each new bit of data plays a

part: it may be uncovered in efforts to test a hypothesis, estimated from previous
information, or collected in observations, experiments, or computations.  As an

observed or measured new piece of information, it becomes part of our base of
knowledge, to share, interpret, and reconcile with the data already in hand. Scien-
tists ask, ÒAre these new data consistent with what we already know?  Are they

just what we might have expected, or do they require us to question the results, to
repeat the experiment, or to find a new interpretation that accounts for why the
data are what they are?Ó  When the scientific community resolves these ques-

tions, the new data become part of the foundation on which the next conjectures
and experimental plans build.  At this stage, also, researchers begin to consider

the implications of the new data, both to strengthen and extend basic understand-
ing in the natural sciences and to seek applications that may bring benefits toBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48BITS OF POWERsociety and progress in bettering the human condition.  Throughout this process,
scientific data are the cumulative substance on which all of science builds.Data in science are universalÑthey have the same validity for scientistseverywhere.  The atomic mass of iron, the structure of DNA, and the amount of

rainfall in Manaus in 1972 are facts independent of the political views of their
user, the time at which we determine them (apart from the evolving, improving
accuracy of the determinations), or the userÕs location.  Their utility depends on
the precision and accuracy with which they are determined and the units we use
to express them. A DNA sequence or a nuclear cross section can be as important
to a researcher in Novosibirsk as it is to another in Pasadena.  Consequently,

except in situations involving national security, the protection of individual pri-
vacy,1 or proprietary rights, scientists have developed an ethic of full and open
exchange of data, within and across national boundaries.  Although infringe-

ments occasionally do occur, they typically generate community disapproval.
Full and open exchange of information is a fundamental tenet of basic science
that scientists regard as essential to optimizing their own work and that of their
colleagues, as well as to enabling the advance of science overall.2Traditionally, scientific data were compilations in lists, tables, and booksÑessentially all on paperÑwhich circulated like all other scholarly information,through personal exchanges, subscriptions, and libraries.  Today, electronic han-
dling of scientific information is becoming the norm.  With this evolution has

come a dramatic increase in the international scope of scientific cooperation and
exchange of information. While basic science has always been largely a collabo-
rative activity that readily crossed national boundaries, electronic communication
has made this cooperation much more informal, intimate, instantaneous, and
continuous than ever before.  Consequently, scientific data now may flow be-

tween scientists in different parts of the world as if they were across the street.Scientists have been, to a large extent, the creators of the means and theenvironment for the ethical code governing the open exchange of their data.  This

is as true in the evolving electronic environment as it has been in the past.  Now,
however, interests outside the scientific community are exerting forces on that
environment that could severely restrict this open exchange.  Scientists believe

that restrictions on data access will slow the progress of science and significantly
diminish the potential benefits that science renders to society.An important consideration in any discussion of exchange of scientific dataconcerns the ÒmarketÓ in which scientists participate, and particularly what its
ÒgoodsÓ and 
ÒreturnÓ are.  Scientists in academia and government are motivated
overwhelmingly by the desire to generate ideas that influence the course of
science.  They want their papers to be read, so much so that they regularly pay

page charges to have those papers published.  Traditional concepts of copyright,

protection of intellectual property, and financial return to the creator of a written
work may apply to a scientist who writes a textbook, but become irrelevant to the
researcher publishing a paper in a scientific journal.  Publishers of such journals,
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES49sometimes including professional societies, adhere to traditional motivations forprotection of intellectual property and copyright.  Scientists are usually delighted

when someone wants to photocopy their articles; their publishers are sometimes
aghast at the same photocopying act.  This tension is often overlooked in consid-

erations of adapting to electronic exchange of scientific information.  It becomes

especially important when one tries to bring economic and legal thinking to bear
on the management of scientific data, and on the behavior and the system of
values of scientists.  (For more detailed discussion on these issues, see Chapters

4 and 5.)This report focuses primarily on international access to scientific data forbasic research purposes.  Nevertheless, in some disciplines, such as meteorology,

a significant part of the data is generated to serve the general public by making
possible severe weather and flood warnings and associated weather prediction.
In formulating policies for international data exchange, the need for data for these
applications also must be taken into account.  In this chapter the committee

broadly characterizes types of scientific data and their use in the laboratory
physical sciences, astronomy and space sciences, Earth sciences, and biological
sciences; outlines some of the major data trends, opportunities, and challenges in
the natural sciences; discusses selected discipline-specific issues; and describes
problems of access to data in less developed countries.  The chapter concludes

with the committeeÕs recommendations for steps to improve access to data in thenatural sciences worldwide.TYPES OF DATA AND THEIR USE IN DIFFERENT DISCIPLINESThere are several ways to characterize scientific data:  among others, by
form, whether numerical, symbolic, still image, animation, or some other; by the
way they were generated or gathered, that is, from experiment, observation, or
simulation; by level of quality; by the size or form of the databases that contain
them; by the nature of the support for their generation or distribution, that is,
public or private, national or international; and, of course, by subject.  Perhaps

the most obvious differentiation is according to the degree of refinement of data
along the path from collection to publication.  Several linked levels of data can be

distinguished in this hierarchy, beginning with initially collected experimental or
observational data.In the laboratory sciences today, data at this first level are rarely raw readingsor counts.  Sophisticated means for gathering and manipulating such information

have softened the concept of ÒprimaryÓ data.  The computer mediating an experi-
ment is likely to extract from several measurements some average of the total
signal minus the background noise.  Frequently, the first data an experimenter

sees appear as a curve or a set of points that represents addition, subtraction, and
averaging of several kinds of measurements, all collected and manipulated elec-
tronically.  While some of these data may be published as tables, most data at this
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50BITS OF POWERlevel have limited distribution.  They are useful when shared among the partici-
pants in a large collaboration, for example, in a high-energy physics experiment.
International distribution of data of this kind is normal practice, particularly
among collaborating scientists.The second major level of data in the laboratory sciences is usually publishedscientific results based on collected data, sometimes including the data and some-
times only providing a pathway by which the data can be obtained.  Evaluated

data files, the next level in the hierarchy, are compilations of data from several
sources created when an ÒevaluatorÓ has worked to obtain the 
ÒbestÓ values of the
tabulated quantities.  Such files are often broadly disseminated, sometimes in

journals established for that purpose, such as the Journal of Physical and Chemi-cal Reference Data; increasingly, these files will be available electronically and,with hypertext, will be linked, so that anyone reading a manuscript will have
ready access to on-line data files on which published results are based, just by
clicking on the relevant figure or text.  When data are structured or compiled in an

organized manner, whether in raw form or after thorough evaluation or process-
ing, they become a database.In the observational sciences, scientific research leads to the generation ofdata that can be processed and interpreted at different levels of complexity.3Typically, each level of processing adds value to the original, raw data by sum-
marizing the original product, synthesizing a new product, or providing an inter-
pretation of the original data.  The processing of data leads to an inherent paradox

that may not be readily apparent.  The original unprocessed, or minimally pro-

cessed, data are usually the most difficult to understand or use by anyone other
than the expert primary user.  With every successive level of processing, the data

tend to become more understandable and better documented for the nonexpert
user.  One might therefore assume that it is the most highly processed data that

have the greatest value for long-term preservation and international exchange, as
in the case of the laboratory sciences, because they are more easily understood by
a broader spectrum of potential users.  In fact, just the opposite is usually the case

for observational data, because it is only with the original unprocessed data that it
will be possible to recreate all other levels of processed data and data products.
To do so, however, requires preservation of the necessary information about the
processing steps and ancillary data.Another important way to characterize scientific data in general is by quality,as indicated by their degree of acceptance in the scientific community. ÒPre-publicationÓ data bear no certification whatsoever.  Such data would, for ex-
ample, be considered by most scientists to be inappropriate as legal evidence.
Data accepted for publication in a refereed journal carry a certification that they,
and the text that accompanies them, contain no obvious error and are admissible
topics of scientific discourse.  Published data, however, are often challenged, and

occasionally the data or their interpretations prove erroneous. When they have
been thoroughly validated, data become dogma.  Values of natural constants, to
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES51some number of decimal places, are firmly established in this way.  Steps toward
confirmation of the soccer-ball structure of the molecule C60 illustrate this pro-
gression in acceptance and endorsement of data and their interpretation.  At first

it was conjectured, prior to publication; then the proposed structure was pub-
lished and shown to be consistent with other evidence then available.  When a

method appeared for preparing the substance in macroscopic quantities, new
experiments,  notably x-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, and infrared

spectroscopy, gave unassailable proof that the molecule is indeed shaped like a
soccer ball.  Since then, nobody would think of questioning that structure.
Particular uses of data and characteristics of disciplines in the natural sci-ences influence needs for and conditions affecting global access to information in
those areas of research.  Examples of successful international data exchange

activities in each of these areas are given in Appendix C.Laboratory Physical SciencesThe laboratory physical sciences comprise an interrelated set of disciplinesthat includes chemistry, materials science, physics, and the subdisciplines and
applications of each of these.  The primary users of most of the data generated

and exchanged in these fields are other physical scientists, although data from
research in chemistry, materials science, and condensed-matter and polymer phys-
ics find heavy secondary use in manufacturing and engineering applications.
Recognition of potential new or changed applications often stimulates the gen-
eration of new data and concepts from basic science in these areas; the flow of
stimuli as well as data runs both ways, between applied and basic sides of these
sciences.The laboratory physical sciences generate data largely from experiments,simulations, or theoretical computations.4  (In the observational sciences, the data
typically describe single, unique events, such as the weather on a particular day
or the explosion of a supernova.)  Although experiments in the physical sciences
can be repeated, it is often the case that due to the size of the apparatus, the extent
of the collaboration, the rarity or uniqueness of the test material, and the expense
involved, the results of a single experiment are adopted and exchanged.5 Instead
of simply repeating experiments, scientists in these fields generally learn of a new
advance and quickly use it as a steppingstone to go beyond that advance, fre-
quently by modifying the technique or the apparatus.  In the case of less complex

laboratory research, scientists typically repeat the previous experiments, as much
to validate the new approach as to check the previous results.  The research

results and the underlying data from basic experimental research are not limited
by national boundaries.  Information presented in an international meeting, a

seminar by a foreign visitor, or an electronically circulated preprint is at least as
likely as a new publication in an international journal to stimulate a new line of
work.  When scientists are engaged in international collaboration and exchange
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52BITS OF POWERdata that are not yet ready for publication, the national boundaries separating thecollaborators are even more transparent.Another characteristic of the physical sciences is associated with the estab-lished theoretical framework of many of the subdisciplines. The data derived
from the theoretical numerical simulations in many cases look like experimen-
tal data, and often are replicated.  These simulations, particularly animations,

may not be part of the conventional manuscripts that report the results, but this
kind of information is now exchanged globally on a variety of media.  Ex-

changing data from simulations is a process vulnerable to the congestion prob-
lems of the Internet, described in Chapter 2, especially as the volume of such
data grows.Like all other scientific disciplines today, the physical sciences use electronicnetworks to coordinate, collect, compile, and distribute nonproprietary data through
informal and formal means.  Projects to evaluate data on particular topics, such as

the thermodynamic or spectroscopic properties of a set of closely related sub-
stances, typically involve small international collaborations that communicate by
Internet.  More complex efforts, such as determining the 
ÒbestÓ values of natural
constants, require more formal cooperative working arrangements and regular data
exchange.  One such effort is the maintenance of the Evaluated Nuclear Structure

Data File (ENSDF), an electronic database of evaluated data on properties of
atomic nuclei and on radiation produced by decay of unstable nuclei.  The database

has existed in electronic form for about 25 years.  An international network of

individuals carries out its evaluations.  Within the United States, this work is

coordinated and supervised by the National Nuclear Data Center at Brookhaven
National Laboratory; internationally, the International Atomic Energy Agency per-
forms these functions.  The ENSDF effort collects data from publications and other

sources and then evaluates and distributes the data in a variety of formats as users
call for it.  Prior to the Internet, these data came to ENSDF on magnetic tapes, but

now they arrive via electronic network, primarily by file transfer protocol, a conve-
nient and widely used mode of transferring data electronically at moderately high
speed.  The dissemination effort is truly worldwide, with active on-line accounts in

approximately 40 countries, on six continents.  This system is described in more

detail in Appendix C.Physical scientists, in general, seek the most timely, lowest-cost, and mostwidely effective means for disseminating their results and for obtaining those of
others, as long as proper citation is not compromised.  Apart from proprietary

data associated with commercial products, data in the physical sciences tend to be
readily available, through journals, government publications, and books, and
increasingly, through electronically available databases.  The databases in the

laboratory physical sciences may seem large in comparison with, for example,
dictionaries; nonetheless, among the four areas of natural science considered in
this report, the laboratory physical sciences typically have the smallest databases.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES53Astronomy and Space SciencesThe primary needs for and uses of data from space are in fundamental re-search, but there are many collateral applications, such as precise positioning,
mapping of the Earth, navigation, education, and even entertainment, as the pub-
lic interest in Comet Shoemaker-Levy demonstrated.  Astronomy is indeed inter-

esting to the public.  As such, its data must not only be collected, but also be

interpreted and made available for formal and informal educational purposes, as
well as for the advancement of our knowledge about the universe.Most data in astronomy and space sciences come from observations madefrom EarthÕs surface or from spacecraft;6 a modest fraction of the data comes
from laboratory experiments. The data from experiments, terrestrial or in space-
craft, conform closely in character to data in the laboratory physical sciences.
Usually, an individual observer or observing project collects the data and distrib-
utes them to other individuals as soon as they have been taken.  These data

frequently have significant value to other researchers and for purposes other than
those for which they were gathered.  It is useful, for example, to compare data

taken by different observers in different wavelength bands or to compare obser-
vations at different times in order to interpret variable objects.  Hence it is impor-

tant to store space science data in a form readily available to other researchers.
Most astronomical data archives, which are open to all scientists, do so.  Use of

these archives is limited only by ease and cost of access.  Consequently, this

community has had to adopt efficient data management practices throughout the
life cycle of the data, to permit effective access by the entire community, national
and international.Research in astronomy and space sciences is collaborative and, inherently,deeply international; it requires multinational efforts to collect data and to imple-
ment efficient transnational exchange of data.  Electronic links now provide the

requisite efficient communications and exchange of data.  The scientific reasons

for this international character include the following:¥Ground-based observatories must be located at optimal observing sites,such as mountaintops with good observing conditions, which are found only in
certain countries;¥Some experiments require simultaneous observations at several points,such as long-baseline radiointerferometry;¥Only parts of the sky can be seen from any single location; and¥Some observations, such as those in the x-ray and far-ultraviolet regions,can be made only from outside the atmosphere, and hence require orbiting
observatories, while others require sending probes to other planets, which creates
a need for collaboration with scientists in nations that have space programs.An economic driving force for the internationalization of space science is theBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54BITS OF POWERhigh cost of large new facilities; this encourages international collaboration as ameans of cost-sharing.  Thus, the Hubble Space Telescope was developed and is
operated as a partnership of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), with
access available to astronomers from all over the world.  The Gemini project,

building two 8-meter telescopes, one in Hawaii and one in Chile, is a partnership
of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Chile, Argentina, and Brazil.Even without explicit or formal collaboration, international sharing of astro-nomical data generally enhances the field.  Recent examples include the impact

of Comet Shoemaker-Levy on Jupiter, the International Halley Watch, the obser-
vations of Comet Hyakutake, and the observations of Supernova 1987a.  Still less

organized research projects are enabled daily by accessing archived data for
historical and multiwavelength comparisons and by facilitating communication
among collaborating astronomers.Astronomers and space scientists establish research strategies and prioritiesfor data collection in their subdisciplines.  In the United States, this is usually

done within the National Research Council, for example, under the decadal As-
tronomy Survey Committees or the Space Studies BoardÕs planetary and spacephysics science strategy panels, or by NASA or National Science Foundation
(NSF) science working groups or ad hoc science community studies.  Other

nations and international organizations develop similar research strategies, for
example, the ESAÕs Horizon 2000, plans for the European Southern Observatory,and the international Gemini project.  Such planning efforts are becoming more

international and effectively identify data needs and policies in support of the
projects.Earth SciencesIn the broadest terms, Earth science data are fundamental to the discoveryand creation of knowledge concerning the interactions among matter, energy, and
living organisms.7  Development of this knowledge is essential for ensuring the
prospect for humanity on our finite planet in the face of rapid demographic and
economic growth.  Between 1820 and 1992, the world population increased 5

times and the gross domestic product per person grew 8 times, with a resulting
global economy growth rate of 40 times. World trade grew more than 500 times.8The best estimate at this time is that the increase in population over the next50 years will be greater in real numbers than the increase over the last 170 years,
accompanied by further large increases in economic activity and world trade.9This situation will bring to the fore new environmental issues and problems that
will press us ever more urgently to ameliorate the impact of humankind on the
environment.Within the purview of the physical Earth sciences are natural phenomena atall spatial and temporal scales that present major scientific challenges for under-
standing and prediction.  These phenomena include natural hazards such as hur-
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES55ricanes, tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions.  Besides the soci-
etal impacts associated with climate, natural hazards, and natural resources, there
are numerous man-made hazards that are coupled with natural phenomena that
are the subject of Earth science research.  Examples include the prediction and

mitigation of pollution plumes in ground water or the atmosphere (e.g., chemicals
or radioactive materials), the factors involved in stratospheric ozone depletion,
and the monitoring of treaties that ban underground nuclear testing (e.g., in
support of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty).The physical, chemical, and biological processes that shape the world inwhich we live are complex and interdependent.  To understand them requires

observations with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution and coverage to char-
acterize the phenomena of interest and to constrain theoretical predictions that are
based on conceptual or quantitative models. Therefore, the lifeblood of research
in most of the Earth sciences is observational data, sometimes global in coverage,
and taken repeatedly over time.  Many of these data also must be integrated with
data from experimental manipulations, or from other disciplines.An example is atmospheric circulation, which controls weather over theentire Earth with significant variations on time scales ranging from hours to
decades or longer, and spatial scales ranging from less than 1 km to thousands of
kilometers.  Weather forecasts for more than a day at a time require the rapid and

repeated acquisition, processing, and interpretation of very large amounts of
synoptic observations on at least a continental scale.  Satellite systems that gather

the necessary data have been and are being developed, but timely access to the
data gathered by different organizations or countries is a major concern.  Climate

studies require many of the same observations as for weather prediction, but also
data on the oceans, land surface, and cryosphere for the entire Earth.  Therefore,

international sharing of very large volumes of global atmospheric circulation data
is essential for meaningful scientific investigation of past and present climates.Scientific knowledge in the various subdisciplines of the Earth sciences hasadvanced to the point where important, multidisciplinary global-scale problems
can be tackled with insight and scientific rigor, provided that high-quality global
observations are available and that computational resources are adequate to pro-
cess and interpret large and diverse data sets.  Major examples of interdiscipli-

nary and integrating research programs in the Earth sciences are the World Cli-
mate Research Program of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and
the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme organized under the auspices of ICSU, and,
nationally, the U.S. Global Change Research Program.10  These are major initia-tives, begun in the 1980s to understand the driving mechanisms (both natural and
human) that cause significant changes in the Earth system.  These efforts involve

collecting and analyzing massive data sets from Earth-observing satellites and
integrating them with multiple-area or site-specific data all over the Earth, in-
cluding developing countries.  Significant progress in these types of complex
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56BITS OF POWERresearch programs can be made only if there is effective transnational flow ofdata and information.Biological SciencesThe breadth of the kinds of data in the biological sciences is probably thewidest among the four areas described in this report.11  The subjects of the data
encompass types and modes of propagation of life forms, modes of provision of
food and fiber, conservation of the planetÕs biota, public health and safety, themolecular bases of life processes, and biotechnology.  Data in the biological

sciences differ somewhat from those in the physical sciences, have some charac-
teristics in common with the other observational sciences, and have some unique
characteristics.  Biologists have no fundamental constants or periodic table.  They

do share with chemists the data specifying structures of molecules, such as nuclear
magnetic resonance spectra and x-ray diffraction patterns, as well as the inferred
structural parameters themselves.  However, many biological data specify ranges

of incidence or of values of some properties.  Such data require textual descrip-

tions, which become part of the databases.  Collections of such data require

modes of access that are different from and frequently more complex than those
that serve well in the physical sciences.  Analysis by computing associations and

similarities, rather than by direct, experimental, causal assessment, is characteris-
tic of biology.Concepts are sometimes less well defined in biology than in the physicalsciences, and so clarity can be compromised when terms with even slightly
different definitions, explicit or implied, are used to classify and describe what
should be commonly understood data.  Even the concept of 
ÒspeciesÓ causes
problems.  For example, there are questions regarding the variabilities found

within and between species and regarding whether species should be defined
according to DNA sequences, with no distinctions within the species, or accord-
ing to taxonomy, with differentiations made among subspecies.  This issue is

elaborated in greater detail below in this chapter.Biologists use some large databases, particularly those of nucleic acid se-quences that form the fast-growing genome databases.  Efforts to build, maintain,

and distribute the information in these databases are highly international and
collaborative.  Centers around the world collect data from contributing scientists
and immediately share them, incorporating them as they accumulate into a coor-
dinated database.  In this respect, biologists share certain problems with the

observational sciences.  Proprietary concerns probably arise at least as frequently

in the biological sciences as in the laboratory physical sciences or the Earth
sciences, but much more frequently than in the space sciences.A somewhat unique characteristic of many biological data, especially re-garding distributions of species, is that they are very location-specific.  Conse-

quently, in order to protect fauna or flora in a given location, or the privacy orBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES57property rights of the people who live there, barriers unrelated to the researchitself sometimes arise that inhibit the flow, particularly the international ex-
change, of biological data.DATA TRENDS, OPPORTUNITIES, AND CHALLENGES IN THENATURAL SCIENCESThe increasing use of electronic means for data collection, storage, manipu-lation, and dissemination is one of a number of broad and interrelated trends that
have significant implications for access to data in the natural sciences.  These

trends include the following:¥Rapid growth of the body of scientific data;¥Development of large international research programs;¥Insufficient funding for data management and preservation activitiesworldwide;¥Decentralization of data management and distribution;¥Electronic publication; and¥Increasing use of simulations and animations as scientific data.The discussion in this section addresses these broad trends as well as theopportunities and challenges they present.  Some discipline- or field-specific

issues are discussed in the next section.Rapid Growth of the Body of Scientific DataIn every area of the sciences, both the volumes and the types of data havegrown at rates unforeseeable 30 years ago.  This growth has been especially rapid

primarily because of vast improvements in and increasing availability of imaging
detector arrays at most wavelength ranges.  For example, in the Earth sciences,

new technology allows data to be collected repetitively with high spatial resolu-
tion.  Remote sensing systems are generating immense volumes of data that are

pushing the limits of our ability to store, retrieve, and analyze those data. For
instance, the introduction of ground-based Doppler radar and new satellite sys-
tems is significantly increasing the data volumes within the atmospheric sciences.
Table 3.1 shows a selection of land remote sensing data sets and their anticipated
volumes that are archived by the Earth Resources Observation Systems (EROS)
Data Center operated by the U.S. Geological Survey in Sioux Falls, South Da-
kota.  In seismology, new initiatives both in the United States and in other

countries have resulted in continuous, broad-band digital recording at high sam-
pling rates.  Special studies using up to 1,000 sensors generate very large data sets

for each experiment. Table 3.2 illustrates the actual and projected growth in data
volumes at the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) DataBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BITS OF POWERTABLE 3.1Projected Volume (in Terabytes) of Satellite Remote Sensing
Data Holdings at the U.S. Geological SurveyÕs Earth Resources ObservationSystems (EROS) Data Center, 1997 to 2005Data SourceBy 1997By 1998By 1999By 2000By 2001By 2005
Landsats 1-5120.5122.5122.5122.5122.5122.5
AVHRRa12.516.520.524.528.540.0
SIR-Cb20.090.090.090.090.090.0
Landsat 7Ñ20.070.0120.0170.0170.0
SRTMcÑÑ112.0113.0114.0117.0
MODISdÑ10.036.062.088.0166.0
ASTEReÑ15.060.0110.0160.0310.0
TOTAL153.0274.0511.0642.0773.01,215.5
aAVHRRÑAdvanced Very High Resolution RadiometerbSIR-CÑShuttle Imaging Radar-CcSRTMÑShuttle Radar Topography MissiondMODISÑModerate-resolution Imaging SpectroradiometereASTERÑAdvanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection RadiometerSOURCE: U.S. Geological Survey, National Mapping Division.Management Center.  Table 3.3 provides a representative sample of astrophysics
data archived by NASA and demonstrates a similar trend in the space sciences.Technology for data storage and computation continues to improve at a rateconsistent with the capability to handle the rapid growth of accumulated data in
the observational sciences.  Scientists worldwide will have to adapt their research

strategies to make effective use of these new data.12  Although state-of-the-art
projects can manage the increasingly large data volumes, perhaps with difficulty,
other users, especially in developing countries, are unlikely to be able to access or
effectively use such data for their own research.Development of Large International Research ProgramsAs the previous discussion indicates, basic scientific research has becomeever more internationalized as a result of several factors:  the expanding capabili-

ties of communication and computation networks, the capabilities for conducting
high-quality science in increasing numbers of countries, and the economic driv-
ing force for sharing the high costs of large projects.  These factors have led to the

formation of new organizational paradigms and methods of data management.
Consequences of this internationalization have been more and higher-quality
science, faster progress, and ever more international involvement.  These oppor-

tunities have appeared at all levels, from individual investigator and small-group
science to large-scale Òbig scienceÓ projects.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES59Recent years have seen several new multibillion-dollar international projects,and multimillion-dollar international efforts have become almost commonplace.
These ÒmegaprojectsÓ or 
ÒmegascienceÓ programs have a number of common
characteristics.  They require long-term funding commitments; they may necessi-

tate the building of new large facilities or instruments, which then require large
expenditures for operating funds; they typically involve teams of researchers
working on different aspects of the project, with the consequent requirement for
international communication and data exchange; and, with the current state of
technology, their scientific objectives cannot be fulfilled by using a smaller-scale
research format.13In 1991 the U.S. Congressional Budget Office identified 80 projects fundedby the U.S. government that each cost at least $25 million (in 1984 dollars)
during the period from 1980 to 1986.14  Many of these involved significant
international participation.  In contrast, there were only a handful of such non-

military large-scale research projects in the 1950s and 1960s.TABLE 3.2Summary of Actual and Projected Data Volumes Archived in the
Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) Data ManagementCenter, 1994 to 2000Data Volumes (gigabytes/year)DataNumber of
SourceInstruments
a1994199519961997199819992000
GSN1001,1592,3593,9596,0038,04710,09112,281
FDSN1463706701,0701,5302,0502,6703,416

JSP arrays51,0952,1903,6505,4757,3009,12510,950
OSN30001558218498936
PASSCAL-BB5001,3182,2773,5565,1547,0739,31211,867

PASSCAL-RR5005428851,3411,9122,5973,3974,310
Regional-Trig5001502904907301,0301,3901,755
TOTAL1,7814,6348,67114,08120,86228,31536,48345,515
NOTE:Abbreviations are as follows:
GSNÑGlobal Seismic Network (IRIS)FDSNÑFederation of Digital Seismic NetworksJSPÑJoint Seismic Program (with the former Soviet Union) (IRIS)OSNÑOcean Seismic NetworkPASSCAL-BBÑProgram for Array Studies of the Continental LithosphereÑBroadband(IRIS)PASSCAL-RRÑProgram for Array Studies of the Continental LithosphereÑRegional Re-cordings (IRIS)Regional-TrigÑRegional Triggered RecordingsaProjected for the year 2000.SOURCE: IRIS Data Management Center, private communication, 1994.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60BITS OF POWERTABLE 3.3  A Representative Sample of NASA Astrophysics Archives, by Satellite Mission
High EnergyInternationalInfrared Astronomical
Compton Gamma RayAstrophysical Observatory 2Ultraviolet ExplorerSatelliteHubble Space Telescope
ObservatoryData typeX-ray dataUltraviolet dataInfrared dataOptical/Ultraviolet dataGamma-ray data
Year of launch19781978198319901990
Duration2.5 yearsOngoing300 daysOngoingOngoing
Total data volume~100~100~150~5,500 by year 2005
~10,00 by year 2000(gigabytes)Data centerEinstein Observatory Data
Center, Cambridge,MassachusettsSOURCE: NASA; reprinted from National Research Council (1995) Preserving Scientific Data on Our Physical Universe: A New Strategy for Archiving theNationÕs Scientific Information Resources, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.National Space Science
Data 
Center,Greenbelt,MarylandInfrared DataAnalysis Center,Pasadena,CaliforniaNational SpaceScience DataCenter, Greenbelt,MarylandSpace TelescopeScience Institute,Baltimore, MarylandBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES61For the purpose of this discussion, it is useful to identify several types oflarge international scientific projects and programs:15¥Experimental facilities for neutron beam, synchrotron radiation sources,lasers, high-energy particle physics, high-field magnet laboratories, and fusion
experiments.¥Fixed observational facilities such as optical and radio ground-basedtelescopes, environmental remote sensors (e.g., lidars and radars), and deep ocean
drilling projects.¥Space science observational satellites, including space telescopes forastronomy and astrophysics, space physics observatories, and planetary missions.¥Earth observation satellites for collecting data about EarthÕs atmosphere,oceans, land surface, and geophysics.¥Distributed observational programs that collect data in many differentlocations as part of an internationally organized research program.  Examples of

this include the global seismic network, the International Geosphere-Biosphere
Programme, the Human Genome Project, and the new Biodiversitas project.It is the latter two types of scientific research initiatives that pose the greatestdata management challenges for effective international exchange, as discussed
below in this chapter.Insufficient Funding for Data Management and PreservationDespite the vast increases in recent years in the amount of data collected andstored, and the very large augmentations in the funding allocated to new observa-
tories and experimental facilities in ambitious international research programs,
there has not been a commensurate increase in the funding for data management
and preservation.  At the same time, the costs associated with data retention and

distribution are typically far less than the costs of reacquisition (in those cases in
which reacquisition is even physically possible).  Although the committee did not

perform comprehensive research on the actual funding levels worldwide, the
members of the committee believe this to be a problem common to most disci-
plines, in many research programs, on both domestic and international levels.In the laboratory sciences, funding agencies focus their support on researchand tend to overlook the fact that data compilations and data access are key to
progress across the research spectrum.  Furthermore, the sheer volume of data

now available makes it increasingly difficult for individual compilers in the
tradition of Ptolemy and Beilstein to fill this need as a pro bono activity, or for the
work to be done as merely ancillary to some funded research program.  In addi-

tion, society fellowship and award committees generally do not place much value
on the contributions their applicants may make to the infrastructure of science in
the form of data compilation, organization, and evaluation work.  Funding agen-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62BITS OF POWERcies have an opportunity to enhance the international aspect of these activities bysupporting scientists from developing countries who tend to be well-educated but
underemployed.  Such a policy could be very cost-effective in that it would not

require high initial capital costs for facilities, but only labor and data access costs.The funding situation in the observational sciences tends to be even moredifficult, with potentially more significant negative effects, given the data-inten-
sive nature of such research.  Experience indicates that scientists associated with
new observatories get much more support than those handling data from old ones,
even though the payoff from optimal utilization of existing data sometimes is
greater.  For instance, according to figures supplied by NOAA, the agency
Õsbudget for its national data centers in FY 1980 was $24.6 million, and their total
data volume was approximately 1 terabyte.  In FY 1994, the budget was only

$22.0 million (not adjusted for inflation), while the volume of their combined
data holdings was about 230 terabytes!  During this same period, the overall

NOAA budget increased from $827.5 million to $1.86 billion, mostly to fund the
acquisition of new observational data.An example of insufficient funding for data management and preservation isthe National Land Remote Sensing Satellite Data Archive at the EROS Data
Center.  This national archive was established by Congress
16 in 1992 and en-
dorsed by the 1996 National Space Policy without the provision of any new
funding to support its expanded mission.Although improvements and significant cost reductions in data storage andprocessing technologies have enabled government data managers to keep up with
the demands in most cases, the pressures from chronic underfunding occasionally
have led to ill-considered attempts to commercialize or privatize the data man-
agement and dissemination functions (as discussed in Chapters 4 and 5).  In other

cases, these financial difficulties have led to inadequate preservation and access
provisions, which sometimes result in the partial or total loss of irreplaceable data
sets.17  The challenge is to develop data management and archiving infrastructure
and procedures that can handle the rapid increases in the volumes of scientific
data, and at the same time maintain older archived data in an easily accessible,
usable form.  An important part of this challenge is to persuade policymakers that

scientific data are indeed a precious resource that should be preserved and used
broadly to advance science and to benefit society.18Decentralization of Data Management and DistributionData collection, management, and distribution over the long term depend ona variety of institutions, that is, organizations that transcend the interest of indi-
viduals or ad hoc groups of scientists.  These institutions have various roles,

missions, and funding responsibilities that affect use of and access to scientific
data.  Many have direct responsibilities or objectives regarding data generated by

publicly funded research, including, in particular, the following institutions:Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES63¥Government science agencies and academies of science;¥Intergovernmental scientific organizations and coordinating bodies;¥Publicly funded data management institutions, including data centersand libraries;¥Publicly funded research institutions, primarily in academia;¥National and international nongovernmental organizations, such as sci-entific and engineering societies, library associations, and information industry
associations;¥Commercial publishers; and¥Governmental policymaking and regulatory bodies.The information technology revolution has changed the roles of some ofthese institutions and brought about the establishment of new entities.  For scien-

tific data management at both the national and the international level, the techno-
logical changes have supported the development of organizations with the fol-
lowing attributes:19¥Widely distributed responsibility.  New telecommunications, data
management, and standardized technology is leading to highly reliable distrib-
uted data management capabilities.  The growing availability of information

technology professionals (along with the lower technical skill levels actually
needed by end users) is enhancing the ability to distribute data more broadly and
increase user participation.  Such distribution of data and their ownership (whether

actual or implied) by user groups improve the utility of the data and help create
important support for long-term retention.¥High-value peer-to-peer communication.  With on-line access to data
and people, a variety of new collaborative relationships can develop.  Information

can be broadcast to interested individuals in a timely fashion.  Data can be

provided directly to field researchers to focus new data collection.  Physical

proximity and formal lines of communication are no longer vital to effective
organizational operation.  Indeed, closed, highly structured organizations often

will be uncompetitive or unable to take full advantage of innovation.¥Specialized data functions.  When resources and capabilities are distrib-
uted, some specific locations can make an effective contribution by specializing.
Specialized groups can be created in a scientific discipline or in some aspect of
data management, archiving, or standard setting.  Such centers can achieve sig-

nificant economies of scale, reducing overall costs while enhancing the effective-
ness of certain functions for the benefit of all.The National Nuclear Data Center (NNDC) is one of many examples of  theevolution from sole source to distributed network.  Under an international agree-

ment, NNDC at Brookhaven National Laboratory is the U.S. source for the inter-
national distribution of evaluated nuclear data files (see Appendix C).  When theBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64BITS OF POWERprimary forms of distribution were hard-copy books or published tables, the solesource was obviousÑthe printed pages generated at NNDC.  When on-line ac-
cess to the databases became available in the mid-1980s, the files had to be
mirrored for easier access overseas.  With the advent of the World Wide Web,

individuals gained the ability to manipulate the databases, which today still reside
at NNDC, using overlay programs that (physically) reside at another data center,
possibly in Europe.In the future the user probably will be unaware of where the data file beingaccessed physically resides and will be able to link to the journal article (pub-
lished by a commercial publisher, for example) in which the data originally
appeared.  The electronic journal article could have links to the original data

tables of the authors.  NNDC has evolved from a collector of evaluated data files,

which were formatted into camera-ready pages for hard-copy publication, to a
center that maintains on-line access to a few databases via a variety of overlay
programs (no longer is there a single, static format).  It is one of many centers

around the world, now common in most scientific disciplines, that develops new,
electronic forms of networked data dissemination.Electronic PublicationThe development and acceptance of electronic networks as a means of com-municating, searching for data and information, and accessing information rap-
idly and directly have driven the increase in electronic publications of all types,
and scientific publications in particular.20  Although not all publishers of scien-
tific journals are moving to completely electronic form, there is a distinct trend to
provide alternative paper and electronic versions of many publications.  For

example, the American Institute of Physics is working to provide its library
clients by early 1997 with electronic access to every one of its journals to which
the library subscribes.  In addition, it now offers some of its journals in CD-ROM

form as a space-saving alternative or supplement to its subscribers.21  The Insti-
tute of Physics in the United Kingdom also provides subscribers with electronic
access to all 33 of its journals.22NASA is sponsoring an all-electronic peer-reviewed journal, Earth Interac-tions. 23
   It is only available electronically and allows color representations of
phenomena, including time-lapsed video clips of observations to show time varia-

tions.  Mathematical calculations on subsets of original data can be carried out by

the reader as well, providing both in-depth understanding of the material and a
check on the validity of the authorÕs results.  This new journal is the product of
three professional societiesÑthe American Meteorological Society, the Ameri-can Geophysical Union, and the Association of American GeographersÑwithadditional support from the Ecological Society of America and the Oceano-
graphic Society of America.  These societies have a combined membership of

approximately 45,000, and so this form of electronic publication will soon beBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES65available to a substantial segment of the Earth sciences community.  Submission,
editing, and peer review will all be done electronically.There is increased attention to electronic publication of astronomical re-search papers and data as well (see Box 3.1).  Most conference proceedings are

collated from electronic submissions in standard (e.g., TeX, LaTeX) formats.
Abstracts of papers in most space science disciplines are now available on-line,24and several journals are publishing electronic versions.This trend is likely to accelerate and to open new opportunities for commu-nicating research results to all scientists.  Electronic publication will not just

replace paper, howeverÑit will alter the sociology of science.  Writing, referee-
ing, and reviewing of a publication are now discrete and strictly ordered events,
but they need not be in the electronic world.  There, annotation, critique, elabora-

tion, and revision can all go on iteratively and indefinitely, and in some instances
no doubt they will.  Some publications likely will become 
Òliving documents,Óunder revision until they are no longer of interest.  Even though our current social

norms for attribution are based on the static publication model, it is doubtful that
the scientific community would retain that model in order to preserve these
norms.  The value of a dynamic discourse is too great.
25Many electronic journals will not be ÒprintableÓ in any meaningful sense.  It
is not just that they will contain motion and sound, but will incorporate also rich
contextual links to the primary materials.  Clicking on a graph will give the reader

access to the data on which it is based, allowing alternative models and interpre-
tations to be explored.  A related important benefit of electronic publications is

that results based on observations and modeling can be checked and validated by
both reviewers and readers; restrictions on article length in paper journals and
limited access to original data and software currently preclude any meaningful
checks of the validity of published results based on observational data.  A 
ÒcopyÓof the bits in an astronomical ÒplateÓ is as good as the original.
Publications also will become ÒactiveÓ agents, rather than passive stacks of
paper.  The term 
ÒprogramÓ has some of the wrong connotations, but nonetheless
future publications will include executing programsÑnot ones that can be ex-ecuted, but that are executingÑautonomously gathering data, making predic-tions, becoming richer and more valuable as time passes.In short, the Internet and World Wide Web are far more rapid and enablingmeans of communicating results, ideas, and other aspects of research than paper
publications.  Many changes in the conduct and dissemination of scientific re-

search, from the individual to the international scale, may be expected to arise
from these developments.26Increasing Use of Simulations and Animations as Scientific DataRelated to the trend in electronic publishing is the increasing use of simula-tions and animations in research.27  Large-scale computation arose in part from a
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66BITS OF POWERBOX 3.1Space Science Data and Electronic PublishingThe space science community has been at the forefront of electronic publishing.Scientific societies, such as the American Astronomical Society (AAS), have beenleaders in this type of information exchange.  For example, AAS collects all of its

meeting abstracts electronically and publishes the AAS Job Register on-line.  In
addition, AAS pioneered the development of effective electronic journals with its on-line publication of the Astrophysical Journal.  What started out as an experiment has

turned into a success story in electronic publication.1Supported in part by a grant from the National Science Foundation, the AAS incooperation with the University of Chicago Press first developed an electronic version
of the Letters portion of the Astrophysical Journal (eApJ).2  Produced in two versions
(HTML for screen reading and PDF for local printing), this journal goes well beyond theelectronic delivery of paper manuscripts typical of most ÒelectronicÓ journals.The eApJ has references tied into the NASA-supported bibliographic databasemaintained by the Astrophysics Data System (ADS; see <http://adswww.harvard.edu>), which provides abstracts of most references and is developing an archive of
page images of several of the most useful astronomical scholarly journals.The eApJ uses URNs instead of URLs (names instead of locations) as link tar-gets, and so the links will remain valid indefinitely.  Both the ADS and the eApJ use

a standardized notation for naming articles, which enables links and pointers to begenerated automatically during the publishing process.  As part of the sophisticatedset of links associated with this journal, the eApJ includes a capacity for forwardreferencing whereby each article carries with it an updated set of  references to
articles that refer to itÑan automated electronic citation service.  Before the full
Astrophysical Journal came on-line in November 1996, the AAS made arrangements
to establish mirror sites in Great Britain, Europe, Australia, and (possibly) Japan toensure relatively rapid response times.The success of the eApJ is propelling the astronomical publishers to bring theirliterature on-line rapidly. Over 95 percent of the worldÕs peer-reviewed astronomicalliterature is expected to be on-line by mid-1997.  Standard protocols, conventions,

and procedures will be absolutely critical if this networked system of  literature and
data is to be effective for the working scientist.Electronic publishing in this area has also enhanced data access and archiving.The Astronomical Data Center, located in Strasbourg, France, has an agreementwith the publishers of Astronomy and Astrophysics Òto provide all data files from their
publications.Ó  The Astronomical Data Center at Goddard has a similar arrangement

with the AAS, which includes Icarus and the publications of the Astronomical Society
of the Pacific, as well as AAS publications.  This type of arrangement Òpermits the
two centers to archive a major portion of the international astronomical data without
individual requests to the authorsÓ of journal publications.31Response by Peter Boyce, American Astronomical Society, to the committeeÕs ÒInquiry toInterested PartiesÓ (see Appendix D).2The full journal is now available on-line at <http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/ApJ/>.3Response by Nancy G. Roman, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, to the committeeÕsÒInquiry to Interested PartiesÓ (see Appendix D).Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES67need to simulate reactive hydrodynamic flows.  Such problems still help drive the
development of increasingly powerful computers.  However, during the past

three decades, simulations have become integrated elements of the toolboxes of
experimentalists and theorists in many of the physical and biological sciences.The increasing importance of modeling and simulation is evidenced for thematerials science field by the recent (1992) inauguration of two new journals
devoted exclusively to this topic: Computational Materials Science (Elsevier)
and Modeling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering (Institute ofPhysics Publishing).  Materials data modeling encompasses two quite different

areas:  materials R&D (both theoretical and experimental) and data handling and

application activities (continuum level design calculations, process modeling,
service behavior modeling, and compression, extrapolation, and interpolation of
data).  Other research areas in which computer simulations have become standard

are in the design of optics for electromagnetic radiation and of beams of electrons
and ions; flow of fluids; folding of protein molecules; interaction of enzyme
molecules with their substrates, the species on which they act; melting and freez-
ing, at the atomic level; the motions of individual atoms during reactive collisions
of molecules; and collisions of gaseous atoms and molecules with surfaces.Many simulations require repeated solution of equations of motion of thesystem by computer.  These equations may be simple or complex, but however

simple they are, the ability to solve them over and over, many millions of times,
as the system they describe evolves, is a consequence of the power of electronic
computers.  The simulation results may be reduced to only a few summary

numbers, which was the usual practice in the early years of computers.  Now it is

common for the results to include numerical information about entire time histo-
ries, information that can be put into tables and graphs.Perhaps the most dramatic advance in simulations, however, has been the useof graphics, particularly animations.  The information in an animation can give

insights into a scientific phenomenon that could not be guessed from individual
snapshot images or numerical indicators. Time may serve as a surrogate for a
spatial dimension, allowing the investigator to visualize the behavior of a func-
tion of three independent variables. Animations are useful when an investigator
uses a preconception to decide what indicators would be best to compute and it
turns out that the situation does not correspond to that preconception.  For ex-

ample, one study examined the high degree of solid-like, cooperative, and collec-
tive motion of most, but not all, of the atoms in the supposedly liquid surface
layer of a cluster of atoms.  Instead of an amorphous swarm of atoms swirling on

the surface, the outer, ÒmoltenÓ layer of the cluster showed organized, collective(but loose) vibrations by all but a few of the surface atoms.  All the quantitative

indicators showing liquid-like character arose from a few atoms displaced from
the surface so that they were free to float just outside it, in almost-free fashion.
The consequence of seeing the animation was the construction of a theoreticalBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68BITS OF POWERmodel very different from the one the investigators had been  planning to use.  In
short, animations have become real tools of research, not just pedagogic devices.The data in animations cannot yet be stored or exchanged in conventionaljournals.  However, electronic storage and transmission over the Internet and the
World Wide Web make it possible for scientists to share not only their tables and
still figures, but also their animations.  A few published papers include references

to Web addresses that provide animations of material discussed in the papers.
Such data are still in a form that is primitive compared with what one can foresee.
Now it is possible to play an animation, even a multiwindow display that shows
several characteristics evolving simultaneously, and sometimes to stop the mo-
tion to study an individual frame.  In the future, it will be possible for the viewer
to stop an animation and examine the image or images from all sides, perhaps
even to carry out manipulative operations on that image that correspond to simu-
lations of physical processes.  The capacity for such data manipulations will

advance as the bandwidth available for data transmission increases, as data stor-
age becomes cheaper and faster, and as the software for generating, storing, and
displaying animations and more elaborate time histories becomes more user-
friendly.  It is already inevitable that scientists will generate image sets for mo-

lecular phenomena analogous to the computer-based ÒtoursÓ of towns and cities
that allow the viewer to choose any path through the area.  For example, it is

possible for a pharmacological researcher to ÒflyÓ a molecule of a potential new
drug to a conjectured target receptor site, say in the brain, to judge whether it is a
topological fit.The capability to share images from animations has a number of advantages.However,  images require more storage space, and the user must have consider-

ably larger bandwidth capabilities to allow electronic transmission of the anima-
tions than typically are required for exchange of numerical or symbolic data.DISCIPLINE-SPECIFIC DATA ISSUESOver the past two decades, the National Research Council and other groupshave issued numerous reports that have addressed scientific management issues
for digital observational data in the Earth and space sciences.28  More recently,
several studies have examined such issues in the biological sciences.29  Most of
these reports have focused quite narrowly on the data management problems of
specific disciplines or agencies; however, many of their recommendations have
broader validity and may be applied to other disciplines and institutions in the
observational sciences in the international context.As noted above in this chapter, the very large scale environmental observa-tional research programs in the Earth and biological sciences pose the greatest
data management challenges and the most difficult public policy issues.  This is

so not only because of the complexity of the scientific questions in those disci-
plines and their data-intensive nature, but also because of their inseparable link-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES69ages to major socioeconomic issues, the potential for private-sector exploitationof the data and related research results, and their relevance to other major govern-
ment concerns such as national security, trade, and foreign policy objectives.
Although the focus of this study is on issues in the transnational flow of scientific
data for use in basic research and not on the role of scientific data in these other,
much broader contexts, it is at the interface of scientific use of data and their
broader potential applications that the most vexing public policy issues ariseÑatopic addressed in some of the discussion below in this report.  The sections

immediately following, however, focus on some of the more specific discipline-
related challenges and opportunities in providing broad international access to
scientific data.Observational Environmental SciencesMeasuring and Monitoring SystemsThe data now available on a global basis are inadequate to document andunderstand many environmental and health problems, or to anticipate problems
that may arise because of the increasing influence of human activity.  What is

required is a comprehensive and long-term effort to observe, understand, assess,
and predict the global environmentÑa World Environmental Watch.Significant progress has been made toward this end, beginning with a seriesof National Research Council studies in the 1980s that outlined the rationale and
data requirements for a new branch of scientific inquiry called Earth system
science.30  This in turn led to the formation of ambitious international global
research programs, such as the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
and the U.S. Global Change Research Program.  A set of international comple-

mentary observing systems has been proposed, elements of which are in various
stages of deployment and development.  Included in this set are the Global

Climate Observing System (which includes the World Weather Watch and the
Global Atmospheric Watch), the Global Ocean Observing System, and the Glo-
bal Terrestrial Observing System.31  These internationally coordinated efforts
will integrate observations from multiple satellites and airborne and in situ sen-
sors deployed worldwide.The Global Ocean Observing System and the Global Terrestrial ObservingSystem are in earlier stages of development than the World Weather Watch and
Global Atmospheric Watch and the associated Global Climate Observing System
(see Appendix C for a description of the World Weather Watch).  However, for

EarthÕs land surface, substantial observing systems exist within many countries,and for the oceans, observing systems have been developed by countries to a
considerable extent for the coastal oceans and to a limited degree for the open
ocean through international collaboration.One of the oldest international observing systems (over 100 years old) is theBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70BITS OF POWERvolunteer ship observing program coordinated by the WMO and the Intergovern-mental Oceanographic Commission.  Through this program involving thousands
of ships from many countries, weather and sea surface temperature observations
have been available to all countries in real time.  It also has provided data on the
climatology of the ocean area for many decades and still does in conjunction with
meteorological satellites.More recently, an extensive observational network for measuring the upperocean was put in place in the western Pacific Ocean as part of the Tropical Ocean
Global Atmosphere Program.  The ocean data from this network and the data

from the World Weather Watch Global Observing System provide the basis for
the development of atmosphere-ocean coupled models, which have formed the
foundation for experimental forecasts in seasonal to interannual predictions.
Extensive plans also have been formulated for the components of the Global
Ocean Observing System to support the study of climate more generally.The Global Terrestrial Observing System has several major components forthe land surface, surface and ground water, and seismology.  Most nations have

developed hydrologic observational networks for both the surface and the subsur-
face water.  River stage observations are taken in most countries, both for flood

forecasting and for water resource management.  The further development of

these observational systems is essential if the nations of the world are to cope
with the wide range of environmental changes that are occurring and can be
envisaged.In the biological environmental sciences, monitoring systems are much lessfully developed than in the Earth sciences.  Carefully planned and coordinated

global monitoring systems for new and emerging diseases and ecological moni-
toring and biodiversity surveys are needed.  An epidemiological system now in

place determines which strains of influenza virus are emerging each year.  The

composition of each yearÕs vaccine depends on effective monitoring and earlywarning.  Recent outbreaks of Ebola virus in Africa indicate the need for more

monitoring information that combines epidemiological and ecological data.An example of a lack of ecological monitoring comes from consideration ofthe worldÕs island ecosystems.  We know a great deal about animals and plants in
special habitats such as the Galapagos Islands, but essentially nothing about their
microbiota.  We do not know the similarities and differences in microbial ecology

between the Galapagos Islands and, for example, the Cape Verde Islands, despite
their geological similarities.Given the nature of the regional and global problems and the interdiscipli-nary nature of the environmental and health sciences, research on a specific
problem often requires the use of data from several observing systems.  There-

fore, important requirements are observational consistency in space and time,
with accurate georeferencing to the maximum degree possible; thorough docu-
mentation of data attributes; and substantial institutional commitments to the
long-term continuity of key observational programs.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES71Quality Control and AssuranceQuality control operates smoothly and almost transparently in those sciencesin which experiments are readily reproducible or lead to subsequent experiments
that validate the original ones.  In the observational sciences, implementing effec-

tive quality control for data requires the use of an audit trail system that includes
anomaly detection, reporting, and correction, as well as the rigorous refereeing of
manuscripts for publication.Quality assurance, the mechanism used by management to assure that thequality of work is as claimed by those doing it, typically plays a far smaller role
in basic science than in applied science and especially in manufacturing.  How-

ever, one can interpret any mechanism to assure scientific integrity as a kind of
quality assurance procedure.  This concept would thus include the mechanisms to

detect and investigate scientific fraud.  Such 
Òquality assuranceÓ efforts are car-
ried out in universities and at the National Institutes of Health, for example.In recent years, some organizations, such as the Carbon Dioxide InformationAnalysis Center (CDIAC) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory have devoted sig-
nificant efforts to producing high quality global Earth science data sets whose
accuracy and reliability have been determined, accompanied by the descriptive
(metadata) documentation needed for their use.  The CDIAC has quality-assured
and documented several key global change databases on such diverse topics as
concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,
carbon fluxes from the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere resulting from
changes in land use, carbon chemistry in the oceans, and long-term climate trends
in the United States.32  These value-added data sets are certified as valid by the
primary users who collected the data, or by those who subsequently carried out
the quality-control checks of the data.  This is a somewhat costly, but successful,

approach for assuring secondary users of the quality of relevant data sets.33Preservation of Historical Data SetsThe trend toward bigger, more complex, and more expensive facilities andprograms in the observational sciences, and toward attendant international col-
laboration, has brought about greater attention to and incentives for effectively
archiving data.  It also has encouraged the development and maintenance of a

curatorial infrastructure necessary to manage the data better, to provide more
uniform processing and documentation, and to make retrospective data more
easily accessible and usable.34Research using archived data has grown in scope and importance, especiallyin enabling the comparison of observations taken at different wavelengths and at
different sites.  In the space sciences, there are efforts to coordinate data catalogs

and indices, facilitating discovery of what data are available (e.g., NASAÕs As-trophysics Data System and its extragalactic database, SIMBAD).  Space as-
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72BITS OF POWERtronomy in the United States has been at the forefront of archiving and distribut-ing data electronically.  Archives are an integral part of all U.S. space astronomy

missions and are now typically being planned for ground-based observatories and
for other countriesÕ space missions as well.  The archiving technologies are
openly available and shared, and data sets from new and different observations
are incorporated increasingly in existing archives. Comprehensive catalogs and
good user-access tools are recognized as very important, as are properly main-
tained and preserved duplicate data sets.  Some major archives are also duplicated

at different sites to reduce communication loads and to promote innovation and
allow different uses.In the Earth sciences, the study of Earth processes involves time-dependentbehavior over time scales ranging from seconds to millions of years.  For rela-

tively short time scales (years or less), observational data from a common observ-
ing platform may be available from a single database.  For longer time scales

(decades to centuries to many thousands of years), it is necessary to scrutinize all
of the retrospective observations available and to use proxy data preserved in the
geologic record or in written records.  Research on global change and on natural

hazards, for example, whose goal is improved prediction of future conditions or
events, depends heavily on accurately reconstructing the record of the past.  Box
3.2 provides several examples of interesting data reconstruction projects in China.Because there has been an increasing awareness of the great value of retro-spective Earth science data, some conscientious efforts to rescue and preserve
older data are being made both nationally and internationally.  In the United

States for example, the National Climatic Data Center and the National Geo-
physical Data Center have devoted time and resources to data rescue in recent
years and now have a policy of transferring all their digital data holdings to new
storage media at least once every 10 years.Many specialized observational databases requiring long-term retention ex-ist in biology as well.  These include such diverse subjects as agricultural records

of many types, including experimental field tests going back to the last century;
museum, zoo, herbaria, and microbial culture collection records; hospital and
other medical records; ecological data; breeding histories of domestic animals
and plants; macromolecular sequences and their accompanying annotations; taxo-
nomic treatments, toxicological information; folk medicine; and characterization
of biological products such as food, fiber, and fine and bulk chemicals.  Some of
these data are in computers, but require normalization for consistency and read-
ability.  Others could be transformed into machine-readable form to make them

generally accessible.  These two tasks are labor intensive and require a large

component of highly skilled labor.  Such undertakings require careful prior evalu-

ation for potential worth. Selective evaluation and support is necessary not only
to enhance the intellectual effort to maintain existing databases, but also enable
the creation of new ones.Once the primary data are analyzed and used to publish research results, theBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES73authoring scientist may be reluctant or inattentive about placing the unpublishedprimary data in a publicly accessible database or archive.  Rather, the scientist is
likely to concentrate on creating new data to be interpreted and summarized for
additional printed publications.  No incentives exist in most biological disciplines

to encourage the contribution of primary data to databases.  The few exceptions

mostly involve data on biological macromolecules such as proteins, DNA, RNA,
and complex carbohydrates.  No crediting mechanism, however, adds to profes-

sional standing in the same way as a printed publication.  The result is the loss of

a great deal of useful data.The long-term retention of biological databases also is being funded andmanaged in a haphazard, uncoordinated fashion throughout the world.  This

chaotic situation is unnecessary.  The worldwide cooperation in establishing

DNA and RNA genetic sequence databanks pointed out in Appendix C demon-
strates what can be done.  The world
Õs information science community, togetherwith the worldÕs biologists, now have the combined skills and much of the infra-structure to preserve and to make basic biological information resources broadly
available.35  The scientific base and technology exist to produce much needed
information structures that are the biological equivalent of the global weatherBOX 3.2Examples of Digitizing Historical Environmental DataIn the PeopleÕs Republic of China the following efforts have led to the digitizingof these historical records, among others:¥A joint study between the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the U.S. De-partment of Energy used proxy records for grain harvests to extend theannual rainfall data for Beijing back to 1260 A.D.1¥Computer analysis of ancient Chinese sunrise eclipse records showed thatthe length of the day was 70 milliseconds shorter in 1876 B.C. than now.2¥Information on medicinal plants from Chinese pharmacopia from thousandsof years ago, as well as other folk medicine records, are being computer-ized in an effort to identify active ingredients that might form the basis formodern drugs.31F.A. Koomanoff, Ye Duzheng, Zhao Jianping, M.R. Riches, W-C. Wang, and Tao Shivan(1988), ÒThe United States Department of Energy and the PeopleÕs Republic of China Acad-emy of Sciences Joint Research on the Greenhouse Effect,
Ó Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc.,
69:1301.2K.D. Pang, K. Yau, H.H. Chou, and R. Wolff (1988), ÒComputer Analysis of Some AncientChinese Sunrise Eclipse Records to Determine the EarthÕs Rotation Rate,Ó Vistas in As-tronomy, 31:833-847.
3Senliang Li (1990), ÒData Acquisition of the Chinese Medicinal Plant Database,Ó presenta-
tion at the CODATA International Conference, Columbus, Ohio.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74BITS OF POWERmonitoring system.  The critical biological problems the world
Õs population facesin such areas as medicine, agriculture, sustainable ecology, food production, and
water quality know no political boundaries and require effective information
transfer and access to archival or baseline data.The fact that observational data are unique and not reproducible leads to theconclusion that they should be preserved as part of the historical record of the
dynamic behavior of Earth and its inhabitants. The intrinsic, long-term value of
observational scientific data was emphasized and discussed in detail in a recent
National Research Council (NRC) study.36  A major point made there was that
such data are an invaluable national (and by inference international) resource that
should be preserved and utilized to advance the state of knowledge about our
natural environment.If this view becomes widely accepted by national and international organiza-tions and governmental bodies, the traditional practices of allowing older data to
become increasingly inaccessible or destroying them will be supplanted by poli-
cies and procedures to preserve retrospective data in accessible and usable forms.
It should be noted that the data volumes of all previously collected data in a given
area of the observational sciences typically are modest or insignificant in com-
parison with the volumes that the current data collection systems produce; if there
were a policy of preserving older data indefinitely into the future, all prior data
would be transferred to new storage media in compatible formats as new storage
and retrieval technology is adopted.Despite the ability of data storage and computational technology to keeppace with the data volumes being generated, there may be instances in which
sufficient resources may not be available to preserve all the useful data from a
research program or a science agency.  In the unlikely event that a suitable long-
term repository cannot be found, the decision regarding what data to purge should
be made by representatives of the primary discipline and other major user groups.Data Integration for Interdisciplinary ResearchThe improvements in technological capabilities have led to new opportuni-ties to address important scientific problems that earlier were either obscure or
considered intractable.  Although a considerable amount of research in the obser-

vational sciences continues to be done by individual investigators in specialty
areas, there are now many more multidisciplinary, multiinvestigator studies in-
volving complex natural processes in space and time.  Attendant to this evolution

is the need to access diverse types of complementary observations made by many
different scientists and organizations around the world.The large international initiatives in global change research mentioned ear-lier provide good examples of programs in which success is critically dependent
on the transnational flow of scientific data and information. The observational
data necessary to obtain meaningful results in most areas of investigation includeBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES75in situ (point or local) measurements, regional observations using various observ-ing platforms (e.g., balloons, remotely piloted vehicles, airplanes), and satellite
remote sensing.A major Earth science initiative involving significant transnational flow ofscientific data is the International Decade of Natural Disaster Reduction.37  The
focus of this initiative is on understanding the dynamic processes that cause
major natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, floods,
hurricanes, tornadoes) and mitigating their effects through enhanced prediction
capabilities and precautionary safety measures.  All of these phenomena occur

globally, and their study involves comparisons of many different types of obser-
vations.  Commonly, cooperative studies are carried out by scientists from sev-

eral countries and through agreements among countries or institutions.  Interna-

tional sharing of a wide variety of observational data, including demographic
data documenting human and economic effects, is essential for improving our
knowledge of these natural hazards.A particularly challenging problem is accessing and merging relatively sparse,lower-resolution, retrospective observations with the higher-resolution current ob-
servational data to document changes occurring in the environment.  A recent NRC

report, Finding the Forest in the Trees:  The Challenge of Combining Diverse
Environmental Data, provided possible solutions for integrating multiple envi-ronmental data sets at different spatial and temporal scales.  This report consid-

ered in detail six case studies to elucidate the problems of interfacing diverse
types of geophysical and ecological data to address important environmental
problems in a global context.  The lessons learned from these case studies pro-

vided the basis for a set of recommendations to overcome barriers deriving from
the data themselves, from usersÕ needs, from organizational interactions, and
from system considerations.  The committee endorses those recommendations

and incorporates them here by reference.38The interfacing of several different environmental data sets in a single researchproject can be difficult because the data layers are not coregistered to a universal
template and therefore do not ÒstackÓ perfectly.  The misalignment of only a few
tenths of a degree in longitude or latitude creates major problems and leads to
misinterpretations.  For example, regions of the world with complex coastlines are
very difficult to study when co-registration of data layers is not perfect.An important tool is Geographic Information System (GIS) software, whichenables all types of data to be correlated or compared geographically.  This

capability greatly facilitates multidisciplinary research that involves many differ-
ent types of observational data and disparate scales of sampling ranging from
point measurements to repeated, synoptic, high-resolution satellite imagery.  Until

recently, most GIS software was geared toward spatial data, but now the time
dimension is being incorporated more formally through four-dimensional assimi-
lation techniques.  GIS is being used routinely both for fundamental scientific

research and for applications in the Earth sciences, although many problemsBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76BITS OF POWERremain.39  Box 3.3 summarizes some of the barriers encountered in an interna-
tional environmental assessment project using GIS.Documentation to Support Secondary Users of Observational DataAs discussed above, research in the observational sciences increasingly in-volves the integration of multiple, diverse data sets, most or all of which were not
collected by the end users. The primary researchers who collect the data often do
not make the effort to include the documentation that secondary users need.
These secondary users,40 who frequently are less knowledgeable or technically
sophisticated, must have sufficient information about the data (i.e., metadata) in
order to avoid possible misuse and misinterpretation.  Of course, if the data are

used improperly, incorrect results and interpretations are likely to result, and
these, in turn, may be propagated through the scientific community of secondary
users, thereby spawning still more erroneous interpretations.Therefore, a key component of effective international and interdisciplinaryBOX 3.3Barriers Encountered in International EnvironmentalAssessments Using Geographic Information SystemsÒI have been working for five years on an EPA-supported project developinggeographic data and geographic information systems for environmental assess-
ment on the Mexico-U.S. border.  This effort has required the acquisition, verifica-tion and enhancement of various types of geographic, earth science and demo-graphic data from Mexico, the US and several international agencies.ÒDuring this binational project, I have encountered several major issues associ-ated with geographic data.  At the conceptual level, these issues involve the cog-
nitive representation of the landscape used to capture the data and to represent it
in the digital domain.  Additionally, standardization of data acquisition methods,
geographic scale, resolution, spatial accuracy, feature (attribute) definition andmetadata presentation are some of the technical issues that lead to a lack of com-
parability and impair maximum utility in a binational setting.  I have found that the
definition and resolution of the conceptual and the technical issues are influencedgreatly by the differences in culture (scientific, political, philosophical), language,
economic development, etc.  Seldom is the reality of the earth
Õs surface represent-ed identically in the mental maps of two individuals.  The translation of this per-
ceived reality to digital maps distorts the variation even more.  Unlike other types of

data, the wide variety of distinct applications for individual geographic and earthscience data sets compounds the potential for misunderstanding and misuse byvarious user groups.ÓSOURCE: George F. Hepner, University of Utah, personal communication, January 18, 1996.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES77use of scientific data is the associated metadata that describe where and how thedata were collected, the calibrations that convert raw data into physical units,
corrections that have been made, the quality and reliability of the data, the data
format(s) and any other information or caveats concerning the proper use of the
data.41For example, research on global change is in large part being carried out bysecondary users.  Past observations of the temperature at Earth
Õs surface, gath-ered at many locations globally for weather, agriculture, or environmental stud-
ies, provide a long-term record that is being investigated to determine whether
global warming is taking place.  In other cases, one type of observation may be

the proxy for another parameter that has not been adequately observed (e.g.,
cloud cover as a proxy for precipitation).  A remote sensing example is the

original Landsat, which was designed for looking at vegetation, crops, and other
agricultural purposes but has been extensively used for geological studies; like-
wise, the Seasat synthetic aperture radar imagery was taken to study the sea
surface, but it has provided a new type of observational data to study geological
features on land, particularly faults and other geological boundaries, surface tex-
tures, and soil moisture.  Past climates are being inferred from paleontological

data on fossil spores and pollens originally collected for biological studies of
limited local areas.The research community does not now have a coordinated effort to indexthese and other extant data sets and to distribute and update this index in the form
of an electronic directory.  Not knowing what data are available is clearly a

barrier to international research in global change science.  Efforts are currently

under way to address this issue.  For example, the International Geosphere-

Biosphere ProgrammeÕs Data and Information System has proposed identifyingdata sets at three levels: (1) by directories, identifying the existence of data sets;
(2) by guides, containing information about their quality and other characteris-
tics; and (3) by inventories, specifying the individual items that are present.42Declassification of Environmental Data at the End of the Cold WarObservational data collected for military or espionage purposes are necessar-ily kept secret for some prescribed period of time, at least until the documented
events, or the inherent evidence of the data collection techniques and technologi-
cal capabilities themselves, can no longer compromise national security.  Some

of these data sets contain valuable historical data, particularly observations of
certain locations or phenomena that are collected on a consistent, repetitive basis
for many years, or even decades.In recent years, both in the United States and especially in the countries ofthe former Soviet Union, the end of the Cold War has led to the release into the
public domain of many of these data.  An example is seismic data gathered for the

purpose of underground nuclear test monitoring.  Until the end of the Cold War,
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78BITS OF POWERno regional recordings of Soviet nuclear explosions were available, nor wereSoviet recordings of U.S. or other countriesÕ test explosions.  Now there is access
to large amounts of these data by scientists outside the former Soviet Union.
Other types of Soviet Earth science data, such as gravity and magnetics observa-
tions and Arctic oceanographic observations, also have been made available to
the scientific community. 43
  Likewise, U.S. data from some previously classified
observational programs, including reconnaissance satellites44 and undersea sen-
sors,45 have been made publicly available.  The international availability of use-
ful Earth science data has increased significantly with these data declassifications,
and the committee encourages all governments to undertake similar reviews of
classified retrospective data sets.Improving International Access to Scientific Data in the Observational
Environmental SciencesA striking example of the benefits of extensive data collection and researchfor international management of environmental problems is evident in agreement
by  the nations of the world on a clear strategy for mitigating depletion of ozone

in the stratosphere.46   Not only was agreement reached in a limited period of
time, but substitute substances and technologies also have been developed rap-
idly without a large economic impact on society.Unfortunately, not all of the many global environmental and health problemscan be confronted in the same way as was done for stratospheric ozone.  In fact,

many of the underlying research issues are extremely complex and interrelated.
In the case of reducing the uncertainties regarding the much publicized global
warming trend, extensive geophysical and biological data on the atmosphere,
ocean, land surface, and cryosphere will be required on a global basis for long
periods of time.  The role of the ocean in the global carbon cycles and in the

energetics of the atmosphere, the impacts of deforestation and desertification, the
full implication of the radiatively active gases, and a host of interrelated natural
processes need to be understood.  Such understanding can be gained only by

acquiring and analyzing comprehensive data sets on a global basis, with the
active involvement of most, if not all, nations, and with the best efforts of the
worldÕs scientific community.  But we do know from the stratospheric ozone
problem that international agreement can be reached when adequate data and
understanding of the problem are available to policymakers throughout the world.
It is therefore essential that environmental and health data and information ca-
pable of describing our global atmosphere, ocean, and terrestrial system be fully
and openly available.  Moreover, making such basic data broadly available is

fundamental to ascertaining the veracity and validity of the scientific process and
of the resulting conclusions.  If the data supporting the conclusions are not readily
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES79available to others for independent analysis, then the confidence in the researchprocess and results will be undermined.This is not to say, however, that all data must be made widely available assoon as they are generated.  Indeed, an important reason for some period of delay

is to ascertain the accuracy and integrity of the data and to prepare them for
broader use, as discussed in the previous sections.  The difficulties inherent in the

collection and proper documentation of data by field researchers, or in the pro-
cessing and organizing of large and complex data sets, can make a delay in the
release of those data not only justified, but prudent.  In addition, it is customary in

many cases for a funding agency to provide the principal investigator or originat-
ing research group with the right to withhold public release of their data for a
prescribed period of proprietary use, not only to adequately prepare the data for
broader dissemination and use, but also to give the principal investigator an
opportunity to analyze the data and to publish the first results.  At the same time,

there may be legitimate countervailing public policy reasons for early or even
immediate availability of data, for example, data collected in publicly funded
government programs such as meteorological satellite systems, which have both
immediate operational and longer-term research applications.While the availability of scientific data as soon as is reasonably possibleshould be the presumption, a single, uniform time period for the release of all data
is neither sensible nor desirable.  What is important is that the funding agency

together with the community of scientists make a thorough evaluation of the
competing interests guiding the release of its data prior to the initiation of every
major data collection program, to establish the terms and conditions of data
availability in consultation with the principal research and data user communi-
ties, and to subsequently enforce compliance.  The 1996 NASA Science Policy

Guide provides a good example of a data availability policy for nonproprietary
scientific data obtained through public funds (see Box 3.4).From a broader policy standpoint, the committee believes that the U.S. datamanagement policy established for the U.S. Global Change Research Program in
1991 (commonly referred to as Òthe Bromley PrinciplesÓ in reference to D. Allan
Bromley, the PresidentÕs Advisor for Science and Technology at that time) pro-vides an excellent model for all major aspects of data availability and access.
Box 3.5 contains the main points of that policy.  The committee adapts the

definition of Òfull and open exchange of data,Ó subsequently developed by the
NRCÕs Committee on Geophysical and Environmental Data,47  as data and infor-
mation are made available with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscrimi-
natory basis, for no more than the cost of reproduction and distribution.Unfortunately, the international exchange of data between research groups,government agencies, and scientific data centers, including the World Data Cen-
ters, is rapidly becoming more complicated, just at a time when full and open
exchange is most needed to make progress on major global environmental prob-
lems.   A growing number of government data centers outside the United States
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80BITS OF POWERBOX 3.4NASAÕs Data Availability PolicyReady access to data from NASA research programs and missions (via mod-ern data archiving and communications technologies) by researchers not directlyinvolved in the program increases the return on NASA research investments.  It istherefore NASA policy that nonproprietary scientific data obtained fromNASA programs and missions will be made publicly available in usable formas quickly as possible.   (Nonproprietary data are data that may be distributed
without violating patent, trade secret, or copyright laws or NASAÕs ability to obtainand protect U.S. government intellectual property rights.)  Such data constitute a
national resource that can be used by scientists, policymakers, and the public
throughout the country to undertake new scientific studies, permit wider assess-ment of the validity of the results and conclusions from NASA missions, and facil-itate broader public understanding of the value of NASA programs and missions.The issue of data rights is a complex one that involves consideration of a widerange of competing factors including:¥the right of public access to data which has been obtained at public ex-pense;¥the need to protect the original ideas which form the basis for competitivelyselected research (there is a strong tradition and body of law in the United
States concerning the protection of intellectual property rights);¥the principle of fairness to investigators to allow them to pursue originalideas and hypotheses and to carry out the scientific investigations for whichthey were selected;¥the need to avoid the premature release of misleading results;¥the need to verify data prior to public release;¥the need for early release of data when such early release is critical tonational needs or required for overarching public policy reasons;¥the need for early release of data for educational and public informationpurposes; and¥the need to protect data which may have a proprietary commercial applica-tion which may confer a competitive advantage, particularly to U.S. indus-tries competing in the international marketplace.A wide variety of approaches to data rights have been used:
¥Virtually immediate release for scientific and public information purposes.Ñ Shoemaker-Levy 9 observations
¥Release of data as soon practical when data are considered reliable forgeneral use.Ñ Earth Observing System
¥Restricted use of data during a limited calibration and verification period,after which verified data are deposited in a public archive.Ñ Magellan
¥Restricted use of data for a limited period of time (typically one year), afterwhich verified data are deposited into an archive for general use.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES81Ñ Most past solar system exploration missions
Ñ Compton Gamma Ray Observatory
Ñ Hubble Space Telescope
Ñ Life and microgravity sciences research
Ñ In-space technology experiments (2 years)
¥Restricted use of data for an extended period to carry out investigationsrequiring the acquisition of data over a long interval of time; data are even-tually archived.Ñ Cosmic Background Explorer
¥Stringent restrictions placed on access to data on the basis of Privacy Act orother considerations.Ñ Human research data
Ñ Proprietary data obtained through the use of NASA facilities such a wind
 tunnel test results
Ñ Restrictions that result from data purchase agreements
It is NASA policy that all nonproprietary scientific mission data be madepublicly available after the shortest reasonable time in forms which permit a
wide range of users to derive scientific, technical, and other benefits.  How-
ever, it appears that neither NASA nor the research community would be wellserved by the rigid adoption of a single uniform policy on the distribution and dis-
semination of data.  Rather, the policy should be established for each mission or
research program on a case-by-case basis.  Well-understood and widely circulat-
ed criteria for making such determinations must be established.  The approach to
be taken for each program or mission will be spelled out in Announcements ofOpportunity, Research Announcements, or other competitive mechanisms so that
prospective participants understand the conditions of participation.  Mechanisms
may also have to be developed to assess adherence to NASA policies concerningthe general availability of data.  If a change is necessary in a previously agreed-to
approach to data rights, NASA will consult the investigators affected to develop amutually agreeable plan that meets the spirit of the principles set forth here.SOURCE: Reprinted from NASA Science Policy Guide (1996), available on-line at <http://
dlt.gsfc.nasa.gov/cordova/guide.html>.charge high prices for data and impose various dissemination and use restrictions.Ad hoc bilateral agreements between data centers and government science agen-
cies are becoming commonplace.  These agreements take on many forms and can

lead to a situation in which individual scientists will no longer be able to obtain
data for their projects without a major effort or large expense.  Additional legal

constraints on access to scientific data of all types are currently being imple-
mented or considered, as discussed in depth in Chapter 5.The committee thus recommends that internationally, in both intergovern-mental and nongovernmental organizations, the full and open exchange of scien-
tific data from publicly funded research be adopted as a fundamental principle.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82BITS OF POWERBOX 3.5The ÒBromley PrinciplesÓ Regarding Full and
Open Access to ÒGlobal ChangeÓ Data
The overall purpose of these policy statements is to facilitate full and openaccess to quality data for global change research.  They were prepared in conso-

nance with the goal of the U.S. Global Change Research Program and representthe U.S. governmentÕs position on access to global change research data.¥The Global Change Research Program requires an early and continuingcommitment to the establishment, maintenance, validation, description, ac-cessibility, and distribution of high-quality, long-term data sets.¥Full and open sharing of the full suite of global data sets for all global changeresearchers is a fundamental objective.¥Preservation of all data needed for long-term global change research isrequired.  For each and every global change data parameter, there should
be at least one explicitly designated archive.  Procedures and criteria for
setting priorities for data acquisition, retention, and purging should be de-
veloped by participating agencies, both nationally and internationally.  A
clearinghouse process should be established to prevent the purging andloss of important data sets.¥Data archives must include easily accessible information about the dataholdings, including quality assessments, supporting ancillary information,and guidance and aids for locating and obtaining the data.¥National and international standards should be used to the greatest extentpossible for media and for processing and communication of global data
sets.¥Data should be provided at the lowest possible cost to global change re-searchers in the interest of full and open access to data.  This cost should,

as a first principle, be no more than the marginal cost of filling a specificuser request.  Agencies should act to streamline administrative arrange-
ments for exchanging data among researchers.¥For those programs in which selected principal investigators have initialperiods of exclusive data use, data should be made openly available assoon as they become widely useful.  In each case, the funding agency

should explicitly define the duration of any exclusive use period.SOURCE:  Data Management for Global Change Research Policy Statements, U.S. Global
Change Research Program, July 1991.The committee believes that such an agreement would significantly improve theability of researchers to develop an adequate scientific understanding of our
natural environment and the human condition, to address major problems facing
the world community, and to broaden and enrich the knowledge base of all
humanity.Given that scientific data in all the disciplinesÑnot just the observationalBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES83sciencesÑare widely distributed globally in different archives or databases andthat significant changes in data collection, storage, retrieval, and dissemination
are steadily taking place, it is clear that some form of distributed data manage-
ment strategy will be required to assure effective and efficient access by the
scientific community. Considering the trends outlined in this chapter, and the
imperative for broad and sustained international cooperation in environmental
research, the committee concludes that the most viable and effective approach for
the transnational flow of scientific data and information is through a system of
connected international networks, each of which is the gateway to particular
types of information.  These data exchange networks, building on the successful

models presented in Appendix C, would connect peer institutions for mutually
beneficial rewards and collaborations, and provide data access to the research and
education communities.  The committee recommends the continued evolution of
the existing distributed network of data centers as part of the global information
infrastructure, with coordinated standards and procedures to provide unrestricted
access at zero or low costs to data required for the study of regional and global
problems.48  This Ònetwork of networksÓ would provide connectivity to multipledata archives internationally and would serve as a coordinated source for impor-
tant scientific data and information.  Significant savings in research time, effort,

and cost, as well as an overall enhancement of results, could be realized by using
such a resource.Terminology and Nomenclature in Biology and Related FieldsA significant barrier to sharing of information in the natural sciences is thatsubfields within disciplines have different languages, jargon, and usage.  Without

clear means for bridging resulting gaps in understanding, communication can be
difficult.  Moreover, lack of precision in terms themselves or in their use can lead

to fundamental problems in searching for and interpreting data.  A biologist, for

example, may use the common name of an organism in recording and transmit-
ting data without taking into consideration the limitations of the term or differ-
ences in usage.  ÒMouseÓ can signify any of a large number of small rodents.
Peanuts are not nuts.  Hospital records that indicate  
Òatypical E. coliÓ without
including the original observations justifying the label ÒatypicalÓ do not commu-
nicate as much information as may be needed for treatment of a patient or for
subsequent studies.The complexity of what is being observed can also complicate precise descrip-tion.  Although the largest epidemiological studies describe far fewer events than

does a short span of infrared satellite data, for example, the resulting biological
database typically will have many more attributes associated with each event than
are associated with, say, astronomical events.  Likewise, a patient
Õs hospital recordoften contains hundreds of different kinds of observations generated in the course
of a diagnostic workup, and even a routine blood sample can yield data of at least aBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84BITS OF POWERdozen kinds.  Variability in the interpretation of each observation and associative
reasoning play key roles in subsequently understanding the information.A fundamental problem related to transfer of biological information in par-ticular is the lack of a consultative body to standardize definitions for the words
used to describe features of organisms.  Dictionaries
Õ coverage often is limited to
narrow groups of organisms.  There is no universal language of biology.  The

chemist knows with great precision what the term Òsodium chlorideÓ means;
determining precise descriptors for aspects of biological entities presents chal-
lenges of another magnitude.Consider, for instance, the term ÒsporeÓ as used in a description of microorgan-
isms.  Spore-forming microorganisms consistently turn up in microbial biodiversity

and bioconservation studies.  But the taxonomy of these organisms is complex.

Spore formation occurs in bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and algae, and the range of
types of spores is also wide.  Currently, the definitions and descriptions of spore

types are very confusing but must be taken into account.  Because of the lack of a

comprehensive, authoritative treatment of the description of spores and spore

types, many biodiversity studies are either in error or not understandable owing to
misidentifications or confusing descriptions.  Furthermore, the lack of a consis-

tent vocabulary with respect to spores has legal and regulatory consequences.
Intellectual property rights concerning strains of microorganisms require strict
definitions and accurate, understandable descriptions of the properties of the
strains, especially if a strain or its use is to be patented.  Scientists, government

regulators, patent officials, and industry lawyers, among others, all require agreed-

upon definitions and standards for describing the various forms of spores and
spore-related anatomical features of microorganisms.The difficulties associated with describing and defining spores applies tomany other descriptors used in biology.  Further, as biologists adapt words from

other disciplines and branches of biology, the meanings can drift.  Terms devel-

oped by botanists to describe the shapes of leaves are also used in describing cell
shapes in microorganisms, albeit with subtle or even major changes in meaning.
ÒObpyriformÓ signifies a pear-shaped leaf with the stem coming out of the blunt
end.  Applied to algae, the same term indicates pear-shaped cells with the blunt

end in the forward direction in swimming.  In addition, although 
Òpear-shapedÓassumes as a model the common commercial pear sold in most of the world, it is
also the case that Asian ÒpearsÓ have no obvious narrow end.
Problems of nomenclature extend to large-scale biological studies as well.For example, the lack of consistent classification schemes for land-cover vegeta-
tion and soils hampers international data exchange and can lead to errors of
interpretation, especially by non-expert users.  Current approaches to classifying
land cover include the physiognomic, floristic, and ecosystematic approaches.  It

is generally agreed that existing land-cover maps cannot provide a globally con-
sistent and up-to-date database for global change studies.49  Satellite remote
sensing is the only viable approach to developing a map of vegetation that isBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES85useful for global change research, and several satellite remote sensing activitiesnow are addressing data requirements for characterizing land cover.50For soils, as for land cover, there is no agreed-upon classification scheme.Soil is a three-dimensional dynamic entity whose propertiesÑphysical, chemi-cal, and biologicalÑvary dramatically in time and space.  Observations of the
causes and effects of these variations provide a valuable historical record of the
components and processes that have produced current soil characteristics and
conditions.  With today
Õs focus on research to understand human-induced changesand rates of change in the Earth system, the challenge to the soil science commu-
nity is to provide a globally credible, compatible, and usable soil and terrain
information system that can be integrated with information about other compo-
nents of the Earth system.  Only with open access to essential terrestrial informa-

tion can intelligent decisions be derived about the Earth system and what, if any,
human intervention is needed to protect it.  Box 3.6 provides an overview of some

of the nomenclature problems in this complex area.The need for improved standardization of terminology, however, is not con-fined to biological or soil science databases.  In any field, use of standardized

terminology in a computerized database is vital in structuring the database, in
digitizing data captured from printed sources, in accessing the database, and in
interchange of data.  The inflexibility and inexorable logic of the computer put

new emphasis on control of terminology and on value-added system features
such as thesauri, synonym files, and expanders for abbreviations and collectives
terms.  Without these aids, valuable information in databases may become inac-

cessible or incorrect, and incomplete or misleading information may be re-
trieved.51Terminology-related barriers to understanding of data can be addressed onlythrough internationally coordinated actions.  Some efforts exist, such as the

SOTER project described in Box 3.6.  Another notable effort, a workshop to

initiate mapping of the correspondence in terms associated with spores across all
of microbiology, was supported with modest funding from the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Committee on Data for Science and Technology
(CODATA), and the U.S. National Science Foundation.  The comprehensive

Dictionary of the Fungi52 is a widely accepted compendium of terms and their
definitions.  However, the 
Systematized Nomenclature of Pathology,53 developed
in the 1960s for computer entry of data,  has not been widely adopted, either in

the United States or in the rest of the world.An important activity in the biological area has been CODATAÕs Commis-sion on Standardized Terminology for Access to Biological Data Banks.  The

commissionÕs encouragement led to the International Union of PharmacologyÕsestablishment of a body to standardize the nomenclature for receptors for drugs.
The International Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses collaborates with the
commission in its efforts to standardize the descriptors for viruses.  The commis-

sion also is participating with the International Union of Biological Sciences andBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86BITS OF POWERBOX 3.6Incompatible Soil and Terrain Information SystemsToday there is a critical need for detailed, universally compatible soil and ter-rain information for use in such applications as global change modeling, national
resource planning and development, and plant breeding.  Between 1960 and 1980
the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, working withall nations, generated a Soil Map of the World, at a scale of 1:5,000,000, and
published it jointly with UNESCO.1 This major accomplishment provided a basis
on which more current and detailed maps suitable for global change modelingmight be built.  A soil and terrain map at a scale of 1:1,000,000 is critically needed

to study and model rates of change related to human activity in terrestrial ecosys-tems.2For the industrialized countries, much more detailed soil maps exist at scalesranging from 1:10,000 to 1:500,000.  However, for many of the less developed
countries, the FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of the World may be the only soil mapavailable for the whole country, although some countries may have detailed maps
for some areas.  Because of its lack of detail and the inadequacy of its original
data, the use of the Soil Map of the World for national resource planning anddevelopment is often questionable.  Unfortunately, FAO has no plans to produce a

more detailed soil map of the world.Since 1950, many agricultural and resource development programs have beenimplemented throughout the developing world, with technical and financial assis-
tance from the United Nations and governmental and private agencies from indus-trialized countries.  These assistance programs have included a number of local-
ized soil mapping projects.  As a result, in many of these countries soils have been
mapped according to different soil classification systems.  Often no attempt has
been made to integrate one system with another.  This situation has resulted in

great confusion in many countries. The significant differences among classificationsystems confound the interpretation of these soil maps for national resource man-agement, and make it difficult, if not impossible, to derive a credible national quality
assessment of soil and land resources.In 1986 the International Society of Soil Science embarked on an ambitiousproject to develop the World Soils and Terrain (SOTER) digital database at a scale
of 1:1,000,000.3 The first task was to develop a universal legend for describing
both the cartographic units and the descriptive data for different soil and terraincategories.  The second task was to develop a set of procedures that would make

it possible to translate and correlate soil and terrain data (cartographic and de-scriptive) from any soil classification system to the universal SOTER database.4During 8 years of effort in several countries many improvements have been madein the SOTER procedures, but the number of constraints to progress remains for-midable.One of the greatest technical constraints is that there is no universally acceptedsoil classification system.  Three of the major systems in use (i.e., systems that
have been applied in relatively large areas) are the Soil Taxonomy system (a U.S.system developed with broad international collaboration), the French system, and
the Russian system.  These systems have been applied widely in specific projects
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES87in countries where the United States, France, and Russia have had collaborativedevelopment projects or strong ties.  SOTER attempts to address this constraint
by providing a universal legend under which any existing soil and terrain map of
acceptable quality may be translated and correlated with the SOTER legend andentered into the SOTER database.  In this process the data set for any country or
classification system can retain its original identity.Measurements of physical, chemical, and biological characteristics are essen-tial for quantifying soil quality. One of the technical constraints in the measurementof soil properties is the lack of uniformity or standardization of analytical proce-
dures.  Another constraint on the comparison of soil properties from one classifica-
tion system to another is that for many soil properties, different class limits areassigned for ranges of soil parameters used for classification purposes.  Examples

are the lack of uniformity in the classification of soil texture, that is, the amountsand distribution of different sizes of soil particles, and the absence of a universallyaccepted definition of slopeÑnone-to-slight, slight, moderate, steep, very steep.Another barrier to access to comparable soil and terrain data sets across inter-national boundaries is the disparity in the conceptual use of quantitative data todelineate mappable soil differences.  Some classification systems integrate much

more quantitative analytic data into these delineations than do other systems.Finally, there are intradisciplinary and interdisciplinary constraints.  Within the
applied discipline of soil science, there are many Òsubdisciplines,Ó including soil
physics, soil chemistry, soil mineralogy, soil microbiology, soil bioremediation, soilgenesis, soil classification and survey, and soil degradation and reclamation.These groups often work in relative isolation from each other and may developtheir own jargon, which may hinder access to data within the soil science commu-nity itself.Efforts have been made in recent years to ÒconnectÓ soil scientists with special-
ists in other disciplines, such as crop geneticists.  Much more could be done,
however, to remove the constraints to better use of soils information by plant breed-
ers in the development of crops more suitable to prevailing soil conditions, such ascultivators of maize or rice that are tolerant (or resistant) to aluminum toxicity,which is prevalent in acid soils of the tropics.  Many other scientists, land use

planners, resource managers, civil engineers, environmental engineers, attorneys,resource economists, and others require specific kinds of information about soilsand soil properties.  Unfortunately, it continues to be very difficult for the non-soil

scientist to effectively access and use the data.1Food and Agriculture Organization (1980), FAO/UNESCO Soil Map of the World,  Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.2M.F. Baumgardner (1993), ÒThe Critical Need for a World Soils Database for GlobalChange Modeling,Ó in 
Proceedings of International Workshop on Soils and Global Modeling,International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, Stockholm.3International Society of Soil Science (1986), ÒWorld  Soils and Terrain Digital Databases
at a Scale of 1:1M (SOTER),Ó project proposal,  M.F. Baumgardner (ed.), ISSS, Wageningen,
the Netherlands.4International Soil Reference and Information Centre (1993), Global and National Soilsand Terrain Digital Databases: Procedures Manual, ISRIC, Wageningen, the Netherlands.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88BITS OF POWERthe International Union of Microbiological Sciences to establish the System 2000network to assemble a database of scientific names of all biota.All these efforts, however, represent a small part of what needs to be done tomake data and results more accessible.  The mechanisms for establishing standards

for words, formats, and storage and retrieval conventions in biological information
management need to be improved.  To be effective and accepted, this must be done

on a truly global basis.  In general, standardization of terms in science today is

either carried out or validated by the appropriate ICSU body.  For example, the

CODATA Task Group on Fundamental Constants is the recognized authority in
nomenclature for fundamental constants.  In biology, the Codes of Nomenclature

are promulgated by ICSU components appropriate to the discipline.The committee suggests that the CODATA Commission on StandardizedTerminology for Access to Biological Data Banks be enhanced into a true consul-
tative body for this purpose.  The commission would need funds sufficient to

provide effective standard-setting services to the biological community.  Expan-

sion of personnel and increased collaboration with other ICSU and outside scien-
tific organizations would be necessary for both functional and political reasons.This should be an ICSU function, coordinated by CODATA, because there is no
other established international source of such standard setting in the biological
sciences.Data Compatibility in the Laboratory Physical SciencesThe barriers to the international exchange of scientific data in the laboratorysciences generally are not as complex as those in the observational sciences,
partly because of the difference in the volumes of data accumulated and used in
day-to-day research and partly because of the ways in which the disciplines have
evolved.  In the physical and the laboratory biological sciences, for example, full

compilations of data have always been published in textbooks and in articles in
professional journals available throughout the world, whereas the data of the
observational sciences in many cases have been accumulated only in government
records.Barriers to international data exchange in the laboratory sciences concernease of  access to data and the use of those data.  Today, the effective exchange of

virtually all scientific data requires that they be in electronic format.  For manu-

scripts, exchange can be straightforward if scientists adopt a common word-
processing language such as TeX or LaTeX, now used worldwide in many com-
munities in the physical sciences.  Scientists need to be able both to generate a

computer-readable manuscript that can be decoded and read on all computer
platforms and to decode and read whatever other scientists may similarly pro-
vide.  Establishing a common set of tools to ensure such compatibility can be

difficult, more so for simulations and animations than for text.  Because of the

volume of data they involve, simulations and animations need to be compressedBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES89for storage and transmission, a problem that should be easy to resolve since theyinvariably originate in computer format.  However, making them accessible to

arbitrary platforms requires either considerable sophistication or standardization,
or both.Converting databases created in hard copy to electronic format can be a costlyenterprise, but is nevertheless far cheaper than erecting library buildings.  Consid-

erable care is needed to ensure that the original data are not compromised in the
process of generating the electronic version.54  In recent years, most data trans-
ferred automatically from paper to computer have been captured and stored as
images of the printed pages.  The alternative is to store the data as text, apart from

components that are true images, such as molecular structures; the increasing avail-
ability of optical character-reading software is making textual storage practical and
economical.  The large number of databases in the physical sciences that have been

developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) have

traditionally been available only in relatively expensive, hard-copy books.  NIST

plans to provide on-line access to all data it collects and compiles and recently has
developed on-line access, with search capabilities, to databases critical to research
in chemistry and physics.55  There is a great difference between data stored elec-
tronically as images, which cannot be manipulated by the user, and data stored as
digitized alphanumeric information, which can be treated as normal text and tables.
Data in most modern databases in the physical sciences are generally not static,
especially when the databases are stored electronically and hence can be updated as
the information improves.  Thus there is always a continuing responsibility and

expense to maintain and disseminate those databases as they evolve.  If the data are

stored only as images, such maintenance is difficult and costly.  Storage, mainte-

nance, and distribution become vastly easier and more efficient if the information is
in the form of a true relational database, in alphanumerics, with user-friendly search
capabilities, qualities that require expense and technical sophistication to imple-
ment.In some areas of the physical sciences, notably materials science and chem-istry, the fragmentation of the data into numerous, autonomous, and often incom-
patible databases continues to be a considerable barrier to access.  Many small

data files exist, often maintained by individuals, with a plethora of formats and a
range of quality levels.  When there are several databases, many means of access

to them, and inadequate directories to locate and search them, it is difficult to
know what information a particular system of databases includes, how to locate
sources for information that they do not cover, and how to assess the quality of
the data.  The problem is further exacerbated when some data are in journal form,

others in hard-copy manuals, and still others in a variety of electronic databases,
each of which may be on a different platform, often with limited search capabili-
ties.  This is in contrast to situations in areas such as atomic and nuclear physics,
in which data have traditionally been compiled and disseminated from a single
source, or at least in a standardized format.  The dissemination of materials
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90BITS OF POWERscience and chemistry databases remains fragmented, and the broad range ofresearchers in these fields still need better access to them.Most of the data in the databases of the physical sciences are needed to carryon the basic research that the funding agencies support.  Just as the funding

agencies support the hardware necessary to do research, these agencies also carry
a responsibility to support the data components of the infrastructure necessary to
conduct research.  Also, just as support for basic research needs to be protected

because of the likelihood of long time intervals between the conduct of the
research and its eventual applications, so should the development and mainte-
nance of databases be protected from short-term fluctuations in budgets or vary-
ing needs for the data in industrial applications.  The development of databases

includes the compilation and evaluation of data from the variety of sources of the
data.  Once developed, it is critical that databases be maintained and continuously

updated as new, relevant data become available.  The dissemination should be via

a variety of platforms and should be in user-friendly forms, with cross-referenc-
ing to files maintained by other agencies, or available via other electronic media.The committee believes that science agencies should maintain responsibilityeither directly or under subcontract for the development, management, retention,
and dissemination of electronic databases that are the product of their research
programs.  Within the United States, the Office of Science and Technology

Policy should develop an overall policy for the long-term retention of scientific
data, including a contingency plan for protecting those data that may become
threatened with the loss of their institutional home.56ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESThe international exchange of scientific data has a scope beyond that of thelarge scientific communities in the technically and economically developed parts
of the world.  While much of this report reflects the research atmosphere in which

its contributors work, it is especially important to address aspects of the subject
associated with disparities of wealth and resources among nations, the cultural
differences with which nations address their societal problems, and the varying
ways nations assign their priorities.The differences in priorities are especially marked in the spectrum of ways inwhich nations, from one end to the other of the scale of development, consider
scientific and technical matters.  More industrialized and wealthier nations choose

to invest discretionary public funds in basic sciences, such as high-energy phys-
ics and astronomy, as well as in applied and developmental science and technol-
ogy.  Nations toward the other end of the developmental scale put little emphasis

on sciences with long-term public-good payback and put most of the resources
they have into applied sciences such as agriculture, aquaculture, medicine, and,
recently, biotechnology.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES91As a consequence of the availability of discretionary resources, scientists inmore industrialized nations traditionally have been able to obtain reliable, up-to-
date research equipment, computers, communications infrastructure, and infor-
mation resources.  The scientific communities in developing countries have not

had such advantages.  In the context of this report, this has meant that the scien-

tists in developed nations have had much better access to data and to the underly-
ing means of communication than their colleagues in other nations, who conse-
quently have not been able to take full advantage of their talents.One of the great challenges in the advancement of science that now faces theinternational community is to use electronic acquisition, management, storage,
and distribution of scientific data to reduce the gap between those who have had
easy access to the fruits of scientific progress and those who have not.  Because of

the decreasing costs of electronic technology, compared with the rising costs of
traditional means of storing and transmitting scientific data, the opportunity is
now opening to make advances in bringing scientists in developing countries
much more deeply into the circle of their colleagues in developed countries.
There will be problems and outright barriers to confront in the process of reduc-
ing this gap, but the situation now offers brighter possibilities than at any time
since science became a major, worldwide enterprise.In this section, the committee reviews some of the issues in data access in thecontext of this asymmetrical relationship between the developed and developing
world.  The constraints to data access within developing countries are considered

first.  These include both the limited capability to generate new scientific data and

the problems facing indigenous scientists who want ready access to data from
outside sources.  Such limitations lead to underutilization of the talents of those

scientists because they cannot easily stay abreast of advances in their fields.  The

committee then examines the ability of scientists in developed countries to obtain
useful data based on work in developing countries.Constraints on Data Access Within Developing CountriesBasic to any consideration of constraints on access to data is the economicsituation in developing nations.  Economic limitations on access to scientific data

are manifest primarily in the inadequacy of communications infrastructure and
related research equipment (pointed out in Chapter 2), as well as in insufficient
resources for training and education.  Another important set of constraints not as
deeply affected by the lack of resources is organizational inadequacies.In many developing countries today, gaining and maintaining access to inter-national sources of scientific data and literature are very difficult.  University

libraries and research institutes in these countries cannot afford to subscribe to
the major scientific journals, publications that tend to be readily available to
scientists in wealthy nations.  Databases that are available even at very low rates,

such as the marginal cost of reproduction, can be prohibitively expensive.  Con-
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92BITS OF POWERtact and sharing by scientists in non-industrial nations with scientific colleaguesin other countries can be extremely limited.  Although there have been some

notable efforts on the part of organizations such as the American Association for
the Advancement of Science and UNESCO to provide scientists in developing
countries with printed copies of scientific data and information,57 much more
could and should be done to improve such sharing of information.  The commit-

tee therefore recommends that until affordable and ubiquitous electronic network
services are available, national and international scientific societies and foreign
aid agencies should establish or improve their existing efforts to send extra stocks
of scientific publications to libraries and research institutions in developing coun-
tries that need them.Training and Education ConsiderationsThe governments of most countries recognize that education, particularlyhigher education, is vital for the creation of a solid national base for scientific
endeavors and economic growth.  The poorest nations typically send their students
abroad for advanced education and specialized training, often in applied disciplines
deemed most useful upon the studentsÕ return.  Following  completion of their
postgraduate education and research abroad, however, a large number of these
highly skilled scientists do not return to their home countries, effectively negating
for the home country the immediate broader benefits of their training.58  Many of
these countries cannot provide a sufficiently supportive environment, including the
necessary research infrastructure and funding, to attract and keep scientists.  Fur-

ther, lack of ready access to current information leads to professional obsolescence.
The Òbrain drainÓ from the poorer to the wealthier nations is a serious constraint tothe generation of new knowledge in the developing countries.In addition to the limitations of the available data management and commu-nications technology, training in the use of available technology is limited as
well.  The growing sophistication of both hardware and software tends to make

their use more efficient and eases the training burden in some ways, but it in-
creases it in others.  Basic functions of the computer system are becoming in-

creasingly automated.  However, the functional power of the systems increases

the demand for and use of more complicated techniques for management, analy-
sis, and dissemination.  An important related problem is a lack of adequately

trained personnel for servicing such complex equipment.At the most basic level is the lack of instructional support for the neophytecomputer user.  For example, in courses taught under United Nations auspices on

topics such as use of computers in microbiology, the students in developing
nations overwhelmingly request supplemental training in the use of computers
for data management and analysis, and in on-line access to data and information
resources.  Generally speaking, much more instructional outreach in basic com-

puter data management and communication skills is needed.59Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES93The committee recommends that international development organizations,together with professional societies, provide targeted training programs for scien-
tists in the use of computers, with emphasis on the management of digital data in
specific disciplines.Organizational IssuesThere are many organizations that provide bilateral and multilateral assis-tance to scientists in developing countries, although few are focused primarily or
exclusively on scientific data issues.  These organizations support scientists

through a variety of mechanisms.  Some provide scientific data and services

directly to researchers in developing countries, others provide access to data
through journal subscriptions and travel grants to international scientific confer-
ences, some provide Internet connections and information technology services,
and others promote and provide training and education.  Examples of national

and international government institutions, nongovernmental organizations, not-
for-profit organizations, professional societies, and private-sector firms that pro-
vide these types of services are described briefly below:60¥U.S. government. Within the United States, the federal government,primarily through the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), pro-
vides foreign assistance for activities of scientists and engineers in less developed
nations.61  Other federal agencies such as NASA and the Department of Agricul-
ture assist scientists by providing data resources and data management services.62Finally, the Department of State, through its Bureau on Oceans, Environment,
and Science, indirectly provides assistance through negotiating and monitoring
environmental agreements and conventions that have significant cooperative re-
search and data exchange provisions.63¥Intergovernmental organizations.  Many intergovernmental organizations
provide assistance to scientists and researchers in developing countries by provid-
ing data and information, training and education, and assistance with information
technology.  The lead player in this arena is the United Nations, primarily through

the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), World Health
Organization (WHO), World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and the World
Bank.4Regional organizations, such as the Organization of American States(OAS)65 and the Pan American Health Organization, also promote science and
technology in developing countries through regional activities. The European
Community pursues scientific and technological cooperation with developing
countries as well, particularly with the aim of generating knowledge and tech-
nologies needed to help achieve sustainable development.66Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94BITS OF POWERFinally, various ad hoc intergovernmental groups and committees havebeen organized to coordinate activities related to major international research
programs as discussed above in this chapter.  Many of these groups have sub-

groups devoted to different data management issues, including activities focused
on developing countries.  For example, the Committee on Earth Observation

Satellites (CEOS) coordinates all spaceborne Earth observation missions among
the spacefaring nations.  CEOS has established a 
ÒPlan of Action for Support toDeveloping Country Activities by CEOS Participants.Ó67  Box 3.7 presents a
number of useful Òlessons learnedÓ by CEOS participants in providing support to
developing countries.¥Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). International NGOs, such as the
Third World Academy of Sciences,68 the International Council of Scientific
Unions,69 and the International Foundation for Science,
70 collaborate with U.N.
programs and agencies to provide scientific and technological support to develop-
ing countries.The Consortium for International Earth Sciences Information Network(CIESIN) is an example of a national NGO, with broad international scope, that
provides data and services to scientists in the developing countries.  In addition to

providing Òglobal and regional network development, science data management,decision support, and training, education, and technical consultation services,ÓCIESIN is the World Data Center A for Human Interactions with the Environ-

ment.71Many national and international not-for-profit organizations also assistscientists in developing countries via different mechanisms.  The Sabre

FoundationÕs Scientific Assistance Project provides educational materials in theform of books and journal subscriptions and an Internet-based technical assistance
program to institutions and individuals in the former Soviet Union and Eastern

Europe.72  The International Science Foundation was established by George Soros
in 1992 to assist scientists in the former Soviet Union and the Baltic States by
promoting contacts with the international scientific community, providing access
to scientific data and information, and establishing international communications
links.73  The International Research and Exchange (IREX) Board promotes aca-
demic exchanges between the United States and the former Soviet Union and
provides professional training, technical assistance, and policy programs.74  Other
organizations, such as the Volunteers in Technical Assistance (VITA), contribute
information services and technology to developing countries to improve their
quality of life.75National and international scientific and engineering societies and asso-ciations play an important role as well.  For example, in addition to the African

libraries program described above, the American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science has promoted regional collaborations between scientists in de-
veloping countries.76  Some professional organizations provide travel grants to
allow individual scientists from developing countries to attend international sci-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES95BOX 3.7CEOS ÒLessons LearnedÓ Regarding Support to
Developing CountriesThe Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) compiled the followinglist of  principles based on the experiences of its members in providing technical

assistance to developing nations:¥Development projects should be planned in partnership between donorsand local institutions in response to real needs of in-country decision-mak-ers. Decision-makers need to be convinced of the utility of such activities inorder to create the appropriate environment for sustainable operation.¥Projects supported by joint efforts of space agencies with development as-sistance organizations can benefit from combining important skills in bothscience/technology and sustainable development.¥Pilot projects should be selected with their later operational requirements inmind.  To be considered successful, a pilot project will provide the founda-
tion for ongoing routine application of the demonstrated capability. This sug-gests the use of affordable technology and readily available data. Projects
aimed at improving indigenous capability to perform already ongoing oper-ations are more likely to succeed.¥Documentation prepared for use by developing country users should beavailable in a language readily understood locally, using minimal technicaljargon, to be easily understandable by the target audience.¥Data and information for developing countries should be on media appropri-ate for the users, avoiding electronic formats requiring equipment that is not
available. Easily reproducible text and imagery will often be more readilyusable than sophisticated digital products. At the same time, considerationshould be given to improving local infrastructure so that media such as CD-
ROMs can progressively be used in developing country applications.¥Expertise in developing countries must not only be created but also be sus-tained. This suggests holding local training courses and emphasizing Òtrainingthe trainer.Ó  Improving existing educational institutions rather than creating new
training centers can enhance the sustainability of the educational process.¥Local reception of satellite data can be an effective tool in identifying prac-tical applications and demonstrating the value of the data in the local envi-ronment. Equipment installed in developing countries must be designed tobe rugged and easily maintained with locally available capabilities.¥Satellite data alone will not contribute to development unless it is trans-formed into useful information and disseminated.¥Countries that have successfully applied satellite technology to develop-ment problems can serve as examples and share their experience and ex-pertise within their regions and more broadly. Their experience may be morerelevant and more applicable to other developing country situations than
the approaches used in industrialized countries.¥Development assistance projects should be structured with sufficient flexi-bility to respond to the unexpected events that often occur.SOURCE: CEOS; available on-line at <http://gds.esrin.esa.it:80/0xc06afc3d_0x000291f2;
internal$sk=041858E7>.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96BITS OF POWERentific and technical conferences.  Other efforts include the American Society for
Mechanical EngineersÕ partnership with the Mechanical Engineering Research
Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences to promote the application of
environmental and energy-related technologies to establish a technology transfer
mechanism between the two organizations.¥Private sector.  A number of private sector organizations also provide
assistance to scientists in developing countries.  This assistance is usually indi-

rect, through the financial support of international NGOs such as the Third World
Academy of Sciences and ICSU.Many of the problems cited above in this section are exacerbated by a lack ofeffective organizational structures or institutional mechanisms for involving sci-
entists within developing countries in the decision-making process regarding
scientific research, much less data access issues.  However, foreign aid agencies

in the developed countries and intergovernmental development organizations are
known not to involve scientists in their decision-making process either.  For

example, U.N. funding agencies respond almost exclusively to requests from the
foreign ministries of member countries.  The foreign ministries in developing

countries almost never utilize scientists in decisions.  The result is a dearth of

funding applications for scientific infrastructure capacity building, which is es-
sential not only to support indigenous scientific research efforts, but also to
encourage economic development.  An analogous situation is evolving in USAID,

where science once flourished, but where the involvement of scientists in internal
planning and funding decisions is eroding rapidly.Of course, some success stories do exist.  For example, Vietnam, concerned
about environmental pollution as well as the need to build biotechnology capac-
ity, arranged for scientists at many levels to collaborate in developing a national
plan in microbiology and biotechnology infrastructure capacity building for sub-
mission to the Global Environment Facility of the U.N. through the United Na-
tions Industrial Development Organization.With regard to improving access to scientific data in developing countries,the committee makes the following recommendations:¥Scientists in developing countries should be encouraged to organize topromote the policy of full and open access to scientific data in their own countries,
as well as to make their data available internationally.¥Foreign aid agencies should (i) make available to individual scientists indeveloping countries more direct, peer-reviewed grants that include support for
access to data, and (ii) facilitate the involvement of scientists in such nations in
their own countriesÕ capacity-building initiatives, research policy decisions, and
national database construction efforts.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES97Constraints on Access to Data from Developing CountriesThe constraints caused by inequities among nations in access to scientificdata are felt most severely in those sciences concerned with inherently interna-
tional issues, such as food production, biodiversity, the prevention and cure of
communicable diseases, global climate change, and other Earth system processes.
Each of these areas of concern requires international research and approaches to
problem solving.  As discussed above in this chapter, developing this essential

understanding requires the generation of globally compatible, accessible, and
usable data sets related to terrestrial ecosystems, the physical environment, and
human activities.  Collaboration of the scientific community in every nation, rich

and poor, in the generation of global observational data sets and the subsequent
full and open transnational flow of those data is imperative; its need cannot be
emphasized too strongly.For example, in the Earth and environmental sciences, particularly in globalchange research, it is essential to integrate remote sensing data with ÒgroundtruthÓ in situ observational data in the creation of consistent and valid data sets.
Without this integration, the value of the data products and research results can be
undermined considerably.  The in situ data are generated by individual workers

and organizations in many different countries.  Maintaining cooperative activities

through which the in situ data are reliably supplied is essential for the success of
international research projects.  Many of the gaps in the collection and dissemina-

tion of in situ data occur in developing countries, where a lack of resources and
other barriers make such cooperative activities difficult.As this report documents, the more wealthy industrialized nations have de-veloped a broad range of international research initiatives, largely supported by a
policy of full and open access to scientific data.  Although significant problems

remain and new barriers to effective collaboration continue to arise, there are
sufficient incentives and resources for sharing of data by scientists in the devel-
oped world.  However, the sharing of scientific data
Ñparticularly data for funda-mental researchÑtends to be a much lower priority for many of the less wealthy,nonindustrialized nations.  Success in ensuring full and open transnational flow

of scientific data among these nations may depend on the degree to which the
industrialized nations are responsive to the needs of the nonindustrialized nations
and can provide incentives for their participation.  An example of such a need

involves the inability of developing nations to pay for large-scale disease treat-
ment programs.  Box 3.8 describes the mutual benefits possible in collaborative

data sharing.As discussed above, incentives for participation by developing nations mightinclude assistance in the development of human resources, the provision of equip-
ment, and the general improvement of the research and communications infra-
structure.  Significant efforts should be made by the scientific community of the

wealthier nations to include scientists from the nonindustrialized nations as part-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98BITS OF POWERners in the global scientific enterprise, particularly in research initiatives that arefundamentally dependent on the availability of global data sets or in studies
addressing basic needs such as disease control and prevention.For example, some attention is being paid to the searching of genomic infor-mation useful for preventing tropical diseases,77 and some of this research is
being carried out in developed nations.  However, greater emphasis on under-

standing such diseases would follow from enhancement of the infrastructure for
expertise in biology and biotechnology in developing nations.  Developed coun-

triesÕ promotion of such advances would not be purely altruistic.  Leishmaniasis,
a disease usually associated with the tropics, infected troops in Desert Storm and
is present on both sides of the Texas-Mexico border.  Tuberculosis usually is not

perceived as a tropical disease, per se, yet resistant strains of the bacteria from thetropics have found their way into populations in the developed nations.  The

motivation for trying to identify and locate genes possibly conferring resistance
in populations where the diseases are common would be deepened by research-
ersÕ proximity to and familiarity with the effects of such diseases, if the resources
and personnel were available in the affected countries.  Economic constraints

might also be lessened for studies in developing nations, where labor costs, even
for highly trained research scientists, are much lower.Another barrier to the collection of data is evident in field studies related tobiodiversity in developing countries.  It is well known that the greatest concentra-

tions of the planetÕs biodiversity occur in developing countries.  However, the
resources to study and exploit the diverse gene pools for biotechnology lie largely
in the developed nations.  In this area, as in all of science and technology,

professionals in developing countries generally lack access to all the data and
information needed to support their work.  Further, considerations regarding

intellectual property are more complicated in biology than in most other disci-BOX 3.8Examples of Successful Transnational Data CollaborationsThe World Data Centers (WDCs) have sponsored several Òdata rescueÓprojects in developing countries.  In some cases, modest funds and sometimes
equipment have been provided to help local scientists digitize older time-series
data as part of the effort to build the International Geosphere-Biosphere Pro-grammeÕs and other studiesÕ global digital databases to document trends and
changes.  Local scientists thus get their own data back in digital form on diskettes
or CD-ROMs, depending on the technology they have.  These efforts further not
only their own work, but also the work of global change researchers internationally.Also, the WDC-A Oceanography (NODC/NOAA) data rescue project provides the
opportunity for local research groups to help to produce for the first time historicaland highly useful analyses and maps of global ocean climatic changes.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES99plines, because the biological materials themselves are repositories for scientificinformation.  For this reason, bioprospecting for new gene pools in tropical

countries by commercial and other interests from industrialized nations has be-
come a contentious issue on a global scale.78  For example, Brazil will no longerallow the sampling of biota by non-Brazilians and will not allow export of biota.79In such cases, the study of these materials is limited to what the country can do
with local resources.  Data that are produced in this way are sequestered rather

than shared with the general scientific community.  Other unanticipated problems

can arise in this context as well, as Boxes 3.9 and 3.10 illustrate.With regard to in situ data collection efforts in developing countries, thecommittee recommends the following actions:  the ICSU, together with funding

agencies and nongovernmental bodies, should strengthen its efforts to assist de-
veloping countries in undertaking their own scientific studies and encourage
scientists engaged in such studies to take active roles in the international scien-
tific community, where their efforts can be appreciated and used.  Legal and

procedural protocols must be developed to provide for fair and equitable sharing
of any resulting intellectual property.  This would not only help create indigenous
BOX 3.9A HobsonÕs ChoiceThe following example of a trade-off between two unpalatable options was pro-vided by the Consortium for International Earth Sciences Information Network(CIESIN) in response to the committeeÕs ÒInquiry to Interested PartiesÓ:One unexpected experience is in the balancing of data access privileges with theaccess of researchers to pursue their research in specific countries.  Our experience

includes an instance where a multi-year program to collect and integrate socioeco-
nomic and environmental data in an African country was successfully completed, the
data conveyed to CIESIN for sustaining access, then the government of the subject
nation was ousted through a violent and protracted coup.  The successor government

did not agree with the predecessor government, in terms of allowing open access to
those data collected and provided by its agencies to the CIESIN-sponsored research-
ers.  Thus, they wanted to prohibit future release of data already out of their physical

custody.The clear implication was that failure to comply with these newly implementedrestrictions would cause further restrictions of follow-on research projects of the type
CIESIN initially supported with UNEP [United Nations Environment Programme] and
others.  The trade off between restricting data access and restricting research access

for future collection is an unsavory and unforeseen challenge that is likely to recur in
that region and elsewhere, as political instability ensues.  Future governments may

decline to honor the information sharing policies of their country.  This dilemma

threatens the free and open access of data on a sustaining basis and raises signifi-
cant questions about where the locus of ownership of data is after governments are
replaced, peacefully or through violent actions.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100BITS OF POWERBOX 3.10Can Data Be Too Accurate?The following is an excerpt from a message that is part of a discussion on theInternet list server, <biodiv-1@bdt.org.br>.  This discussion group emphasizes glo-
bal biodiversity, conservation of habitat and biota, and information regarding theseareas.  The author of this message is Jeff Waldon.  The message illustrates an

important but little appreciated aspect of the tension between free dissemination ofinformation and commercial and nonscientific private interests:     The debate is whether release or restriction of sensitive locational information is
the best thing for conservation.  There are cases of collectors using such information

to decimate rare and endangered species at a site (e.g., the recent arrest of butterfly
poachers that targeted National Parks in the western United States).  On the other

hand, there are other examples of species protection because the landowner was
informed of the existence of a rare animal or plant.  I have been involved in the

development of information systems for about 10 years, and I have heard both sides
argued strenuously.  My personal feeling is that the 
Òboogie manÓ collector is real, but
in most cases we overreact to his presence.  We are losing many more populations of

threatened and endangered species because of ignorance rather than malice.     We have developed a compromise in our systems whereby we release sensitive
information on species, but the locational data accuracy is reduced to help reduce the
likelihood that a collector might successfully collect at that site.  If a development

project for the public is reviewed, and more accurate information is required, that
information is provided at the discretion of the biologist working with the requester.  I

come from the academic school of thought that relies on the free interchange of
information, and this compromise strikes me as still too restrictive at times.  On the

other hand, government employees are bound by laws and policies that make them
accountable for their actions including the consequences of releasing information on
the location of threatened and endangered species, and I see their dilemma.SOURCE:  Jeff Waldon, personal communication, 1995, used with permission.
data resources and promote a greater interest within nations of the developingworld in obtaining a more thorough understanding of their own resources, but
also lead to more fruitful international cooperative research.RECOMMENDATIONS ON DATA ISSUES IN THENATURAL SCIENCESThe recommendations set forth below are addressed to all individuals andorganizations with responsibilities for managing scientific data acquired with
public funds.1.Governmental science agencies and intergovernmental organizations
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES101should adopt as a fundamental operating principle the full and open exchange ofscientific data.  By 
Òfull and open exchangeÓ the committee means that the data
and information derived from publicly funded research are made available with
as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than the
cost of reproduction and distribution.2.The International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), together with the
scientific Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, the Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development Megascience Forum, and the national sci-
ence agencies and professional societies of member countries, should consider
developing a distributed international network of data centers.  Such a network

should draw on the strengths of successful examples of international data exchange
activities as described in Appendix C of this report, including, in particular, the

ICSU World Data Centers, and become a prominent part of the global informa-
tion infrastructure that has been proposed by the ÒGroup of SevenÓ nations.  To
facilitate the international dissemination and interdisciplinary use of scientific
data, all public scientific data activities, including the network of data centers,
should plan for and commit to providing the human and financial resources
sufficient for carrying out the following functions:a.Involve experts from the relevant disciplines, together with informa-
tion resource managers and technical specialists, in the active management
and preservation of the data;b.Develop and maintain up-to-date, comprehensive, on-line directories
of data sources and protocols for access;c.Provide documentation (metadata) adequate to ensure that each data
set can be properly used and understood, with special attention given to
making the data usable by individuals outside the core discipline area.  This

problem is particularly acute within the biological sciences, in which impre-
cision and variations in taxonomic definitions and nomenclature pose sig-
nificant barriers to communication, even among the biological subdisciplines.
The committee suggests that the CODATA Commission on Standardized
Terminology for Access to Biological Data Banks be enhanced into a true
international consultative body and that similar mechanisms be developed
for other disciplines, as needed;d.Incorporate advances in technology to facilitate access to and use of
scientific data, while overcoming incompatibilities in formats, media, and
other technical attributes through vigorous coordination and standardization
efforts;e.Institute effective programs of quality control and peer review of data
sets; andf.Digitize all key historical data sets and ensure that every important
condition for the long-term retention of data be met, including the adoptionBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102BITS OF POWERof appropriate retention and purging criteria and the timely transfer of alldata sets to new media to prevent their deterioration or obsolescence.3.The ICSU and other professional scientific societies should encourage
the study of, and publication of peer-reviewed papers on, effective data manage-
ment and preservation practices, as well as promote the teaching of those prac-
tices in all institutions of higher learning.4.All scientists conducting publicly funded research should make their
data available immediately, or following a reasonable period of time for propri-
etary use. The maximum length of any proprietary period should be expressly
established by the particular scientific communities, and compliance should be
monitored subsequently by the funding agency.5.As a corollary to recommendation 2.a above, publicly funded scientific
databases should be maintained either directly or under subcontract by the gov-
ernment science agencies with the requisite discipline mission and need.  In the

United States, the Office of Science and Technology Policy should develop an
overall policy for the long-term retention of scientific data, including a contin-
gency plan for protecting those data that may become threatened with the loss of
their institutional home.806.With regard to improving access to scientific data in developing coun-
tries, the committee makes the following recommendations:a.International development organizations, together with professional
societies, should provide targeted training programs for scientists in the use
of computers, with emphasis on the management of digital data in specific
disciplines.b.Foreign aid agencies should (i) make available to individual scientists
in developing countries more direct, peer-reviewed grants that include sup-
port for access to data, and (ii) facilitate the involvement of scientists in such
nations in their own countriesÕ capacity-building initiatives, research policy
decisions, and national database construction efforts.c.Scientists in developing countries should be encouraged to organize to
promote the policy of full and open access to scientific data in their own
countries, as well as to make their data available internationally.d.The ICSU, together with funding agencies and nongovernmental bod-
ies, should strengthen its efforts to assist developing countries in undertaking
their own scientific studies and encourage scientists engaged in such studies
to take active roles in the international scientific community, where their
efforts can be appreciated and used.  Legal and procedural protocols must be

developed to provide for fair and equitable sharing of any resulting intellec-
tual property.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES103e.Until affordable and ubiquitous electronic network services are avail-
able, national and international scientific societies and foreign aid agencies
should establish or improve their existing efforts to send extra stocks of
scientific publications to libraries and research institutions in developing
countries that need them.7.Finally, the ICSU, together with the principal national and international
scientific organizations mentioned in Recommendation 2 above, should convene
a series of major international meetings to initiate meaningful action on these
recommendations.NOTES1.Privacy issues, which become especially important in the social sciences and clinical research,
were judged to be of only tertiary concern in the context of most of the disciplines examined inthis study, and thus are not addressed in any detail in this report.2.In some areas of the experimental sciences, it is standard practice for researchers to publish
general results, such as structures of protein molecules, but retain details, such as precisecoordinates of the atoms, for some limited period of time, during which they may pursue theimplications of their own measurements.  In many instances, particularly in the observational
sciences, principal investigators are allowed to keep data sets proprietary for some specifiedperiod of time in order to be able to analyze them and publish their results first.  This issue is
discussed below in this chapter.3.National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data on Our Physical Universe: ANew Strategy for Archiving the NationÕs Scientific Information Resources, National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.4.Cosmic-ray research is an exception here.  While it is based largely on observations rather than
experiments, it has been classified traditionally in physics, rather than astronomy or spacescience.  It overlaps all of these, of course.
5.For a more detailed discussion of the differences between experimental and observational data,
see National Research Council (1995), Preserving Scientific Data, note 3.6.For a comprehensive listing of most internationally available data sets from space missions, see
the NASA Goddard Space Flight CenterÕs National Space Science Data Center home page at<http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ >.7.For a broad listing of international WWW servers covering all aspects of Earth science data and
information, see the NASA Global Change Master Directory at <http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-
bin/pointers/>; see also <http://gds.esrin.esa.it:80/>.8.A. Maddison (1995), 
Monitoring the World Economy: 1820-1992, OECD, Paris, 255 pp.9.T.F. Malone (1995), 
ÒReflections on the Human Prospect,Ó in 
Annual Review of Energy and theEnvironment (R.H. Socolow, ed.) 20:1-29, Annual Reviews, Palo Alto, California.
10.See <http://www.usgcrp.gov > for additional information on the U.S. Global Change Research
Program and related data activities, and <http://www.igbp.kva.se/index.html> for information
on the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme.11.See the WWW Virtual Library for a comprehensive index of biological data and information at
<http://golgi.harvard.edu/biopages>.  See also a listing of sources of international biological

information on the Internet on the Web site of the U.S. Geological SurveyÕs Biological Re-sources Division at <http://www.its.nbs.gov/nbii/iao/ibii.html>; and the Biotechnology Indus-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104BITS OF POWERtry OrganizationÕs compilation of biotechnology databases at <http://www.bio.org/educ/dbasef.html>.12.See, for example, National Research Council (1996), 
Statistical Challenges and Possible Ap-proaches in the Analysis of Massive Data Sets, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.13.Genevieve J. Knezo, (1994), 
ÒMajor Science and Technology Programs:  Megaprojects and
Presidential Initiatives, Trends Through the FY 1995 Request,Ó  Congressional Research Ser-
vice, Washington, D.C., March 29,  p. 1.
14.Congressional Budget Office, July (1991), 
ÒLarge Non-Defense R&D Projects in the Budget:1980-1986,Ó CBO, Washington, D.C. Unfortunately, more recent statistics are not available.
15.For a detailed review of the various large international research projects and programs cur-
rently under way, see Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, OECDMegascience Forum (1993),  Megascience and Its Background, Paris.  See also the OECD
Megascience Forum Web site at <http://www.oecd.org/dsti/mega/>.16.15 United States Code, Section 5652 (1992).
17.See General Accounting Office (1990), 
Environmental DataÑMajor Effort Is Needed to Im-prove NOAAÕs Data Management and Archiving, Washington, D.C.; and General AccountingOffice (1990), Space OperationsÑNASA Is Not Archiving All Potentially Valuable Data, Wash-
ington, D.C.  It should be noted that both agencies have taken significant measures to rectify

these past problems.18.National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data, note 3.19.National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data, note 3, at pp. 47-48.20.See Gary Taubes, (1996), 
ÒScience Journals Go Wired,Ó Science 271(February 9):764; and
UNESCO Expert Conference on Electronic Publishing in Science (1996), ICSU Press at
<http://www.lmcp.jussieu.fr/~fabrice/icsu/information/index.html>.  See also, Steve Hitchcock,

Leslie Carr, and Wendy Hall, ÒA Survey of STM On-line Journals 1990-95: The Calm Beforethe Storm,Ó at <http://journals.ecs.soton.ac.uk/survey/survey.html>.
21.<http://www.aip.org:80/>.
22.<http://www.iop.org/>.
23.See <http://eij.gsfc.nasa.gov>.

24.See, for example, the NASA-funded Astrophysics Data System Abstract Service at <http://
adswww.harvard.edu/ads_abstracts.html>.25.See Richard T. Kouzes, James D. Myers, and William A. Wulf (1996), 
ÒCollaboratories:  Do-
ing Science on the Internet,Ó  IEEE Computer 29(8):40-46.
26.For additional insights in this area, see the 
Proceedings of the Ô96 UNESCO Conference onElectronic Publishing in Science, held at the UNESCO Headquarters in Paris, February 19-23,1996.  A summary of the results from that conference was presented by D.F. Shaw (1996),
ÒElectronic Publishing in Science,Ó Science International, ICSU Paris, May, pp. 1-3.27.See Nahum Gershon and Judith R. Brown (1996), 
ÒComputer Graphics and Visualization in theGlobal Information Infrastructure,Ó a Special Report in 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applica-tions, March, pp. 60-75; and Robert Braham (1995), ÒMath & Visualization: New Tools, NewFrontiers,Ó a Focus Report in 
IEEE Spectrum, November, pp. 19-65.28.Canadian Global Change Program (1996), 
ÒData Policy and Barriers to Data Access in Canada:Issues for Global Change Research,Ó The Royal Society of Canada, Ottawa.  National Research
Council (1993), 1992 Review of the World Data Center A for Rockets and Satellites, NationalSpace Science Data Center, Board on Earth Sciences and Resources, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1992), Toward a Coordinated Spatial DataInfrastructure for the Nation, Board on Earth Sciences and Resources, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.; National Academy of Public Administration (1991), The Archives ofthe Future: Archival Strategies for the Treatment of Electronic Databases, A report for theNational Archives and Records Administration; General Accounting Office (1990), Environ-mental DataÑMajor Effort Is Needed to Improve NOAAÕs Data Management and Archiving,Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES105Washington, D.C.; General Accounting Office (1990), Space OperationsÑNASA Is NotArchiving All Potentially Valuable Data, Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1990),
Spatial Data Needs: The Future of the National Mapping Program, Board on Earth Sciencesand Resources, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1988),Geophysical Data: Policy Issues, Committee on Geophysical Data,, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1988), Selected Issues in Space Science DataManagement and Computation, Space Science Board, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.; National Research Council (1986), Atmospheric Climate Data: Problems and Promises,Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.;
National Research Council (1986), Issues and Recommendations Associated with DistributedComputation and Data Management Systems for the Space Sciences, Space Science Board,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; J.K. Haas, H.W. Samuels, and B.T. Simmons
(1985), Appraising the Records of Modern Science and Technology: A Guide
, MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.; National Research Council (1984), Solar-Terres-trial Data Access, Distribution and Archiving, Space Science Board and Board on AtmosphericSciences and Climate, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; National Research Council(1982), Selected Issues in Space Science Data Management and Computation, Space ScienceBoard, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.29.Committee on the Future of Long-term Ecological Data (FLED), 
 (1995), Final Report of theEcological Society of America, Katherine L. Gross, Chair, Ecological Society of America,Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1993), A Biological Survey for the Nation,Committee on the Formation of the National Biological Survey, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.30.National Research Council (1986), 
Toward a Geosphere-Biosphere Program, National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1988), Toward an Understanding ofGlobal Change: Initial Priorities for U.S. Contributions to the International Geosphere-Bio-sphere Program, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; and National Research Council(1990), Research Strategies for the U.S. Global Change Research Program, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.31.Additional information on the Global Climate Observing System can be found at the World
Meteorological OrganizationsÕs Web site at <http://www.wmo.ch/web/gcos/gcoshome.html>;and see <http://www.wmo.ch/web/www/www.html> for the World Weather Watch, and <http:
//www.wmo.ch/web/arep/gaw.html> for the Global Weather Watch.  See <http://www.unesco.
org/ioc/goos/iocgoos.html> for the Global Ocean Observing System and <http://www.wsl.ch/wsidb/gtos/gtos.html> for the Global Terrestrial Observing System.32.See the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center
Õs Web site at <http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/cdiac>.33.For extensive discussion of data quality control and assurance procedures and recommenda-
tions in the context of interdisciplinary environmental research, see National Research Council(1995), Finding the Forest in the Trees: The Challenge of Combining Diverse Environmental
Data, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.34.For a general overview of issues and requirements in archiving digital data and information, see
Task Force on Archiving of Digital Information (1995), Preserving Digital Information, the
Commission on Preservation and Access and the Research Libraries Group, Inc., at http://
lyra.rlg.org./Arch TF/>.35.See, for example, Committee on the Future of Long-term Ecological Data (FLED), (1995),
Final Report of the Ecological Society of America, Katherine L. Gross, Chair, Ecological
Society of America, Washington, D.C.36.National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data, note 3.37.National Research Council (1994), 
Facing the Challenge: The U.S. National Report to theIDNDR World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, Yokohama, Japan, May 23-27, 1994,Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106BITS OF POWERU.S. National Committee for the Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.; National Research Council (1991), A Safer Future: Reducing theImpacts of Natural Disasters, U.S. National Committee for the Decade for Natural DisasterReduction, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.38.National Research Council (1995), 
Finding the Forest in the Trees, note 33.39.See, generally, National Research Council (1992), 
Toward a Coordinated Spatial Data Infra-structure for the Nation, Board on Earth Sciences and Resources, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.40.Secondary users, such as researchers in other fields, policymakers, educators, and the general
public, do not collect and create data sets, but they perform tasks with, analyze, and interpretthe data.  For a discussion of distinctions between user categories, see National Research
Council (1995), Study on the Long-term Retention of Selected Scientific and Technical Recordsof the Federal GovernmentÑWorking Papers, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.41.See National Research Council (1995), 
Finding the Forest in the Trees, note 33, and Preserv-ing Scientific Data, note 3.  For general information on metadata issues, see the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory Metadata and Data Management information page at <http://www.llnl.gov/liv_comp/metadata/metadata.html>.42.For more information regarding IGBP-DIS data activities, see <http://www.cnrm.meteo.fr:8000/
igbp/outline.html>.  Additional information is provided in the 
ÒSummary Report on the 7thIGBP-DIS Scientific Steering Committee Meeting ManualÓ (1996) at <http://www.cnrm.meteo.
fr:8000/igbp/meetings summary_rep_ssc_feb96_ver_html.html>.  See also the NASA Global

Change Master Directory for another example of a successful on-line indexing effort at <http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-Bin/pointers/>.43.Michael Carlowicz (1997), 
ÒNew Data from Cold War Treasure Trove,Ó EOS, American Geo-physical Union, Vol. 78, no. 9, March 4, p. 93.44.See 
ÒCorona: AmericaÕs First Satellite ProgramÓ (1995), Kevin C. Ruffner, ed., Central Intelli-gence Agency History Staff Center for the Study of Intelligence, Washington, D.C.; and RobertA. McDonald (1995), ÒOpening the Cold War Sky to the Public: Declassifying Satellite Recon-naissance Imagery,Ó Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, pp. 385-390.  For a
listing of declassified satellite data products, including information about missions, dates, andresolution, see the United States Geological SurveyÕs EROS Data Center Web site at <http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/glis/hyper/guide/disp>.45.See William J. Broad (1996), 
ÒAnti-Sub Seabed Grid Thrown Open to Eavesdropping,Ó NewYork Times, July 2, p. C1.46.See National Research Council (1988), 
Ozone Depletion, Greenhouse Gases and ClimateChange: Proceedings of a Joint Symposium by the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climateand the Committee on Global Change, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
47.National Research Council (1995), 
On the Full and Open Exchange of Scientific Data, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  The appendix to the report also presents a collection of
other similar supporting policy statements.48.See Information Infrastructure Task Force (1994), 
The Global Information Infrastructure:Agenda for Cooperation, Washington, D.C., at <http://www.iitf.nist.gov/documents/docs/gii/giiagend.html>.49.J.R.G. Townshend, C. Justice, W. Li, C. Gurney, and J. McManus (1991), 
ÒGlobal Land CoverClassification by Remote Sensing:  Present Capabilities and Future Possibilities,
Ó Remote Sens-ing and the Environment 35:243-355.50.See T.R. Loveland, J.W. Merchant, D.O. Ohlen, and J.F. Brown (1991), 
ÒDevelopment of aLand Cover Characteristics Database for the Conterminous U.S.,Ó Photogrammetric Engineer-ing and Remote Sensing 57:1453-1463.
51.These points have been discussed in some detail for the field of materials databases, where the
high volume and critical importance of metadata, the broad scope of the materials field, the richBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES107vocabulary of materials technology, and the international character of materials informationgive special importance to the subjects.  See J.H. Westbrook and W. Grattidge (1992), ÒTermi-nological Standards for Materials Databases,Ó in 
Computerization and Networking of MaterialsDatabases, Vol. 3, T.J. Barry and K.W. Reynard, eds., American Society for Testing andMaterials, Philadelphia, pp. 15-33.52.D.L. Hawksworth, B.C. Sutton, and G.C. Ainsworth (1983), 
Dictionary of the Fungi (including
the Lichens), seventh edition, Commonwealth Mycological Institute, Kew, Surrey, England.53.College of American Pathologists, Committee on Nomenclature and Classification of Disease
(1965), Systematized Nomenclature of Pathology, first edition, American Cancer Society and
American Medical Association, Chicago.54.A reference with numerous examples from the field of chemistry is J.H. Westbrook (1993),
ÒProblems in the Computerization of Chemical Information: Capture of Tabular and GraphicalData,Ó Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 33:6-17.
55.See <http://www.nist.gov/srd/>.
56.See the recommendations in National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data,note 3.57.For example, the American Association for the Advancement of Science sponsors the Project
for African Research Libraries in partnership with U.S. scientific societies to provide subscrip-
tions for core scientific and technical journals in 35 sub-Saharan African countries (see <http://www.aaas.org/international/ssa-1.htm> for general information on international programs).For UNESCOÕs programs on the advancement, transfer, and sharing of knowledge in the natu-ral sciences, see also <http://www.unesco.org/ch-intern/programmes/science/highlights.html>.58.These statistics vary over time and according to country and discipline, and are available for
only a few major countries.  See
 Science & Engineering Indicators
 (1996), National Science
Board, Washington, D.C., pp. 2-28 to 2-30.  The statistics indicate that 35 to 75 percent of
foreign graduate students surveyed intend to stay in the United States upon completion of theirstudies.59.For an overview of potential educational activities to improve the management of scientific and
engineering data, see National Research Council (1986), Improving the Treatment of Scientificand Engineering Data Through Education, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.60.This is not an exhaustive list of organizations that provide assistance to scientists in developing
countries.  Several organizations, such as the International Development Research Centre Li-

brary, provide extensive links to Internet sites related to international development (see <http://www.irdc.ca/library/world/world.html>).61.USAID focuses on regional activities, such as the African Data Dissemination Service (ADDS),
which is conducted in conjunction with several private organizations, the Office of Arid LandStudies at the University of Arizona, NASA, and NOAA.  An example of an ADDS project is
the Famine Early Warning System, which, with the help of the USGS EROS Data Center,

provides information about potential famine situations to allow for proactive initiatives toprevent famine (see <http://edcsnw4.cr.usgs.gov/adds/general/> for additional information onADDS).  Other USAID activities, such as AfricaLink and the Leland Initiative, provide net-

work connections and information management to Africa (see <http://www.info.usaid.gov/regions/afr/> for a description of these and other regional programs in Africa).  The USAID-
sponsored U.S.-Russian NGO Cooperation Project provides small grants and equipment for
individuals and institutions to link to an environmental e-mail network in Central Asia and theWest Newly Independent States (see <gopher://gaia.info.usaid.gov:70/00...enis_reg/nis.factsheet/enviro3.txt>).62.For example, the NASA Pathfinder project uses Landsat images to determine forest land cover
and change for three quarters of the world.  The USDA Foreign Agriculture Service provides
support to the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research (CGIAR) through the
prediction of global production of major grains.  For additional information on both programs,
see the Proceedings of a Workshop on the Use of Remote Sensing Technologies and GISBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108BITS OF POWERDatabase in CGIAR Centers (1995), Environment and National Resources Information Center
(see <http://www.info.usaid.gov/environment/enric/special/cgiar.htm>).63.See <http://www.state.gov/www/global/oes/envir.html>.

64.See <http://www.unsystem.org> for the official listing of the United Nations system of organi-
zationsÕ Internet servers. Numerous initiatives within the U.N. programs and specialized agen-
cies directly assist scientists in developing countries through a variety of mechanisms.  One

example is the Sustainable Development Network Programme of the UNDP, which links gov-ernment organizations, the private sector, universities, NGOs, and individuals in developingcountries through electronic networks for the purpose of exchanging information on sustainable
development (see <http://www3.undp.org>). Refer to the programsÕ and agencies
Õ home pages
for further details on other U.N. initiatives.65.For example, the OAS RedHUCyT program is a hemisphere-wide interuniversity scientific and
technological information network created in 1991 with the objective to connect OAS membercountries to the Internet, Òintegrating an electronic network for the exchange of scientific andtechnological information among professors, researchers, and specialists, at different universi-
ties in the member statesÓ (for additional information, see  <http://www.oas.org/EN/PROG/
RED/covere.htm>). OAS also sponsors a regional scientific and technological developmentprogram, which carries out a number of multinational and national projects that provide mem-
ber states Òwith an opportunity to share experiences, to provide . . . mutual support and toengage in joint activities to further the advancement of science and technology and to promoteintegral developmentÓ (see <http://www.oas.org/EN/PROG/pa26e.htm>).
66.See the Institute for Baltic Studies
Õ Web site at <http://www.ibs.ee/dollar/fw4/wp/dev.html>.
67.<http://gds.esrin.esa.it:80/559DE416/T0xc1cce622_0x00029290>.
68.The Third World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) was founded in 1983 to support scientific
research in developing countries through provision of research grants, spare parts for scientificequipment, books and journals, and fellowships.  See <http://www.ictp.trieste.it/TWAS.html/>
for a description of TWAS activities and programs. The organization not only is closely coupledwith the U.N., but also collaborates with the International Council of Scientific Unions (seenext note).69.The International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) was founded in 1933 to 
Òbring togethernatural scientists in international scientific endeavor.Ó  ICSU works closely with UNESCO,
WMO, FAO, and UNEP through formal or ad hoc collaborations (see <http://www.lmcp.
jussieu.fr/~fabrice/icsu/> for additional information on ICSU).   ICSUÕs Committee on Scienceand Technology in Developing Countries (COSTED) was created in 1966 to stimulate interna-tional scientific and technological cooperation in developing countries.  It is a joint initiative

co-sponsored by UNESCO and was merged with the International Biosciences Network, anactivity with similar objectives, in 1994.  For additional information on COSTED and its
activities, see G. Thyagara (1995), ÒCooperative Research for Development Is COSTEDÕsAim,Ó The Hindu On-line (<http://www.webpage.com/hindu/960113/22/0820a.html>).  ICSU
also works to assist  scientists in developing countries through its scientific unions and interdis-
ciplinary committees; for example, CODATA recently established the Task Group on Out-
reach, Education, and Communication, which promotes collaboration, scientific informationexchange, and technology transfer for individual scientists and technologists in developingnations.70.Founded in 1972, the International Foundation for Science (IFS) provides support (in the form
of research grants, equipment, regional workshops and training courses, and travel grants) toyoung scientists in developing countries in the following research areas:  aquatic resources,

animal production, crop science, forestry/agroforestry, food science, and natural products.  See
<http://ifs.plants.ox.ac.uk/ifs/> for additional information about IFS activities and programs.71.See <http://www/ciesin.org> for additional information about CIESIN
Õs programs and ser-vices.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCIENTIFIC ISSUES10972.See <http://www.std.com/sabre/SAP/sap.info.html> for additional information on the Sabre
Foundation.73.See <http://www.isf.ru/index-isf.html> for additional information about the International Sci-
ence Foundation and its various programs that assist scientists, such as its Library AssistanceProgram and the Telecommunications Program.74.See <http://info.irex.org> for additional information about IREX programs.

75.See <http://vita.org>.
76.See American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
Science and Technology in theAmericas:  Perspectives on Pan American Collaboration (1994), 2nd ed., E. Jeffrey Stann, ed.,AAAS, Washington, D.C.77.See James M. Musser (1996), 
ÒMolecular Population Genetic Analysis of Emerged BacterialPathogens:  Selected Insights,
Ó EID, 2(1), January-March.78.See
 Biodiversity Prospecting:  Using Genetic Resources for Sustainable Development 
(1993),Reid et al., World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C., 350 pp.; and ÒBioprospecting/Bio-piracy and Indigenous PeoplesÓ (1994) 
RAFI Communique, Nov./Dec.79.Personal communication from a member of the staff of the Brazilian Embassy, Washington,
D.C., 1995.80.See the recommendations in National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data,note 3.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110BITS OF POWERThe most striking theme throughout this report is how progress in informa-tion technologies has changed the way science is accomplished.  It has enabled

the generation, processing, storage, and distribution of quantities of data un-dreamed of even a decade ago.Sensing systems (e.g., Earth observation satellites, the Hubble Space Tele-scope, ground-based radars) and other forms of automated data generation (e.g.,
genome studies) produce enormous amounts of useful data, enabling scientists to
study natural phenomena at a much greater level of detail and granularity than
was hitherto possible.  Science and scientists have been the main drivers of this

highly sophisticated and often very expensive technology, using it to push for-
ward the frontiers of knowledge in their respective disciplines.  The continuous

increases in the processing power available to analyze the data are as crucial to
this evolution as the improvements in data generation capabilities.  Surprisingly,
these increases have not come principally from more powerful supercomputers,
but rather from cheaper, more powerful workstations and PCs available through-
out the scientific community.  The development of inexpensive mass storage

media has ensured that the preservation of these vast quantities of data, both
processed and unprocessed, is both possible and affordable.  Finally, the most

profound change in technology has been the worldwide growth of the Internet,
with its potential to make data from anywhere in the world available anywhere
else in the world, instantaneously, and, increasingly, in large quantities.These four factors, taken together, have revolutionized the way science isconducted, making it truly global.  Perhaps most interesting is that this progress

has changed the way scientists communicate with each other.  Physical scientists
11045Data from Publicly Funded ResearchÑTheEconomic PerspectiveBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE111are leading the way among scholars in the publication of electronic journals,compressing the time between discovery and communication of the results.  This

phenomenon is accelerating the already rapid pace of discovery and innovation,
as the cycle time of discovery, communication, and next discovery is reduced.
The committee uses the term Òdigitization of scienceÓ as a shorthand for this
phenomenon.As a consequence, the flow of scientific data and information has beenimproved, as the cost of publication and of access to information has been drasti-
cally reduced.  While not all scientists in every country have full access to

modern PCs and fast Internet connections, these technologies are becoming wide-
spread and are likely to be ubiquitous in the near future.This digitization of science has occurred contemporaneously (and coinciden-tally) with the demise of the great power rivalry of the Cold War. Russian and
U.S. scientific relations have become less heavily dominated by security consid-
erations, and this factor also has led to an  increase in the availability and transfer

of scientific data, as noted in Chapter 3.At the same time, there have been fundamental changes in how governments inmany countries see their role relative to markets.  Budget pressures, plus the evident

success of market economies, have led many governments to privatize activities
previously delivered via the public sector, in hopes of relieving the burden on
taxpayers while improving the allocation of economic resources.  These pressures

have begun to be felt in the area of scientific data; for example, in the United States,
Landsat remote sensing was privatized in the mid-1980s, and some European coun-
tries have strongly urged limits on the sharing of meteorological and other data in
order to protect the data markets for their government monopolies.THE TREND TOWARD MARKETSÑGOODOR BAD FOR SCIENCE?To researchers and educators in the natural sciences, this pressure towardprivatization and commercialization of scientific data is of great concern.  Many

fear that scientific data, the lifeblood of science, will be priced beyond their
means, especially in less developed countries.  It is argued, correctly, that the

conduct of scientific research, including the maintenance and distribution of
scientific data, is a public good, provided for by government funding (see Box
4.1). This traditional model1 has worked well in the past, and many scientists
2 are
of the view that privatizing the distribution of scientific data will impede scien-
tific research.To the economist, this concern at first seems misplaced.  While the conduct
of scientific research certainly is a public good, one might consider the mainte-
nance and distribution of scientific data as the provision of one of the commodi-
ties used by scientists.  This view makes scientific data analogous to the chemi-

cals, computers, and travel that each scientist is free to buy or not, as they bestBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112BITS OF POWERBOX 4.1What Is a Public Good?Economic analysis recognizes that not all goods can be easily transactedthrough markets.  There is an important class of economic goods, called 
publicgoods, in which markets may not work well. The term Òpublic goodÓ does not referto something that is Ògood for the public.Ó  It refers to a product or service pos-
sessed of certain properties that lead to collective consumption or production, rath-er than private consumption or production.  A public good is characterized by two

attributes, nondepletability and 
nonexcludability (nonappropriability).  Nondeplet-
ability means that the product in question cannot be used up and is thus availableto additional persons.  If I eat a slice of cheese, less remains available for others to

consume.  However, if I use the latest statistics on the number of employees in the
steel industry or the number of persons infected by some disease, those statisticsremain just as available as before for use by othersÑtheir supply is not depleted
by additional use or additional users.  Nondepletability is the main reason econo-
mists conclude that free use of public goods can be justifiedÑthere is no socialcost when another person uses them, and there is no justification for the disincen-
tive to their use that is constituted by a substantial price for that use.  This, then, is
the user side of the dilemma of provision of public goodsÑeconomic efficiencycalls for a zero or very low price for their use, but private enterprise cannot be
expected to provide a costly and valuable service without charge.The second attribute, nonexcludability, is the supplier side of the problem. Non-excludability means that the good in question produces benefits from which otherscannot be excluded and which cannot easily be constrained only to those who pay.A classic case is that of national defense; defending one American involves de-
fending all Americans.  One cannot supply the service to some people but exclude
others.  Information also possesses this attribute, although somewhat less fully
than national defense.  Once information is provided to some, it is likely, but not

certain, to leak out to others.  Absence of excludability makes it very difficult for the
provider of such a service to collect reimbursement for the cost of supplying theservice.  That is why, economists conclude, it is often difficult for any supplier other

than government to provide certain types of public goods.It is generally accepted that scientific research itself has strong public-goodattributes, in that the knowledge produced by such research is freely available to
all (i.e., nonexcludable) and provides social and economic benefits to members ofsociety far beyond those who produce it and those who pay for it.  Such goods are
usually provided by governmentsÑor they are not provided at all.The public-good nature of science is not limited to any particular nation.  The
scientific endeavor has traditionally been and will continue to be a global enter-prise; the success of this endeavor depends critically on the global community of
scientists, and their ability to work with innovators, implementers, and users.  To
the extent that this global interchange is restricted or inhibited, the long-run contri-bution of science to the U.S. economy will decrease. Thus, the United States has
an interest not only in a healthy domestic scientific community, but also in a robustglobal scientific community.However, the issue in this report is not scientific research, but rather the datathat science generates, either as input to scientific research (e.g., data from mete-orological satellites) or as output from scientific research (e.g., description of aBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE113serve the scientistÕs needs.  In this traditional market model, both consumers and
researchers would be better served by suppliers anxious to survive by supplying
the most desired data set traits:  reliability, accuracy, timeliness, and so forth.

Instead of the government providing financial support to data centers, why not
give the funds to individual researchers, who can then make choices among data
suppliers who best serve their needs?  To many economists, therefore,

privatization appears at first blush to be a positive development for science.A more careful economic analysis of the maintenance and distribution ofscientific data, however, suggests that a somewhat different market model is
more appropriate here, for a number of reasons.  In some cases, the (public good)

scientific research is tightly tied to the collection, maintenance, and distribution
of the data generated from the research.  For example, the Hubble Space Tele-

scope (HST) project (and other space science observatories), clearly a public
good, collects, maintains, and distributes the data from the HST as part and parcel
of the project itself.  In this case, the basic research is vertically integrated with

data distribution, and separating the two functions would create more difficulties
than keeping them integrated.In other cases, frequently overlapping with the conditions described abovefor the HST project, the contributors of scientific data are the same as the con-
sumers of the data, all of whom are members of the same relatively small research
community.  This is especially so in relatively esoteric areas of fundamental

research, such as high-energy physics or paleontology.  This model is closer to

that of a family or clan, in which exchange is not monetized but depends on social
norms specifying expected and well-understood levels of contribution.  Imposing

a market price system in such a situation could not only be countercultural, but
also counterproductive.  For example, administrative expenses of instituting such

a system might well be higher than the revenues realized.  In yet other cases, the
market for scientific data is not large enough to support more than a single
supplier, which would mean that the data either would not be provided by the
market or would be provided under monopoly conditions.gene sequence).  Clearly, scientific data have some aspects of a public good.  On
the other hand, scholarly journals have been copyrighting scientific articles foryears (thereby privatizing them) without impeding the flow of science.  Certainly,

the provision of scientific data has important spillovers: future researchers withinthe field benefit from these data, researchers in other fields also may benefit (e.g.,medical researchers benefit from the provision of biological research data), and
commercial firms (e.g., pharmaceutical firms) may benefit as well.  Unfortunately,
uncertainty about who the ultimate beneficiaries are, which appears to be funda-mental to science, precludes asking those beneficiaries of spillovers to pay.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114BITS OF POWERAn additional and more subtle difficulty arises from the nature of the fundingof scientific research.  There is no question that the public-good nature of funda-
mental scientific research requires public funding,3 and this includes ensuring
that researchers have the necessary inputs such as scientific data.4  Privatizing
data distribution would not change the requirement that data acquisition be pub-
licly funded; it would simply change the locus of funding from the supplier/
distributor of data (i.e., publicly funded and operated data centers providing data
either free or at low cost to researchers) to the consumer of data (i.e., the research-
ers would have a Òdata budgetÓ as part of their grant, which they would use to
shop among suppliers for their data needs).But are these two modes of funding equivalent?  The second mode might bethought by economists to be superior, in that it puts the financial power in the
hands of the consumer.  However, the fact that both involve public funding,

subject to year-to-year political vagaries, suggests a different view.  In the first

mode, funding is directed to government agencies or large research institutions,
which thereby have an interest in continued funding and can make the case to
their legislators for such funding.  In the second mode, funding is directed to

individual researchers, who, while they have an interest in ensuring continued
funding for purchasing data, clearly do not have the political ability to protect this
funding from political pressures to reduce or eliminate it. This inability is a major
factor underlying scientistsÕ concerns that if the distribution of scientific data
were privatized, the increases in research grants to enable their data purchases
would soon disappear, leaving researchers and perhaps their universities to pick
up the bill.  The economic problem here is that 
government cannot commit tofuture funding of researchers for buying data.  Neither Congress nor the Admin-istration can make credible commitments for future funding.  Ensuring that large

institutions have the means and the access to argue the political case for scientific
data will increase the likelihood that future funding of such data will be made
available.5  The committee believes that direct appropriation or block grant sup-
port to institutions with broad responsibilities for data management, retention,
and distribution, while not assured, is typically more stable and secure, and
fortified by an institutional memory to recognize and support the continued utility
of archived data.  Thus, a strong case can be made for funding (subsidizing)

institutions to be data distributors as part of the infrastructure for government
research in cases where both (1) the long-term availability of the data is essential
for the conduct of research, and (2) there is no guarantee of continued financial
support of the user community for acquiring data.DETERMINANTS OF THE STRUCTURE OFSCIENTIFIC DATA DISTRIBUTIONHow best to distribute scientific data depends on several economic proper-ties of the underlying science and scientific community that both generates andBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE115uses the data, as well as other uses for the data.  To determine these properties, the
key questions are as follows:¥Does the scientific research depend on a substantial public investment inone or more facilities that generate the data of interest?  The Hubble SpaceTelescope is a clear example of a single costly facility, the sole purpose of which
is to generate basic scientific data for its useful life.  Another example is weather

or other earth observing satellites, which constitute major facilities in their own
right, but that also contribute to a common broader research data set.  In these

cases the data have significant nonresearch applications as well, which are a mix
of public good and commercial uses.  The collection, processing, and distribution

of data typically are most efficiently vertically integrated in the same program.
The costly observational facility is usually provided by government (e.g., NOAA,
NASA, ESA), and so the distribution of the resulting data (at least the minimally
processed data) is best handled by the same agency.¥Is the (non-facilities-based) scientific research coordinated across re-searchers, possibly in different countries?  An example of this situation is the
Human Genome Project.  Individual researchers throughout the world contribute

to this effort; the results of each individual research project are made available to
all researchers.  In fact, the maintenance of common data sets available to all is

what defines this as a project.  In such cases, there typically is a lead government

agency with responsibility for the entire project that also takes responsibility,
either directly or indirectly, for providing for data collection and distribution.
Though not facilities-based, a common repository of information and scientific
data is essential to the conduct and usefulness of the entire project.  An important

element of such a repository is that it is the mechanism by which researchers
communicate with each other.   In some cases, such as paleoclimatological re-

search, contributors and users are largely the same, and the repository acts solely
as the means of professional exchange.  In this situation, ensuring that the data are

freely available is part of the project itself.  The responsible agency may provide
the distribution facility, or it may fund a university, consortium of universities, or
other nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to operate the facility.¥Is the community of users roughly the same as the community of contribu-tors?  As with the paleoclimatology or astronomy examples above, the distribu-
tion of scientific data is best viewed as a sharing of results within a community,
rather than as a market opportunity.  If the community of users is much broader

than those making contributions, then distributing scientific data is also a publi-
cation function, possibly to private concerns.  A good example of this situation is

the Human Genome Project, for which the repository of research results is of
interest to others beyond the immediate research community, such as pharmaceu-
tical companies.In cases where the user community is much larger than the contributor com-munity, governments or NGOs may still wish to make the information availableBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116BITS OF POWERto all at no cost.  This was the case for the World Meteorological Organization
ÕsWorld Weather Watch, discussed in the previous chapter.  However, for budget

reasons nonscientific users may be required to pay for the data.  Under this

arrangement, some form of price discrimination or product differentiation may be
required, in which scientific researchers can acquire the data free or at very low
cost, while nonresearch users are charged for the data.6  This can be done by the
responsible agency itself.  However, the agency first must determine whether the

transaction costs of establishing and maintaining discriminatory prices exceed
any extra income so derived, particularly for data from narrowly focused basic
research projects.  Obviously, an agency should implement a price discrimination

scheme only if the efficiency gains (not just the revenue gains) outweigh the
transaction and administrative costs of doing so.  Price discrimination, in prac-

tice, will be worth the effort only with a sufficiently large commercial user base.¥Is the user community large enough to support more than one data dis-tributor?  In many cases, a particular scientific data set is likely to be of interest
to only a few scientists and practitioners, and a private7 market may support only
one distributor, due to scale economies.8  In such cases, privatizing data distribu-
tion will result in a private monopoly with no incentive to support the public
interest, replacing a public monopoly that does have such a commitment.  Of

course, government monopolies that do not sustain activities providing public
goods are no better than private monopolies.As a quick reference, Table 4.1 lists the relevant properties mentioned abovefor each of a number of diverse scientific data sets.PRIVATIZATION:  WHEN DOES IT MAKE SENSE?
Given the unique nature of scientific data, it might appear that government(or NGO subcontractor) distribution of such data is always the correct choice.
However, there may be opportunities for private firms to reformat, enhance, and
market these publicly available data in new, added-value forms.  Private firms

may have capabilities not available to government agencies or NGOs that would
add value for various end users.  For example, NOAA distributes weather data to

all users on equal terms, including to commercial firms, some of which package
this information and provide forecasting services to the public via mass media.
While NOAA clearly has a huge advantage in technology and meteorological
science, the commercial firms have an equally clear advantage in packaging the
information for maximum public impact.9 Thus, any private supplier who re-
quests access to scientific data should be given it and should be permitted to go
into competition with other suppliers and with the government itself.  The market-
place will then determine the best package of service, support, and reliable data
for users, including scientific researchers. 10
  Fortunately, there are many cases in
addition to that for weather data in which private sector distribution of value-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE117TABLE 4.1Properties Relevant to Distribution for a Number of Scientific Data Sets
No. of UsersEqual to (=)Single/or GreaterMajor
Facilities-MultipleThan (>)Observational/Raw/National/CommercialPricing Basis
abasedActivitiesContributors?ExperimentalProcessedGlobalInterest?Discrimination?
GenbankÑNM>EPGYesInternet access
NIH/NLM/(submittal/retrievalfree; CD-ROMNCBIsoftware)@MC
Genome DatabaseÑJohnsNM>EPGYesFree
Hopkins University, funded
by DOE, NIH, Japan S&THubble Space TelescopeÑYSOPGNo;Free
NASA/ESA (operated(principallyoccasional
by AURA)spaceuse by
researchers)publishers
National Space ScienceYMOR/PGNo@MC
Data CenterÑNASAEuropean Space InformationYMOPGNoFree
System(browser/imagingsoftware)National Center forYMOR/PNLittle@MC;
Atmospheric ResearchÑadditionalNot-for-profit, NSF fundingservicesavailable(continues)Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118BITS OF POWERTABLE 4.1Continued
No. of UsersEqual to (=)Single/or GreaterMajor
Facilities-MultipleThan (>)Observational/Raw/National/CommercialPricing Basis
abasedActivitiesContributors?ExperimentalProcessedGlobalInterest?Discrimination?
T-2 Nuclear InformationYMEPGNoFree
ServiceÑUC,b DOE
Australian OceanographicYM>, but mostlyOPGSome
Free as 
ÒpublicData CentreÑAustralianresearchers(free software)good,
Ó @MC
Dept. of Defensefor commercialESAÑInformation RetrievalYM>O and E;PG;PerhapsAppears to be
ServiceÑEuropean Unionincludesfocusedsome> IC
Space Agencyfinancial dataon
European
UnionEarth ResourcesYM>OR/PGSome; usedVaries; ranges
Observation SystemsÑbyfrom free
USGS (DOI)governmentto > IC
agenciesScripps Institution ofYM=OPGLittle@MC
OceanographyÑNot-for-profitBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE119University of AlaskaYM>; mostlyORNLittle@MC
GeoData CenterÑpublicUniversity/State fundsPaleoclimatology WorldNM=OR/PGNoFree for direct
Data Center AÑNGDCcontributors; @
NOAA/DOCMC otherwiseNational Climatic DataYM>OPGNo@MC; careful
CenterÑNOAA/DOCaccounting foranalysis todetermine MCIncorporated ResearchYM>OPGNoFree
Institutions for Seismology
(IRIS)ÑUniversityconsortium; NSF fundingProperties of IntermetallicNM>EPGYesPrinted books
Alloys
ÑPurdue 
Universityfairly expensive;CINDAS/MIAC (DOD)higher cost forforeign usersEvaluated NuclearNM>EPGNoFree
Data File/B (DOE)aPricing basis: IC = incremental cost; MC = marginal cost, or cost of reproduction.bAbbreviations and acronyms are defined in Appendix A.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120BITS OF POWERadded data has worked to the benefit of science and the broader public.  The Fatty
Acid Methyl Ester (FAME) database in microbiology (Box 4.2) is a case in which
a private firm offers alternatives to the data available from government.  The

committee lists below some necessary conditions for the complete privatization
of scientific data distribution to be an appropriate option:¥Can the distribution of data be separated easily from their generation?  For the
HST, the answer is ÒnoÓ; for the Human Genome Project, the answer is likely Òyes.Ó¥Is the scientific data set used by others beyond the research community?Again, for the HST, the answer is ÒnoÓ; for the Human Genome Project, theanswer is likely Òyes.Ó¥Is the potential market large enough to support several data distributors?If so, then the resulting private market could be competitive, and privatization
could be helpful to scientists and others.  If not, then privatization could lead to

monopolization, which would likely be detrimental to the interests of science.¥Is it easy to discriminate prices or differentiate products between scien-tific users and other users?  If this is possible, can low prices be mandatedcontractually for government-funded data for scientific users?  If so, then it is
likely that scientists will obtain the needed data on more favorable terms than
their colleagues in private industry with more resources.BOX 4.2FAME: A Private-Public Sector SuccessAn example of how a market can be made from subsidized data generation is theFatty Acid Methyl Ester, or FAME, system of identifying bacteria.  The fatty acids are
extracted from the bacteria to be identified, made volatile by methyl esterification,
and subjected to chromatography.  The resultant chromatogram yields a profile pat-
tern that is analyzed statistically to identify the bacteria.  The profiles and the statis-
tics make up the database of interest.  The original work was done, and the database

was compiled, at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta,Georgia.  The CDC staff is augmenting and actively using the database in fulfilling its
mission.  Much of the database is included in a publication for use by bacteriologists,

especially in clinical microbiology laboratories.1A commercial company, MIDI,2  adapted the CDC system, developed its own
proprietary database, and apparently has been successful in commercializing the
system.  The two databases have gone their separate ways, competing in the
intellectual, but not the economic, marketplace.1W.S. Weyant, C.W. Moss, R.E. Weaver, D.G. Hollis, J.G. Jordan, E.C. Cook, and M.I.Daneshvar (1996), Identification of Unusual Pathogenic Gram-negative Aerobic and Faculta-tively Anaerobic Bacteria, Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Md.2Located at 115 Barsdale Professional Center, Newark, DE 19711.SOURCE: Micah Krichevsky, Bionomics International, Bethesda, Md.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE121¥Is it costly to separate the distribution of data to scientists from theirdistribution to other users, such as commercial users?  For small or esoteric
research communities, economies of scale in data distribution may make this
separation costly.If all these questions can be answered Òyes,Ó then privatizing the distribution
of scientific data should be an option to be considered.  Privatizing data distribu-

tion might appear to be attractive to a budget-constrained government agency.  It

certainly removes the cost of maintaining and distributing the data and may even
bring in revenues that can help the agency fulfill other aspects of its mission.BOX 4.3The Failed Privatization of LandsatThe story of what happened to the Landsat system when it was privatized isinstructive. Landsat is a series of remote sensing satellites, the first of which waslaunched by NASA in 1972.  The Carter Administration proposed the privatization

of  Landsat in 1978.  This led in the early 1980s to a transfer of responsibility for the
system to NOAA, which attempted to build a customer base for LandsatÕs dataproducts.  Under both NASA and NOAA management, Landsat images were made

available to all users at the marginal cost of reproduction.The privatization process was accelerated during the Reagan Administration.Congress passed the Land Remote-Sensing Commercialization Act in 1984, set-ting forth the general provisions for privatization of the system.  In 1985, the EarthObservation Satellite (EOSAT) Co. (a joint venture of Hughes and RCA) was

awarded the contract, along with an additional $250 million and a promise to payfor future satellite launches.  EOSAT was thus given a de facto monopoly on all
Landsat images, because there were no direct competitors.  The government
Õspolicy of providing nondiscriminatory access to remote sensing data on a world-wide basis was interpreted by EOSAT to mean that as long as the companycharged the same (high) price to everyone, it was following the governmentÕs non-discriminatory access policy.  The price of Landsat images increased from approx-
imately $400 per image to $4,400 per image, a price at which EOSAT was able toattract some commercial and federal government customers, but few academic or
independent researchers.In the early 1990s, the research community became anxious to use Landsatdata for global change research, and NASA and NOAA complained to Congress
about the high prices.  In response to those and other concerns, Congress passed
the Land Remote Sensing Policy Act of 1992, which returned the Landsat systemto the public sector.  NASA and EOSAT negotiated a price reduction to the U.S.

Government and Affiliated Users to $425 per image.  However, nonfederal and
foreign researchers still must pay the high image prices, effectively cutting off alarge segment of the research community that would benefit from the use of Land-
sat images.  This situation is expected to be rectified with the launch of Landsat 7,
the next satellite in the series, at which time NASA is supposed to make the dataavailable again to all users at the marginal cost of reproduction.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122BITS OF POWERBOX 4.4The Impact of Landsat Privatization on ResearchForty-five leading scientists were asked to describe the effects that their limitedaccess to Landsat data has had on their work over the past decade.1 The list below
summarizes their most important points:¥Projects in the initial concept often are not proposed, or are drastically scaleddown, because the cost of the scenes is prohibitive.¥The development of state land cover maps for many different applied purpos-es has not been possible.¥Important agricultural inventories were inhibited to the point where effortswere abandoned.¥The high costs of the data significantly hindered studies involving multipledates and scenes. Developing appropriate and automated methods ofchange detection has been especially hindered.  The conduct of seasonal or
phenotypically related research was not possible.  Many remote sensing stud-
ies have involved analysis of a single scene, and the conclusions derivedrelate to that (and only that) scene. The repeatability of such conclusions is
thus suspect.  Would the same observations have been derived using a data
set from a different time period?  If a given technique does not work with a
July data set, should one conclude that the technique does not work at all?
Only tests with a multitude of data sets will provide these answers, but highprices limit these rather basic tests.¥One impact of the continuing dilemma with Landsat and privatization hasbeen that the technology is not the state of the art.  For more than a decade

the United States has had no long-term commitment to land remote sensingat the national level.  Landsat 5, the highest-resolution operational U.S. satel-
lite and the only one available for civilian use, is more than 12 years old.  The

United States has been struggling to develop and launch Landsat 7 (withLandsat 6 having failed on launch).  There is now increasing competition from
other nations that have committed to long-term operational continuity for their
land remote sensing systems and have stepped in to fill this void in U.S.policy.¥Graduate students frequently are restricted in the Landsat data available tothem.  Some students spend time writing mini-proposals for funds just for
acquiring data and these proposals are often rejected because of unavailabil-ity of funds.¥The ability to conduct low-cost basic research has been hampered.   Many
technological innovations have come out of such research, but because ofthe cost of new imagery, these opportunities have been reduced or the re-
search has been completed with older, archived data.  While technology de-
velopment is somewhat independent of the age of the data, applied researchand environmental managers become less interested when such efforts use
data long out of date.  Even now, there are numerous articles in the journals
using data from the 1980s.  Techniques such as subpixel classification, re-
search into periodicity patterns as they affect image quality, patterns of spec-
tral mixing in patchy landscapes, and climate/microclimate/image calibrationare all significantly under-researched.  Thus, the high cost of imagery has
resulted in few, if any, innovations in the applications of this technology.¥The poor availability of Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) imagery is not onlydue to cost, but also to the practice of operating the satellite selectively forBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE123certain land-surface areas.  The cost of imagery reduced the user base, and
EOSAT had to determine which images would be most marketable prior to
acquiring them.  That left many scientists with a very limited, high-cost archive
of TM data.  Thus, for certain areas of the globe there is extensive coverage,
but for others it is very poor.In addition, the more detailed narrative of a senior soil scientist, a member of theinterdisciplinary Laboratory for Applications of Remote Sensing at Purdue Universi-ty, is revealing:During the mid- to late 1970s and into the early 1980s, our research group washeavily involved in interdisciplinary research (involving electrical engineers, civil engi-neers, computer scientists, statisticians, meteorologists, crop physiologists, soil scien-tists, foresters, environmental specialists), collaborating with several federal agencies
and other universities.  Our research focused on the study of the relationships betweenthe data derived from the Landsat multispectral scanner (MSS) and thematic mapper,the characteristics of agricultural land surfaces, and the changes of these surfaces with
time. Specific objectives were to determine the feasibility of using Landsat MSS andTM data for crop inventory and monitoring.  Some questions addressed were:  What
quantitative changes occur in the spectral characteristics of crops (corn, soybeans,
winter wheat, spring wheat, rice, many other crops) throughout phenological develop-ment?  What spectral changes are a result of stress from drought, nutrient deficiency,
disease, insect infestation, salinity of the soil, storm damage, wetness, and other caus-
es?  Can these changes be identified and delineated by classical pattern recognition
analysis applied to multispectral data obtained by aerospace sensors? Many of thesequestions were addressed by our research during that period and at least partiallyanswered.One of the many areas of research that came to a complete halt when the price ofTM data was increased manyfold was in the application of time-sequential remotesensing data (e.g., MSS, TM, advanced very-high-resolution radiometer (AVHRR), andothers) to mapping and monitoring terrestrial ecosystems and to developing models to
assess land quality, soil productivity and degradation, and erosion hazards.  The antic-
ipation that had begun to build for use of earth observation satellite data for integrationwith other data sets to provide national, continental, and global resource databases
was suddenly dashed.  It became impossible to develop the procedures, approaches,
and models for doing any credible global monitoring and modeling, especially for ter-restrial ecosystems, without such data.  Remote sensing research with agricultural

crops slowed considerably, and much of it stopped completely as a result of the dimin-ished support for civilian space research in the early 1980s and the subsequent com-mercialization of Landsat, which resulted in exorbitant data costs.  Researchers in

remote sensing laboratories and centers around the world, especially in universities,almost overnight went from a Òdata richÓ situation to a condition of Òdata poverty.Ó Manyof the basic questions that were being addressed in the early 1980s are still being
asked because the data became unaffordable to the research community addressingthese questions.  The resulting nonavailability of data probably played a significant rolein the decline of and, in many cases, the closing of remote sensing programs at numer-
ous universities.It is a pity that the commercialization occurred when it did.  The scientific 
ÒhomeworkÓhad not been completed or carried out to the point at which marketable products had
been sufficiently demonstrated.  Another few years of affordable data and public re-
search support in this area might have made the commercialization process morefeasible and ultimately less painful.1Compiled by Michael D. Jennings, National Biological Service, Gap Analysis Program,University of Idaho, Moscow.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124BITS OF POWERHowever, if not done in accord with the principles above, it can be disastrous forthe governmentÕs basic scientific mission.  Such a situation occurred with the
privatization of the Landsat system in 1985.  The history of this case and its

impact on science are described in Boxes 4.3 and 4.4.It also should be noted in this context that the government producers ofscientific data are themselves in a potential position to act as exploitive monopo-
lies, absent some formal restraints.  In the United States, the prices that the

federal government can charge are heavily regulated by law (see the following
section).  This is not the case in all other countries, however; some government

agency monopolies are allowed to sell their data commercially without the re-
straints of a competitive market.In summary, when privatization or commercialization leads to unregulatedmonopoly supply, it is not good public policy, and especially not good for science.
When privatization leads to competitive supply to multiple user communities, it
could well be good public policy, especially if scientific users are assured access at
reasonable prices and there is a net benefit to the public from such a transfer.PRICING PUBLICLY FUNDED SCIENTIFIC DATARamsey pricing is a mechanism developed for regulated monopolies, whichin this context mean either government monopolies or monopolies acting as
agents of the government.  It was long ago proved by the British mathematician,

Frank Ramsey,11 that where the optimal price for a good is zero or is insuffi-
ciently high to pay for the total cost of the product, economic efficiency requires
the shortfall to be covered by differential prices, with the highest prices charged
to users with low elasticity of demand, that is, users whose usage will be reduced
relatively little by a given charge for the item.  The reason is clear.  A high price
to a user whose elasticity of demand is great will cause a large cut in that personÕsuse of the itemÑa major deviation from that individualÕs optimal use of the item.Thus, any price that is likely to prevent scientists from using data because of
budgetary problems means that the elasticity of demand of the scientist users is
high.  Ramsey analysis then confirms that these scientists should not be charged

a substantial price for data.  Commercial users, in contrast, if they stand to make
a considerable profit from the data, will acquire them even at a substantial price,
meaning that their demand is relatively inelastic.  Welfare analysis confirms that
these users should bear the bulk of the cost.There are several approaches to achieving so-called ÒRamseyÓ prices.
  Themost straightforward approach is pure price discrimination.  The supplier can

establish different prices for different customer groups, using some means of
identifying which customers are in which groups.  For example, professional

societies and scientific journals often charge different dues or subscription prices
to libraries, to professors of various ranks, and to graduate students.  Since stu-

dent discounts are generally quite deep, some form of identification is requiredBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE125for such discounts.  Usually, societies depend on self-reporting to discriminate
among full, associate, and assistant professors, or by income.  Naturally, there is

some ÒleakageÓ due to false reporting, sharing of materials, and the like.  How-
ever, these schemes generally are successful in reaching multiple user groups
while maintaining revenues.In some cases, price discrimination based on observable customer character-istics is not feasible.  A useful approach in such cases is for the supplier to

develop data product lines, consisting of somewhat different packages of data
and value-added services at different prices, directed at different user segments.
The price differentials cannot be so great as to encourage excessive leakage of
users from one package to another because of price.  In order to prevent this
, price
differentials can be no greater than the value differentials among user segments.
There are several methods of product line differentiation:¥Time.  Users who demand up-to-the-minute (i.e., real-time or near-real-
time) data pay more than those willing to wait and use archived or retrospective
data.¥Customer support.  Users who demand full access to telephone support
and other types of support services pay more.¥Sample size.  Users who want a higher sampling rate pay more.
¥Documentation.  Users who require full documentation of the data pay
more.¥Scope of coverage.  Are the data useful for a narrow user group or for a
broader, more comprehensive audience?However, these methods do not address how much should be charged to
various users of the scientific data.  The appropriate guidelines are as follows:
¥For the contributor and active researcher community, data acquisitionshould most likely be free, or, following much of current practice, available at the
marginal cost of distribution.  This guideline is based on the presumption that the

individual contributor is actually creating the value.  In this case, the data

distributor is acting as a repository of the data for the active research community,
which is both contributing and using the data.12  However, it is possible that freeaccess may generate such a great demand for service that congestion occurs, in
which case some form of congestion pricing would be appropriate.¥For others, including commercial users, data acquisition should bepriced to cover the costs of serving those users.The two appropriate pricing methods, incremental and marginal cost pricing,differ as follows:¥Incremental cost pricing.  The price to secondary users is set so that
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126BITS OF POWERrevenues cover the cost to provide this incremental use, including recompilingthe data, perhaps maintaining a computer site for downloading, purchasing CD-
ROM blanks, recording the data, shipping to the user, and customer support, but
not including costs for the core service.¥Marginal cost pricing.  The price to secondary users is set at the marginal
cost of the specific unit sent to the user, including the cost of the CD-ROM blanks
and postage and shipping.  This price is lower than the incremental cost price, as
long as the cost of output per unit declines when volume increases. It is easiest to
express the difference between these two ideas mathematically.Assume that the total cost to supply the quantities q1 q2  0 of two goods is
C (q1, q2)  0 , with 
C  > 0; then
qimarginal cost of good 1 = 
C ;qiincremental cost of good 1 = 
C (q1, q2) Ð C (0, q
2)  .q1The pricing policy specified in Office of Management and Budget (OMB)Circular A-130,13 which applies to all federal government agencies, corresponds
to incremental cost pricing.  The tradition in the research community, and the

pricing level indicated by the Òfull and open accessÓ policy, corresponds to mar-
ginal cost pricing.One can argue on the basis of public good benefits that the price floor shouldbe zero or the marginal cost.  If avoiding undue subsidization were to become an

overriding concern, then incremental cost would be the appropriate price floor.14Under the OMB pricing policy for federal government data, however, the full
incremental cost is also the ceiling.ELECTRONIC ACCESS AND INTERNET CONGESTIONPerhaps the most profound change associated with the digitization of scienceis the ability to access scientific data worldwide from the desktop, via the Internet.
But new capabilities give rise to new problems.  In this case, the recent conges-

tion on the Internet, particularly across the Atlantic and the Pacific, has reduced
the ability of scientists to access data around the world, and particularly to moni-
tor experiments overseas in real time.  Once the exclusive preserve of scientists,

the Internet has attracted so much interest since the advent of the World Wide
Web that nonscience traffic now dwarfs scientific traffic.  This phenomenon is a

classic example of a Òtragedy of the commons,Ó in which use of a common
property becomes so intense that its value and benefit to its users diminish,
possibly even to the extent that the good becomes useless.  Many scientists see
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE127the congestion resulting from this popularization of the Web as interfering withtheir ability to do science across the Internet, as discussed in Chapter 2.The Internet congestion issue is a difficult one and is likely to be with us fora long time.  Prior to the popularity of the World Wide Web, the fairly low level

of usage imposed on the Internet by scientists was well within the modest capaci-
ties of the network to function without discernible delay.  Scientific users per-

ceived the network as having no capacity constraints, because they never encoun-
tered any.  Today, the situation is different; the use of the Internet has increased

to the point that those modest capacities, even though they are expanding, are
being reached (or even exceeded in peak periods) in many areas.  Delays are the

norm in some situations, such as the link to Central Europe during daytime hours
on either side.What are those capacities?  Generally, capacity constraints exist within com-
puters (servers) and the transmission pipes that connect them.  These transmis-

sion pipes are leased telephone company lines and share the same physical facili-
ties as all other telecommunications services.  For example, there are several

physical transmission facilities that span the North Atlantic, the most important
of which are the undersea fiber-optic cables.  All telephone traffic and leased

lines use these facilities, with the split being determined by how many lines have
been leased for Internet use.15  Additionally, local 
Òhot spotsÓ can occur, in which
a server that hosts a particularly popular Web site becomes congested because of
increased traffic.  This in turn causes nearby servers to become congested with

traffic attempting to reach the busy server, so network congestion can spread.
The solution is straightforward:  the popular server must add capacity.
Note that the greatest strength of the InternetÑits decentralized characterÑcan become its greatest weakness.  In a fully decentralized network, the solution

to congestion relies on the implementation of decisions to expand capacity.  Un-

fortunately, congestion affects not only the party that causes the congestion but
others as well, so it becomes a classic ÒexternalityÓ problem.  The owner of a site
may be perfectly happy to live with congestion on his or her popular site (even
though the siteÕs visitors are not happy), but the ownerÕs actions will causecongestion at nearby sites and perhaps even throughout the network, thereby
imposing costs on others.  Furthermore, congestion can also be imposed when

two parties cannot come to an agreement about expanding capacity.  If the United

States and European countries cannot agree on how much capacity is needed to
connect their respective networks, or how to share the costs of that capacity, then
needed expansion may not occur, to the detriment of users.How best to deal with this Òtragedy of the commonsÓ?  The usual solution to
congestion16 is to ensure that those who cause it bear its full cost, in the form of
congestion prices.  This is a mature theory in economics.  The Varian and MacKie-

Mason proposals for Òsmart pricingÓ are the most well-developed in the context
of the Internet and are specifically designed to cope with congestion problems.17It is sufficient for the committeeÕs purpose here to note that such pricing schemesBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128BITS OF POWERwill generally involve some form of usage-based prices for real-time traffic (i.e.,traffic that cannot be delayed until congestion has eased).  This could be a per-

packet charge, for example, or a per-minute charge differentiated by type of
traffic (e.g., telnet, video, Internet, phone).18The effectiveness of congestion prices depends on two obvious, but critical,functions served by prices:  (1) users will have an incentive to postpone traffic to

less congested, lower-cost periods if they are required to pay a high price during
peak periods, and (2) suppliers will have an incentive to increase the capacity of
a server or a transmission route if traffic during the peak periods is highly profit-
able.  The demand-shift effect tends to reduce traffic, while the supply effect

tends to increase capacity in the long run.  Additionally, users who require peak-
load use in the short run will, upon payment of the peak-load price, be more likely
to obtain service under this regime than with underpriced peak service.One other possible means for dealing with congestion would involve invest-ment in hardware and especially software and would follow a growing trend in
business.  This would be the creation of one or more dedicated networks for

scientific research, such as the Internet II now being developed with support from
the National Science Foundation.  Such a network would function much like the

ÒintranetsÓ being established by private firms.  The committee urges that funding
agencies and professional societies begin to examine and evaluate this option in
greater detail.There is no question that congestion is also its own punishment.  Servers or
network administrators who generate congestion also suffer its consequences.
However, those consequences extend to others, and the individual disincentives
will not reflect the ÒexternalÓ costs imposed.  Current administrative mechanisms
may help alleviate congestion, as well.  Sufficient peer pressure from network

ÒpartnersÓ may induce managers of congestion-causing servers to increase their
capacity to keep their standing with their colleagues.  In the long run, however, the

ÒpartnershipÓ model of the past is unlikely to provide sufficient incentives to allevi-
ate congestion, and the current situation can be interpreted as a transition to a new
regime in which more formal mechanisms, such as congestion pricing, will be
required.RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING ECONOMICASPECTS OF SCIENTIFIC DATAThe committee recommends that the economic aspects of facilities for stor-age and distribution of scientific data generated by publicly funded research be
evaluated according to the following criteria:¥Does the scientific research depend on a substantial public investmentin one or more facilities that generate the data of interest?  If so, the data
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE129distribution facilities are most likely to benefit by being vertically integrated withthe observational or experimental facilities themselves.¥Does the (non-facilities-based) distributed scientific research involve co-ordination among researchers, possibly in different countries?  If so, then data
distribution becomes a means of communication among contributing scientists, and
for this community, the price of the data alone should be zero.  If the distributor

subsequently adds value to the data, then the price should be no higher than the
marginal cost of adding value.19¥Is the community of users roughly the same as the community of contribu-tors?  If so, then data distribution should be priced at zero (or at marginal cost, if
value is added).  If there are many users who are not contributors, such as commer-

cial customers, then some form of price discrimination to ensure zero or low prices
to contributing scientific users, with possibly higher prices to others, may be appro-
priate.¥Is the user community large enough to support more than one data dis-tributor?  If so, then privatization of data distribution may be a viable policy option.
If not, then privatization should occur only if the contractual arrangements are
adequately protective of the needs of the scientific community.  Necessary
Ñbutnot necessarily sufficientÑconditions for privatization to be desirable are as fol-lows:ÑThe distribution of data can be separated easily from their generation.ÑThe scientific data set is used by others beyond the researchcommunity.ÑIt is easy to price discriminate/product differentiate between scientificusers and other users, and it is easy for the government to contractually mandate
low prices to scientific users for government-funded data.ÑPrivatization will not result in the unrestricted monopoly provision ofthe data.The appropriate price ceiling for nonscientific users of scientific data gener-ated through government research is incremental cost, as defined in the section
above titled ÒPricing Publicly Funded Scientific Data.Ó  The price of scientific data
to the contributing scientific community should be zero, or at most marginal cost.NOTES1.Not all scientific data are maintained and distributed by public agencies or via public funding,
although this is the norm.  Various not-for-profit institutions and private firms are also provid-

ers of basic scientific data.2.Throughout this section, the terms 
ÒscientistsÓ and  
Òscientific researchersÓ are intended to
include explicitly both U.S. and foreign scientists working in the natural sciences.  Scientific

research is by its nature a global enterprise; actions by any single government are felt by theentire scientific community.  However, the barriers to scientific information flow are exacer-
bated by the problem of unequal technological capabilities, important in virtually all the disci-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130BITS OF POWERpline-specific contexts.  This has at least two dimensions: individuals/institutions have different
levels of computing and networking skills, and individuals/institutions have different levels ofaccessibility to hardware and software needed to exercise those skills.  Generally, scientists are
relatively sophisticated in their skill sets; the problem in science is the availability of tools, bothcomputing and networking.  The digitization of science suggests that if individuals, institutions,
or countries lack the tools to process, analyze, and share scientific data at the level typically
enjoyed in the developed countries, they will be unable to participate fully in the scientificendeavor, to the detriment of science as a whole.  The problem, of course, is not confined to
science, and involves the unequal distribution of wealth and income across the globe.  At this

level, it is highly unlikely that the expressed needs of scientists will have much effect inchanging this unequal distribution of income.  However, specific science-oriented activities can
make a difference; recycling hardware, for example, to scientists in developing countries may
greatly improve their ability to process data at almost no cost.  While U.S. scientists may view
two-year-old 486 PCs as hopelessly underpowered, these cast-off computers may be a godsendto scientists in Africa who currently have nothing.  Perhaps the best way to facilitate such

transfers is via professional society programs and institutions, which are likely to be able toidentify both needs and donors efficiently, with relatively low levels of public financial sup-port.3.The external benefits of fundamental or basic research are to be contrasted with the benefits of
development, generally of products and services for sale, in which the full benefits are capturedby the buyer and seller.  Generally, only basic research is acknowledged to be a public good,

while development is seen as a private good, at least where there is effective patent protection.Of course, the distinction between research and development is not as clean as this suggests,although it is often a useful distinction.4.Of course, the committee recognizes that the acquisition of data by the government through its
research activities is neither a costless activity nor an activity requiring unfettered spending; itis, however, a part of the process of doing research that falls outside the charge of this study,which focuses on data distribution and access.5.An instructive lesson can be drawn from the shift in public policy regarding mental health in
the 1960s.  The strategy was to shift from institutional care to community-based care, with
substantial deinstitutionalization of patients and a funding shift to community facilities.  The
unfortunate result was that funding for institutions dropped, but no funding was provided for
community care.  It is claimed that this failure to provide for local funding has added substan-
tially to the homeless population.6.A more extensive introduction to the complex topic of price discrimination/product differentia-
tion is contained in the section ÒPricing Publicly Funded Scientific Data,Ó below.
7.The committee
Õs use of the term ÒprivateÓ in this context includes only for-profit firms that arenot subsidized by the government; other private institutions such as universities, educational
consortia, foundations, and other NGOs are not included in this context.8.As a practical matter, one would expect scale economies of data distribution to be exhausted at
rather low levels of demand.  However, many scientific data sets may have demand lower than

this threshold and thus be subject to a Ònatural monopoly.Ó9.In this case, of course, meteorologists still obtain their scientific data from NOAA, not com-
mercial firms, and so there are actually separate distribution channels for scientists and the
public.  The point here is that there are activities in which the private sector can outperform thepublic/NGO sector.10.Implicit is the assumption that if the government and private suppliers (who may get their raw
data ÒwholesaleÓ from the government) are competing against one another in the marketplace,
the government is constrained to set prices to recover its cost.  See the section titled 
ÒPricingPublicly Funded Scientific Data.Ó11.F. Ramsey (1927), 
ÒA Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,Ó Econ. J., 35 (March):47-61.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA FROM PUBLICLY FUNDED RESEARCHÑTHE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE131See also M. Boiteaux (1956), ÒSur la gestion des Monopoles Publics astreints a lÕequilibrebudgetaire,Ó Econometrica (Jan. 24): 22-40, and W.J. Baumol and D.F. Bradford (1970), 
ÒOp-timal Departures from Marginal Cost Pricing,Ó Am. Econ. Rev., 60 (June):265-283.12.A zero price might seem too low to some; however, it is the contributions of this community
that actually create the value in the first place.  An instructive analogy is consumer banking:
depositors with sufficiently large balances receive ÒfreeÓ checking from banks; the 
quid proquo is that the bank has the use of their money.  Similarly, the database provider could give free
access to contributors, with the quid pro quo being the contributions themselves.  It also should
be noted that if the data were not supplied free, it is almost certain that some public-spirited
scientist with spare server capacity would have a graduate student maintain an FTP or WWWsite with the data on it for free downloading for interested colleagues.13.The OMB Circular A-130 policy regarding federal government information dissemination prac-
tices was codified in the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, P.L. 104-13, which amended 44U.S.C. Chapter 35, effective October 1, 1995.14.The original reference for this finding is Gerald Faulhaber (1975), 
ÒCross Subsidization:  Pric-
ing in Public Enterprises,Ó Am. Econ. Rev., 65:966-977.  Later references, among many others,
are J.C. Panzar and R.D. Willig (1977), ÒFree Entry and the Sustainability of Natural Mo-nopoly,Ó Bell J. Econ., 8 (Spring):1-22, and W.J. Baumol (1977), ÒOn the Proper Cost Tests forNatural Monopoly in a Multiproduct Industry,Ó Am. Econ. Rev., 67 (December):809-822.15.The current situation on the North Atlantic route is that there is virtually no congestion for
placing telephone calls from Europe to the United States, but serious congestion for Internet
traffic.  The conclusion from this evidence is clear:  there is plenty of capacity in the physical
transmission facilities, but too little of that capacity is devoted to the Internet.  The simple (but
expensive) solution for the researcher in Europe is to place a modem telephone call to the U.S.
computer, or vice versa, and conduct the research via direct connection.16.There are, of course, a wide variety of engineering and queuing-theory solutions, priority
schemes, compression methods, and so forth.  All such methods either reduce the capacity
required or seek to allocate scarce capacity during congestion to more valued uses.  Ultimately,
however, capacity is finite, and congestion may still occur, but at higher load levels.17.For a discussion of the economics of network pricing, see Hal Varian and Jeff MacKie-Mason
(1995), ÒPricing the Internet,Ó in B. Kahin and J. Keller, eds., 
Public Access to the Internet,MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.; Hal Varian and Jeff MacKie-Mason (1995), ÒPricing CongestibleNetwork Resources,Ó Advances in the Fundamentals of Networking, IEEE Journal on SelectedAreas in Communications, and Gerald R. Faulhaber (1992), ÒPricing Internet: The EfficientSubsidy,Ó in B. Kahin, ed., 
Building Information Infrastructure, McGraw-Hill, New York.18.Another possibility for dealing with congestion is to offer a lower subscription charge to users
who are willing to postpone their use to off-peak times.  Currently, Lexis/Nexis offers universi-
ties a low subscription charge but denies access during peak times.19.By 
Òadding valueÓ in this case is meant any transformation of the data beyond that necessary
for scientific research that increases the value of the information for some or all potential usersof the data.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132BITS OF POWERLaws and regulations, both national and international, affect the flow ofscientific information through electronic networks.  Among them are rules re-

garding liability for false or misleading information, laws protecting individual
privacy rights, and export controls.  This chapter focuses on intellectual property

policies and their expression in laws and regulations affecting the contents of
databases, because changes are now afoot that may erode the relatively privileged
position science has held within the existing legal framework.1  By restricting
scientistsÕ full and open access to the data on which future advances depend (see
Box 5.1), these changes could impede the progress of science and thus limit the
contributions that science can make to society, notwithstanding the constitutional
mandate that intellectual property rights should be limited in time and should
advance science and the useful arts.2One such change is that governments, including our own, are finding itincreasingly difficult to maintain the rate of growth that publicly funded science
has enjoyed over the past half century.  When scientific research is supported

instead by private funding, the end results and perhaps the research itself are
likely to be kept proprietary.  Furthermore, there are indications that the scientific

data management that governments continue to fund may well be carried out as if
it were proprietary, in the sense that fees for use of the data may exceed the costs
of dissemination.  As their tax bases decline and governments come to regard

their data collections as possible sources of revenue, they have, in some in-
stances, adopted the same short-term, profit-maximizing strategies as private
firms.  Yet today, when commercially valuable data of scientific importance are

made available in electronic form, they also become available for rapid, inexpen-1325The Trend Toward StrengthenedIntellectual Property Rights: A PotentialThreat to Public-Good Uses ofScientific DataBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS133sive copying and manipulation.  While this facilitates value-adding uses from one
perspective, from another, it undermines the data providerÕs ability to recovercosts, much less to generate a profit.A second change is that, in many areas of research, the separation has dimin-ished between basic research, where intellectual property rules are more con-
cerned with attribution of ideas and findings than with the appropriation of pub-
lished material, and applied research, where intellectual property and proprietary
concerns predominate.  This conjunction has been especially evident in computer
BOX 5.1Effects of Government Support on U.S. Research andData ActivitiesThe ability of private-sector technological development in the United States tothrive without the kind of centrally organized institutional framework and industrial
policy apparatus typical of the European Community and many other nations1  has
stemmed in good measure from the large public investments in basic research anddevelopment that were made after the late 1950s, in response to Cold War pres-
sures and national security interests.  In retrospect, the success of the U.S. inno-
vation system, despite its apparent anarchical character, can be seen as linked topublic funding of academic institutions and specialized laboratories, whose re-
search product has paved the way for private industrial applications.2  In this con-text, the fact that federal funding also largely defrayed the costs of collecting anddisseminating raw and elaborated scientific data merits particular attention.Throughout the Cold War period, and extending into the present, the U.S. gov-ernment has reinforced its subsidies of fundamental research with a policy of openexchange of scientific data.  This policy was promoted internationally through the

governmentÕs bilateral science and technology cooperative agreements and in-creasingly in recent years through both bilateral and multilateral agreements con-cerning various large-scale research programs and projects.  None of these agree-

ments, however, has broadly encompassed all scientific research activities.Instead, they typically have been limited to scientific cooperation and related pro-tocols for the exchange of data according to the special interests of a geographicregion, scientific discipline or subdiscipline,  or specific projects undertaken by theparties to the agreement. In the rise of the United States to become the worldÕs
leading producer of technological goods and scientific information, the govern-mentÕs role in ensuring an open supply of data to the scientific community underfavorable economic conditions has been a constant stabilizing factor.1See, e.g., Margaret Sharp and  Keith Pavitt (1993), ÒTechnology Policy in the 1990s: Old
Trends and New Realities,Ó J. Common Mkt. Stud.
, 31:129, 138-39, table 1.
2See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council(1995), Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Supportthe NationÕs Infrastructure, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134BITS OF POWERscience and biotechnology, where some basic advances are now virtually insepa-rable from their industrial applications.  The granting of patents or other exclu-

sive property rights in these industrial applications can affect the ability of other
researchers to test and extend the theories underlying them.Third, the revolutionary convergence of digital, computing, and telecommu-nications technologies has profoundly altered the preexisting status quo.3  The
potentially large gains and losses from the commercial exploitation of data under
these changing conditions have led to a concerted drive for new and stronger
forms of legal protection for publishers of electronic databases in general, includ-
ing compilations of scientific data that were heretofore treated as components of
the public domain.4The current trend toward stronger and more enduring intellectual propertyrights, and fewer limitations on the rights of copyright holders vis-‹-vis public-good uses of information, could reduce some of the limitations that have ben-
efited scientists, and on which they have relied. Government studies of the chal-
lenges that digital technologies pose for intellectual property law at both national
and international levels have stimulated calls for strengthening intellectual prop-
erty rules.  In addition to legislation either adopted or still under consideration in

the United States and other nations, proposals to strengthen international copy-
right and related laws were a major focus of multilateral negotiations sponsored
by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in December 1996,
largely at the urging of the United States and the European Union.One of the draft treaties currently being considered calls for worldwideadoption of a new form of intellectual property protection for the contents of
databases.5  Although this treaty was scheduled for discussion and approval at the
WIPO Diplomatic Conference held in Geneva, Switzerland, on December 2-20,
1996, the conference delegates decided that it required further study.  Future

adoption of a treaty with similar proposals would have such profound conse-
quences for transnational exchanges of scientific data that the committee chose it
as a principal focus of this chapter.This chapter begins by briefly describing the relevant legal infrastructureduring the predigital period and by identifying certain destabilizing factors, such
as the introduction of electronic photocopying machines.  It then outlines digital

technologiesÕ role in accelerating the rise of information as a commodity to be
bought and sold and in thus upsetting the previous imperfect balance between
underprotection and overprotection of the rights of data creators and holders.  The

discussion that follows examines the emerging legal responses to these phenom-
ena.  It describes the current legislative and treaty proposals in detail and explores

the implications for science of new proprietary rights in databases.  The chapter

concludes by proposing actions that groups representing the research and educa-
tion communities should undertake to stimulate reformulation of the legislative
and treaty proposals, with a view to reconciling the need to protect the legitimateBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS135interests of database makers with the need to protect the activity of science and toensure its ongoing contribution to the public interest.SALIENT FEATURES OF THE PREDIGITAL STATUS QUOBecause the creation, collection, and dissemination of scientific data in theUnited States have in large part been subsidized by government funding, they
have not depended on the balance between incentives to create and efforts to
preserve free competition that intellectual property law normally governs.  Within

this framework, most academic compilers or generators of scientific data were
more concerned about obtaining credit or recognition for their contributions than
about securing the economic fruits of their efforts.6  Only in cases where mem-
bers of the scientific community authored discursive scientific works or other-
wise participated in applied technological innovation, or where commercial pub-
lishers compiled value-added databases, were they likely to be affected by legal
rules governing commercial applications of data.  In such cases, existing legal

institutions proved relatively stable in the predigital epoch, and the scientific
community has taken this stability largely for granted.In the private sector, by contrast, commercial compilers of data have longsuffered from a risk of market failure owing to the intangible, ubiquitous, and,
above all, indivisible nature of information goods and to the ease with which free
riders may have appropriated the fruits of the compilersÕ investment, once the
information goods were made available to the public in print media.  Despite this

risk, the domestic and international intellectual property systems responded la-
conically, if not with indifference, to the compilersÕ dilemma.
7  This indifference
stemmed in part from the inability of the worldwide intellectual property system
to match compilations of data to the basic subject matter categories covered,
respectively, by the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property
(1883) and the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works (1886).8  It also stemmed from a concomitant reluctance to fetter the basic
building blocks of scientific and intellectual discourse with legal impediments.9Notwithstanding these infirmities, the commercial exploitation of nonscien-tific data and of published compilations of information prospered in some devel-
oped countries, notably the United States and the United Kingdom (where copy-
right protection is sometimes available).  Whether there would have been greater

commercial exploitation of scientific data in the past if publishers could have
invoked stronger proprietary rights is a matter of conjecture.  Patents are seldom

available for database contents because writings are not patentable subject matter
and also because the largely incremental character of database development would
typically make it hard to meet eligibility requirements.  Even contract law has

significant limitations when mass-market information products are sold to per-
sons outside the scope of a contract.10Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136BITS OF POWERData as Know-how Applied to IndustryTo obtain some measure of protection, firms engaged in industrial applica-tions of scientific discoveries have entrusted their commercially valuable data to
trade secret law or to equivalent laws of confidential information.  Trade secret

law (or equivalent laws of confidential information) provides innovators and
investors with no exclusive property rights at all.  Rather, it permits third parties

to reverse-engineer any unpatented industrial product by proper or honest means
in order to reveal the process by which it was obtained, and to use that process to
manufacture equivalent goods.11  To the extent that an innovative product is
derived from commercial applications of scientific data kept under actual or legal
secrecy, a competitor always remained free to generate the same data and to
apply it to similar products or uses.12Trade secret law thus provides qualifying originators with no legal immunityfrom direct competition.  It merely confers a 
Òhead start,Ó that is, an uncertain
period of natural lead time, during which originators seek to recoup their invest-
ment in research and development while establishing their trademarks as symbols
of quality that consumers recognize.  In this and other respects, trade secret law

operates as a liability regime that discourages certain types of conduct rather than as
an exclusive property right that may create a legal barrier to entry (see Box 5.2).When scientific data are disseminated to the public in print media, theynormally forfeit the protection of trade secret law, or related laws of confidential-
ity, except insofar as two-party contracts may otherwise provide.  Not surpris-

ingly, commercial compilers in such cases have sometimes found it difficult to
appropriate the fruits of their investment unless either copyright laws or unfair
competition laws afford them a limited shelter against wholesale duplication by
third parties.Copyright Law as a Cultural BargainThe advent of the printing press created for published literary and artisticworks markets that had previously existed only in a rudimentary form, owing to
the need to produce each copy of a work by hand from a single original.  Para-

doxically, to promote markets for information goods and other literary and artis-
tic works, the state intervened by erecting new monopoly rightsÑintellectualproperty rightsÑeven as it removed the royal privileges and guild monopoliespertaining to tangible goods that were handed down from the Middle Ages.Information goods have the properties of so-called public goodsÑthey arenondepletable and nonexcludable.  A second comer
Õs use of a new informationgood does not diminish or exhaust it; once it is disclosed to the world, anyone can
use it without the originatorÕs permission and without reimbursing him or her forthe costs of research and production.  Unless the state limits the ability of third

parties to copy a given literary production, for example, and to sell the copiedBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS137good for less than the price charged by the originator, neither the author nor thepublisher may have sufficient incentives to create or invest in the dissemination
of cultural and information goods.13The historical solution to this problem has been the mature copyright system,which charges both authors and their publishers a price for overcoming market
failure.  In effect, copyright law has enabled the state to impose 
Òportable fencesÓBOX 5.2DefinitionsLiability Rule and Exclusive Property RightsA property right precludes third parties from appropriating the object of protec-tion, whereas a liability rule regulates the means by which they can engage incertain potentially harmful acts on certain conditions.1  If one has Òrightful posses-sion of some thingÑsuch as an automobile or a homeÓ under an exclusive proper-
ty right, Òanother person ordinarily cannot take it without permissionÓ; but a liabilityrule permits others to engage in acts that Òcreate risks of harm and thus constituteprobabilistic invasions of property interestsÓ (such as nuisances), while obligating
them to pay damages for harm under specified circumstances.2Sui generisSui generis 
means Òof its own kind or classÓ  (BlackÕs Law Dictionary 1434,West, 6th ed., 1990).  The literature refers to special-purpose intellectual property
laws that deviate significantly from the classic patent and copyright paradigms asÒsui generisÓ regimes.  See, for example, Pamela Samuelson (1985), 
ÒCreating aNew Kind of Intellectual Property Law: Applying the Lessons of the Chip Law to
Computer Programs,Ó Minn. L. Rev., 70:471 (discussing the sui generis character
of the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act).SubpatentableA subpatentable innovation is novel in the sense of being new, but it representsa step in technical progress that an engineer might be expected to make in duecourse.  By definition, a patentable invention must be 
ÒnonobviousÓ in the sense
that it represents a breakthrough beyond the capacity of a routine engineer to
make in due course.3In simpler terms, patents are supposed to reward extraordinary achievements,while subpatentable innovations are those that proceed in small, incremental steps.1See, e.g., Guido Calabresi and A. Douglas Melamed (1972), ÒProperty Rules, LiabilityRules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral,Ó Harv. L. Rev.
, 85:1089.2Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell (1996), ÒProperty Rules Versus Liability Rules:  An
Economic Analysis,Ó Harv. L. Rev.
, 109:713, 713-15.  For an analysis of trade secret law as a
default liability regime governing relations between originators and borrowers of subpatentable
innovations, see Reichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,
Ó note 27.
3See 35 United States Code, section 103 (1996).Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138BITS OF POWERthat accompany intangible creations and that limit what purchasers can do withthem, even though they possess the physical artifacts, such as books or printed
tables of numbers, in which these intangible creations are embodied.14  In so
doing, the state also has imposed legal constraints on authors and publishersÑacultural bargainÑthat has attempted to balance incentives to create against thepublic interest in both free competition and access to the copyrighted culture.15For example, although copyright law protects an authorÕs personal expres-sion for a relatively long period of time, it attaches only to Òoriginal works ofauthorship.Ó  In principle, this requirement excludes functionally dictated collec-
tions of data that fail to manifest a creative selection or arrangement.16  More-
over, copyright law never prevents third parties from independently creating their
own versions of another authorÕs unprotectable ideas or of the factual discoveriespresented in a given scientific publication.  In other words, copyright law protects

only a given authorÕs style, not his or her factual or ideological content.The Concept of Fair UseThe mature copyright paradigm further curbs even this limited monopoly byrelaxing the authorÕs control over certain uses of great public interest.  Thus,
numerous exceptions to and limitations on the copyright ownerÕs bundle of ex-clusive rights favor face-to-face teaching (e.g., by allowing limited duplication of
materials for classroom use), library and archival uses, and selected public inter-
est pursuits,17 in addition to a general 
Òfair useÓ exception 
Òfor purposes such ascriticism, comment, news reporting, teaching . . . scholarship, or research.Ó18While the availability and scope of statutory exceptions usually vary with thenature of the subject matter at issue, the fair use exception applies to all subject
matter categories across the board.  Even so, overriding the copyright owner
Õsexclusive rights in the name of fair use remains an atypical result contingent on a
judicial evaluation of the special Òpurpose and characterÓ of the use, the 
Ònatureof the copyrighted work,Ó the 
Òamount and substantiality of the portion used,Óand the Òeffect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copy-righted work.Ó19In recent years, the advent of new technologiesÑfrom photocopying ma-chines to computer programs and optical scannersÑhas unsettled the doctrine offair use20 by enabling even copies for private research uses to displace commer-
cial markets,21 and also by making it possible to overcome most of the transaction
cost problems that increasingly had been used to justify application of the fair use
exception in practice.22Protection AffordedCopyright law will not protect the product of a compilerÕs industrious ef-fortsÑi.e., of labor, skill, or investmentÑif the selection or arrangement it em-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS139bodies does not rise to the level of an original work of authorship.  Moreover, a
mature copyright system usually affords protection only against wholesale copy-
ing of the original selection and arrangement underlying any eligible compilation
of data.  In the United States, this doctrine of weak or 
ÒthinÓ protection for factual
works has been reinforced by First Amendment concerns, which some courts and
commentators viewed as mandating broad access to the disparate facts that result
from a compilerÕs efforts.23  When these doctrines apply, they greatly diminish
the value of copyright protection even to database publishers who satisfy the
eligibility criteria, because their exclusive reproduction and derivative work
rightsÑas construed by the Supreme Court in Feist Publications, Inc. v. RuralTelephone Service Co.Ñwill not normally prevent unauthorized extractions ofdisparate data for either competing or value-adding uses.24Some federal appellate courts, however, have begun to rebel against the Feistdecision and to reinstate stronger copyright protection for factual compilationsand databases by subtle doctrinal manipulation.25  Whether state or federal unfair
competition laws could also provide some supplementary relief against the unau-
thorized copying of commercially valuable data that are not protected by trade
secret or copyright laws remains an unsettled question, although such laws are
sometimes invoked both here and abroad.26  In any event, this cyclical fluctuation
between states of underprotection and overprotection is a characteristic trait of
borderline subject matter that fits imperfectly within the classical patent and
copyright paradigms, such as the contents of databases.27DIGITAL TECHNOLOGYÑDISRUPTING THE BALANCE OFPUBLIC AND PRIVATE INTERESTSDespite (or perhaps because of) the relatively weak legal infrastructure gov-erning use of data, a thriving market for compiled information has grown up, and
U.S. publishers appear to play a dominant role in it,28 although it is important to
emphasize that this market has been largely concerned with nonscientific data
and information.  This industry seems largely characterized by niche marketers

who supply and dominate specific market segments.  The limited size of these

segments and the relatively high startup and servicing costs seem to deter second
comers from readily entering such markets.29   In other words, once the threshold
level of investment has been crossed, the first comer tends to take the relevant
market segment as a whole.The public sector nonetheless has remained largely immunized from thepotential abuses of market power inherent in this situation, owing both to its
subsidized status and to the long-standing legal tradition that denied copyright
protection to works produced by U.S. government agencies.30  As a result, data
provided by federally funded projects have flowed through the domestic innova-
tion system with few legal impediments (see Box 5.1), and legal disputes aboutBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140BITS OF POWERownership or the exercise of proprietary rights in scientific data as such rarelyhave been ventilated before intellectual property tribunals.31By the late 1980s, however, digital technologies and new telecommunicationsnetworks had combined to produce Òthe greatest changes in the way information isdistributed since the invention of printing by movable type in the 15th century.Ó32The use of computers made it economically feasible to collect, store, manage, anddeliver huge amounts of data at a time when continuously expanding databases
have become ever more prominent building blocks of knowledge, especially in the
observational sciences, as discussed in Chapter 3.  Electronic databases further blur

the line between these collection and application functions by allowing users to
make their own tailor-made extractions from the mass of data available in the
collection as a whole.33  These tools allow users to 
Òadd . . . immense value to whatwould otherwise be masses of incoherent, disparate data.Ó34Moreover, the latest value-added data products, once disseminated world-wide via the Internet and other media, frequently lead to the rapid production of
new technical innovations, which result in the generation of more data.35  Elec-
tronic publishing thus broadly advances the revolutionary process that computer-
ization began, and it makes both data and research results potentially available at
very low cost all over the world.36As this digital and telecommunications revolution has created vast new mar-kets for electronic information goods and tools,37 it has outpaced the legal infra-
structure, which remains geared to the slower-moving print media.38  This strain
manifests itself in two contradictory ways.  Sometimes digital technology aggra-
vates the basic market-failure characteristic of information goods and thus deep-
ens a chronic state of underprotection.  This can occur, for example, when second

comers download the originatorÕs data and enter the market with a competingproduct that free-rides on the originatorÕs investment.39  At other times, however,
digital technology so thoroughly overcomes the threat of market failure that it
endows the first to invest with abnormal market power that can result in a chronic
state of overprotection.  This can occur, for example, when sole-source data

providers charge exorbitant prices or oblige libraries and research institutions to
accept terms and conditions that effectively waive both the special privileges and
the fair use exceptions set out in the Copyright Act of 1976.40The Vulnerability of Publicly Distributed Electronic DatabasesTo the extent that government- or university-generated data remainuncommercialized, their vulnerability to technically refined means of accessing,
downloading, or duplication is only of relative importance.  Presumably, the origi-
nators want the broadest possible distribution of their data sets.41  Even in this
situation, however, there are some concerns that are likely to grow over time.  For
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS141example, government may impose cost-recovery conditions on the use of data that
third parties who obtain unauthorized access could avoid.  Users also might

inadvertently corrupt the original database and cause potential harm.Moreover, over time, the distinction between basic, noncommercialized dataand data applied to industrial pursuits or other downstream uses seems likely to
break down, as has already occurred in other disciplines, such as the Earth sci-
ences and biotechnology.42  Universities and other research institutions may view
data compilations generated in the course of their research as potential revenue
sources, especially in an era of declining government support, just as they have
done with patentable inventions.  As more scientific data are applied to commer-

cial purposes for one reason or another, the data collectors must necessarily
distinguish between sources that are made publicly available without charge and
those that are not.43  Otherwise, even the providers that do not charge for data
could disrupt contractually controlled applications of their own data downstream,
not to mention the risk that the noncharging government or academic generator
might inadvertently infringe on third partiesÕ proprietary domains.
A related trend is for some governments to commercialize their data, regard-less of whether other governments follow suit.  The former will become concerned

about the vulnerability of their data even if the latter are not.  By the same token,

those providers that still choose not to charge for their services will increasingly
come into contact with (and, perhaps, conflict with) the legal and technical fences
that states bent on commercializing data may erect.  As one observer put it, 
ÒThedivision between the two regimesÓ could become 
Òa dam over which informationwill not easily flow,Ó to the possible detriment of scientific progress and global
economic growth, which seems to require that Ò[m]ore than perhaps any othercommodity, data must be allowed to move without barriers.Ó44To the extent that databases are commercialized, whatever their origin, therefined digital technologies that enhance the compilerÕs power to collect anddisseminate data will enhance as well the free-riding competitorÕs power to ap-propriate the fruits of the first comerÕs investment.45  The second comer who
purchases the originatorÕs product, say, in the form of a CD-ROM, may electroni-cally extract and recompile the data in question at a fraction of their collection
and distribution costs.  The second product may then be sold for less than the

first, because its publisher has contributed nothing directly or indirectly to the
research and production costs.  Digital technology also enables second comers to

extract and recombine the originatorÕs data into value-added products that im-prove on the original, or that compete in different and sometimes distant market
segments.46  In some cases, third parties may even extract the compiler
Õs data inorder to make them available over telecommunications networks, an act that can
destroy any residual incentives to invest.47  In such cases, existing copyright laws
generally afford little or no relief, as explained above.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142BITS OF POWERRelative Invulnerability of Many Privately Controlled DatabasesWhen the database maker is the sole source of the data in question, andsubstitute databases cannot readily be compiled from public domain sources,
digital technology greatly strengthens a supplierÕs market power.  By restricting
access to identifiable, on-line subscribers, for example, and by Òplacing condi-tions on access and [using technology] to monitor . . . customer usage,Ó the
publisher can largely restore the power of the two-party contractual deal that the
advent of the printing press had appeared to destroy.48  In effect, publishers in this
position may not need copyright law at all, even if they qualified for protection.
They may prefer to reject the state-imposed cultural bargain in order to override
both its fair-use provisions and its specific exemptions favoring the public inter-
est in teaching and research.49Moreover, electronic publishers may have virtually no transaction cost prob-lems to overcome because digital technology now enables them to track and
charge for every instance of electronic access, even for browsing and scientific
uses that were previously exempt.50  The resulting market power then enables the
publisher to impose monopoly prices and arbitrary terms on usersÑincludinglibraries, educational institutions, and research centersÑand to disregard the so-cial consequences that ensue from the inability of such public organizations to
foot the bills.51How Will the Public Interest Be Served in the Information Age?While many types of scientific data, like other forms of information, possesseconomic value under the appropriate circumstances, the sponsors of new propri-
etary rights explicitly contemplate a level of systematic commercialization of both
large and small units of data that is unprecedented.  How these impending changes
in the legal infrastructure will impinge on the research and educational communi-
ties has not been clearly worked out even by the European authorities responsible
for the European UnionÕs recently adopted Directive on the Legal Protection ofDatabases.52  A bill to enact a U.S. model of the European law, which was recently
introduced, is even more cryptic in this regard,53 while the WIPO Draft Database
Treaty tried to finesse the issue.54  One can predict, nevertheless, that these legisla-
tive initiatives will greatly affect the scientific and educational communities if, as
Chapters 3 and 4 of this report have emphasized, they lead to a more market-driven
environment with fewer government subsidies than before.Whether contractual attempts to reduce usersÕ access to scientific and cul-
tural products that was promoted by copyright laws in the past will survive legal
challenges on such grounds as federal preemption of state law, or doctrines of
misuse of copyrights (allied to antitrust law), remains controversial.55  Another
question is whether the economic and cultural bargain embodied in copyright law
remains appropriate for the digital environment (see Box 5.3), given that trade-
driven economic policies have otherwise weakened the consensus on which thatBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS143BOX 5.3Copyright Law in the Information AgeÑTwo PerspectivesThe application of domestic copyright laws to digital technologies that did not existat the time of drafting undoubtedly means that the statutory language will not always fitthe cyberspace dimension.  The resulting ambiguities could give rise to legal uncer-

tainty in a number of real or hypothetical situations.  Yet, the Copyright Act of 1976 was
deliberately drafted with a view to accommodating future technologies, while the man-ner in which one seeks to resolve ambiguities that impartial observers find genuinely
troublesome, rather than merely pretextual, depends on oneÕs allegiance to the Òeco-nomic and cultural bargainÓ thought to lie at the core of prior law.
1For example, bookstores do not charge customers for the privilege of browsingthrough the stacks prior to purchasing specific books, and this use would not violatethe copyright ownerÕs exclusive reproduction rights, irrespective of any contractualrelations between booksellers and customers.  Once the work in question was con-

verted to digital form and transmitted over telecommunications networks, however,publishers could monitor and charge for analogous uses if they fell within their exclu-sive rights to reproduce, adapt, publicly perform, distribute, or display copyrighted
works, or if a new Òexclusive right of transmissionÓ were enacted, as the InformationInfrastructure Task ForceÕs White Paper proposes.  Enactment of  the White Paper
Õsproposed ÒtransmissionÓ right could then explicitly or implicitly remove uses analo-
gous to ÒbrowsingÓ from the prior 
Òfair useÓ tradition, whereas reliance on existing law
would leave the issue to case-by-case judicial determination.However, the WIPO Copyright Treaty that was opened for signature on De-cember 20, 1996, created in Article 8 a new right of communication to the publicthat gives authors the exclusive right to make available Òto the public . . . [these]works in such a way that members of the public may access these works from aplace and at a time individually chosen by them.Ó  Moreover, the agreed state-
ments concerning this treaty explicitly carry over the preexisting fair uses recog-
nized in state practice and allow for new instances of fair use for digital transmis-sions of copyrighted works over telecommunication networks.The Copyright Act of 1976 also allows one who purchases copies of most copy-righted literary works to give or lend them to others or even to resell them second-hand for profit without owing additional royalties to the owners of the copyrights inquestion.2  Whether analogous acts are, or should be, permitted with regard to
digitally transmitted works is open to question,3 as is the right of certain users to
1See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. ¤¤101 (definition of Òliterary worksÓ and 
ÒcopiesÓ), 102(a), (b), 107(codification of fair use in terms of market interest); Jaszi, note 15 in text (stressing ÒculturalbargainÓ underlying copyrighted tradition).
2See 17 U.S.C. ¤¤106 (3) (exclusive distribution right), 109 (a) (first sale doctrine).  How-
ever, unauthorized commercial lending of sound recordings and computer programs is pro-
hibited in the United States, see 17 U.S.C. ¤109 (b) (1994), and the commercial lending ofbooks or films is subject to royalties under some foreign laws.3See, e.g., White Paper, note 38 in text, at p. 92 (claiming that unauthorized distribution bytransmission necessarily entails electronic ÒcopyingÓ (not true of the print media) and there-
fore violates the reproduction right, which is not limited by first sale doctrineÕs toleration oflending and resale); McManis, note 64 in text, at pp. 269-72 (criticizing and rejecting the
White PaperÕs interpretation of current law).(continues)Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144BITS OF POWERBOX 5.3Continued
study or download digitally transmitted works for private research and other non-commercial purposes without payment of royalties to the copyright owners.  While
publishers of print media had more or less grudgingly come to terms with suchprivate or fair uses, they do not believe the same exceptions apply (or ought to
apply) to on-line or other forms of digital transmission.4While the advent of new technologies has always created a degree of legaluncertainty in intellectual property law, the tendency in the past was to allow the
law slowly to catch up, despite the risk of some short-term obsolescence.  In con-
trast, the supporters of the currently proposed changes to the law contend that theopposite course of action is needed with respect to digitally conveyed knowledge
and information goods, and the major reforms set out in the White Paper adhere tothis view.If one believes that the federal courts can apply existing copyright and unfaircompetition laws to the new technologies with relatively little friction, then one hasimplicitly opted for a wait-and-see approach or at least for a minimalist approach,based on case-by-case judicial decisions and a minimum amount of tinkering with
the statute as it stands.5  This approach leaves the traditional exemptions for sci-
entific and educational users intact, but subject to case-by-case evaluation.6  If, in
contrast, one believes that gaps in the law leave on-line publishers too much at
risk, then proposals for statutory reform easily escalate into a campaign to rid theemerging information infrastructure of allegedly anachronistic vestiges of the cul-tural bargain that had heretofore protected users and second comers of works inprint and other media.74See, e.g., White Paper, note 38 in text, at pp. 65-68, 216; McManis, note 64, at pp. 263-73 and note 258 (criticizing this position and identifying White Paper with the view that Ògiventhe availability of metering [by commercial digital content providers], systematic electronic
browsing by academics should not be considered fair useÓ); Pamela Samuelson (1994),ÒLegally Speaking: The NII Intellectual Property Report,Ó Communications of the ACM, 37:21,23 (Dec.) (stating that Òthe real purpose behind the proposed digital transmission right is toenable copyright owners to control all digital performances and displays of copyrighted works,
without regard to whether they are public or privateÓ).5See also McManis, ÒEmerging Computer Technology,Ó note 64, at pp. 63-73 (disputing
White PaperÕs interpretation of existing law and concluding that it Òis highly selective aboutwhich uncertainties . . . it would like Congress to address,Ó which  
Òmakes critics suspiciousabout . . . [its] motivation in proposing that the distribution right be amended so as to ex-
pressly apply to transmissionsÓ).6Cf., American Geophysical Union v. Texaco Inc., 60 F.3d 913 (2d Cir. 1995) (finding thatsystematic photocopying of an academic journal by a commercial research institute was not
fair use where blanket licenses were available from a collection society); Sega v. Accolade(9th Cir. 1992) (decompilation of computer programs to extract unprotected ideas was analyti-
cal fair use where ideas were not otherwise accessible and expression was not copied). See
also National Basketball Association vs. Motorola, 1997 U.S. App. Legis. 1527 (2nd Cir. 1997)(holding that real-time transmission of NBA game scores and statistics taken from TV and radio
broadcasts in progress to hand-held pagers did not violate state unfair competition law).7See, e.g., McManis, ÒEmerging Computer Technology,Ó note 64 in text, at pp. 266-69;
Jaszi, note 15 in text.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS145cultural bargain previously depended.56  Equally uncertain is the role that librar-
ies will play once information providers Òcan connect directly to the userÓ via
digital transmission over telecommunications networks.57  Some observers see
the changing role of libraries as grounds for allowing publishers virtually unfet-
tered discretion to impose contractual conditions on library access to networked
transmissions.58  Others see the dependence of users everywhere on digital trans-
missions for the future acquisition of scientific knowledge as grounds for gener-
alizing some of todayÕs library and fair use privileges to all on-line users.59  The
real question, then is how to recreate a Òfair useÓ zone in cyberspace
60 that
protects the strong public interest in ensuring that certain uses and certain users,
notably the research and educational communities, are not priced out of the
market or forced to cut back on the kind of basic research that has heretofore
played a crucial role in U.S. economic and technological growth.61THE DRIVE FOR LEGAL PROTECTION OFNONCOPYRIGHTABLE DATABASESIn response to the perceived gap in the worldwide intellectual property sys-tem,62 proposals are being put forward to protect noncopyrightable databases by
means of ad hoc or 
sui generis intellectual property regimesÑthat is, by specialintellectual property laws that deviate significantly from the classical patent and
copyright models63 that underlie the Paris and Berne conventions of 1883 and
1886, respectively.  The impetus for a 
sui generis database law has come from the
Commission of the European Communities, whose member countries have adopted,
to varying degrees, a policy of commercializing government-generated data.64  That
policy is contrary to the traditional policy of the United States, which has favored
full and open access.Starting in the late 1980s, the Commission of the European Communitiesbegan to reevaluate the legal status of databases, especially electronic databases, in
the process of formulating an overall strategy for information technologies known
as the Information Market Policy Action (IMPACT) program.65  The Commission
found that European database producers had to overcome several comparative
disadvantages in order to expand their share of the world market and to catch up
with U.S. industry, which dominated the market and was growing at a faster rate
than its European counterpart.  To overcome these disadvantages, the Commission

stressed the need for a single, integrated market, undistorted by differing regulatory
approaches, and for higher levels of intellectual property protection, tailored to the
needs of potential investors in database production, that might stimulate additional
investment in this sector.66  Another likely premise in the Commission
Õs thinkingwas that privatizing the governmentÕs role in the collection and distribution of datamight also generate income streams that could help to offset the shrinking availabil-
ity of public funds for research and development.The Commission decided both to harmonize the domestic copyright lawsBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146BITS OF POWERinsofar as they applied to compilations of data and to require that the memberstates adopt sui generis intellectual property laws to protect the contents of
noncopyrightable electronic databases, a proposal that was subsequently extended
to databases in print media as well.67  In this regard, comparative law revealed
that the Nordic countries were already experimenting with short-term, copyright-
like protection of noncopyrightable compilations (known as the Nordic catalogue
rule), with a view to curbing commercial piracy without extending full copyright
protection to borderline literary productions that lacked creative authorship.68Accordingly, in 1992, the Commission proposed an innovative Directive to pro-
tect such databases, Òloosely modeled on the Nordic catalogue rule, [and that]more directly and strongly protects electronic information tools.Ó69  A greatly
amended version of this proposal was adopted by the Council of Ministers and
the European Parliament in July 1995,70 which became the final European Direc-
tive on the Legal Protection of Databases of March 11, 1996.71While the precise mesh of the 1996 DirectiveÕs two-tiered provisions inadministrative and judicial practice remains to be seen, its highly protectionist
attributes are unmistakable.  Moreover, if all the pending legislative projects are

implemented as explained below, similar changes could be introduced into U.S.
law andÑvia a WIPO Database TreatyÑinto international law as well.Development of the European Approach to Noncopyrightable DatabasesCollections of data, including those relatively unstructured or unprocessedcollections of primary interest to scientists, have never fit comfortably within the
romantic notion of authorship that once dominated European copyright law, or
even within the more pragmatic conceptions of ÒoriginalityÓ that pervade modern
copyright laws, such as that of the United States.  Behind this conceptual resis-

tance there lies a profound concern, often expressed in judicial decisions and the
writings of jurists, that facts and ideas constitute building blocks of intellectual
discourse that should not (and perhaps cannot constitutionally) be removed from
the public domain.  In this context, the scientific community
Õs own commitmentto the full and unrestricted flow of data represents an important subchapter in a
larger discourse that, in this country, at least, is rooted in the First Amendment.72The Commission of the European Communities initially addressed with com-mendable caution the perceived need for legal incentives to spur investment in
electronic database production.  The Commission affirmed its preference for a

regime based on modified liability principles, that is, one that would deter certain
types of socially undesirable conduct without vesting exclusive property rights in
data as such (see Box 5.2).73  Unfortunately, even the Commission
Õs earliestproposals along these lines were flawed by contradictory elements drawn from
the exclusive rights model, while the final version became a much less balanced
and potentially anticompetitive exclusive property right.74Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS147The European CommissionÕs Initial ProjectThe European CommissionÕs initial approach was premised on the Òabsenceof a harmonized system of unfair competition legislationÓ to safeguard 
Òthe in-vestment of considerable human, technical and financial resourcesÓ in the mak-
ing of databases that Òcan be copied or accessed at a fraction of the cost needed todesign them independently.Ó75  The logical solution, therefore, was to codify a
new type of unfair competition law.  Such a sui generis law, loosely modeled onexisting laws that already protected trade secrets or confidential information,
would repress conduct amounting to the ÒmisappropriationÓ of an electronic
database producerÕs investment without imposing either legal barriers to entry orthe social costs of actual or legal secrecy.76  To this end, the Commission pro-
posed simply to forbid the Òunfair extractionÓ of data from an electronic database
for commercial purposes without the second comerÕs having expended indepen-dent effort to collect and verify similar information.  The first draft Directive

accordingly provided a 10-year period of lead time in which the database maker
could recoup his or her investment in a noncopyrightable electronic database
while preventing copiers from engaging in for-profit extraction or reutilization of
the factual contents, in whole or in substantial part.77The CommissionÕs Òunfair extractionÓ criterion seemed to invite case-by-
case judicial distinctions between procompetitive activities, especially indepen-
dent investment in the generation of a competing electronic database (which was
roughly analogous to reverse-engineering by honest means), and market-distort-
ing forms of electronic copying (which were roughly comparable to industrial
espionage, commercial bribery, and other types of ÒparasiticÓ or free-riding be-
havior that unfair competition laws interdict).  It also may have opened the door

to case-by-case judicial evaluation of unauthorized extractions deemed ÒfairÓbecause they advanced noncommercial educational and scientific pursuits, al-
though neither the draft Directive nor the first Explanatory Memorandum specifi-
cally endorsed this proposition.  In any event, the drafters further diluted the

database makerÕs new right against Òunfair extractionÓ by engrafting some ex-
press userÕs rights upon it and by adopting explicit measures to safeguard thepublic interest in free competition.For example, the drafters apparently envisioned that lawful users of an elec-tronic database could make a limited reuse of its contents even for some commer-
cial purposes, as might occur in value-adding uses.  There was also no clear

means for database creators to extend the duration of control over the initial
compilation by making subsequent changes to it, although the extent to which
this omission resulted from a drafting oversight remains unclear.  Moreover,

price competition was directly encouraged.  Second comers could choose be-

tween independently compiling their own databases from scratch or invoking a
statutory compulsory license against any sole-source provider of data in elec-
tronic databases, with a view to competing against that provider while payingBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148BITS OF POWERreasonable royalties for the use of the data thus extracted.78  The liability prin-
ciples loosely embodied in the first draft of the Directive thus created no legal
barriers to entry.  Arguably, these principles may even have lessened existing

economic barriers to entry by empowering would-be competitors to borrow data
at reasonable rates when the cost of independently regenerating them appeared
too costly or otherwise inefficient as a business strategy.79Absent from this framework were any explicit exceptions favoring educa-tional and scientific users (assuming these were not implicitly ÒfairÓ uses under
the basic Òunfair extractionÓ criterion of the draft Directive), an omission that the
European Parliament singled out for criticism.  Although the legislative history

does not explain why the drafters rejected this criticism,80 the reasonable infer-
ence from all the evidence is that the Commission believed further exceptions
and immunities would unduly weaken the publishersÕ incentives to invest under a
regime that already implemented a procompetitive strategy.  If so, the Commis-

sion appears to have erred in at least two respects.First, it seems to have assumed that a competitive market would intrinsicallysatisfy the needs of the scientific and educational communities, whereas this
report shows that basic science has organizational and operational needs that
often differ from those a competitive market is geared to meet.81  Indeed, experi-
ence demonstrates that basic science may not be able to pay the market rate even
when it is competitively determined.  Important research projects consequently

may languish for lack of affordable data unless nonmarket mechanisms (such as
subsidies) or legal constraints on publishers (such as fair use exceptions and
compulsory licenses) close the gap.Second, the drafters apparently assumed that their concern for the publicinterest in free competition was still a paramount legislative value in developed
market economies.  Unfortunately, such protection of the public interest that was

implicit in their rudimentary liability framework ultimately gave way to a potent
exclusive property right in which public interest safeguards were deemphasized
in favor of the protection of private interests.The European UnionÕs Final ProductÑThe 1996 Directive on the LegalProtection of DatabasesAlthough the European CommissionÕs initial project had undergone trans-formation by the time that the Amended Proposal was put forward in 1993,82 its
wholesale conversion from a relatively weak liability regime to a strong exclu-
sive property right occurred during the closed proceedings of the European Coun-
cil of Ministers, which produced the Common Position of July 10, 1995.83  This
version, with minor technical alterations, became the final Directive on Data-
bases, adopted on March 11, 1996, which the European Union member states
must now convert into domestic intellectual property laws and regulations.84The Directive as finally adopted may be subdivided into five parts:  (1) a list
of 60 ÒrecitalsÓ or premises that underlie this legislation; (2) a small group of
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS149definitional articles that apply across the board (Articles 1-2); (3) a set of provi-sions harmonizing the treatment of databases under the member statesÕ domesticcopyright laws (Articles 3-6); (4) a set of provisions requiring these same states
to provide the new, sui generis intellectual property right for noncopyrightabledatabases (Articles 7-11); and (5) a final group of Òcommon provisionsÓ that
apply to both copyright and the sui generis 
laws (Articles 12-16).Of these, the broad definition of ÒdatabaseÓ in Article 1(2)
85 constitutes an
important feature.  Whereas earlier proposals had limited
 sui generis 
protectionto electronic databases that were deemed particularly vulnerable to rapid duplica-tion, the broadened definition now includes databases in print form that are
accessible to the human eye.  In other words, no database circulating within the

European Union will escape the regulatory effects of the 1996 Directive, regard-
less of the medium in which it appears or the nature of its compilers.As finally enacted, the sui generis right conferred on qualifying databasemakers is no longer couched in terms of ÒunfairÓ or even 
ÒunauthorizedÓ acts or
uses.86  Rather, the database maker obtains an absolute exclusive 
Òright to preventextraction and/or reutilization of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluated
qualitatively and/or quantitatively, of the contents of that database.Ó87  This two-pronged exclusive right, which now applies to both electronic and nonelectronic
databases,88 lasts for an initial period of at least 15 years.  Any compiler who
makes a database available to the public, however, may continually renew the
right for additional 15-year terms with every additional investment in the data-
base.89  This renewal right covers the contents of the entire database, and not just
the new matter (as would occur under the derivative work right of copyright law).The final 1996 Directive does not make sui generis protection contingent onthe showing of a creative achievement or of a novel contribution to the prior art,
the classical bases for justifying legal derogation from free competition in the
past.  Rather, it requires the database maker to prove that 
Òthere has been qualita-tively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in either the obtaining, veri-
fication or presentation of the contentsÓ or in 
Òany substantial change resultingfrom the accumulation of successive additions, deletions or alterations.Ó90  Be-
cause the Directive itself provides no further guidelines for evaluating the requi-
site level of investment in either case, this threshold will remain uncertain, pend-
ing decisions by European courts applying the still to be drafted domestic database
laws.  Nevertheless, there are no limits to the number of quantitative or qualita-

tive changes that will thus qualify for such extensions, and any publisher who
continues to make a substantial investment in updating, improving, or expanding
an existing database can look forward to perpetual protection.Even though the sui generis right depends on mere investment rather than on
some palpable creative contribution, the scope of protection that the 1996 Direc-
tive affords investors in noncopyrightable databases now appears roughly equiva-

lent to that which it elsewhere affords full-fledged authors of copyrightable com-
pilations (and greater than that traditionally afforded to authors of literary works;
see Box 5.4).91  This conclusion follows both from the definitions of the exclu-
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150BITS OF POWERBOX 5.4The 1996 European DirectiveÕs Broad Protection for DatabaseInvestorsThe investorÕs scope of protection under the hybrid right to prevent extractionappears paradoxically to exceed even that afforded authors of traditional literaryand artistic works under the classical copyright paradigm of the Berne Convention1in at least three important respects.  First, the basic idea-expression dichotomy
underlying U.S. copyright law2 (which the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) applies universally to all copyrightable works,including such borderline works as computer programs and factual compilations3)does not apply to noncopyrightable databases covered by the sui generis regime.For this and other reasons explained below, in the universe of data generators,there is no public domain substratum from which either research workers or sec-
ond comers are progressively entitled to withdraw previously generated data4 with-
out seeking licenses that may or may not be granted.On the contrary, every independent generation of data, however mundane orcommonplace, will obtain protection if it costs money, and every regeneration orreutilization of the same data in updates, additions, and extensions that cost mon-ey will extend that protection without limit as to time.5  As a consequence, third
parties will rarely be able to avoid the expense of regenerating preexisting dataÑin the way that they can always use previously generated ideas, however much itcost to develop themÑunless the originator of the relevant database has aban-doned it, or declined to exercise his or her proprietary rights, much as occurs undertrademark laws.6  To be sure, data providers (including, where feasible, membersof the scientific community) could decide not to exercise proprietary rights in cer-tain databases, for example, those funded by government agencies; but this wouldnot change the legal situation with respect to scientifically important data located in
privately owned databases or in those funded by public agencies, especially for-eign agencies, that had opted to commercialize their data.7The absence of any equivalent of the idea-expression doctrine under the newsui generis regime means that investors, in effect, obtain proprietary rights in data1See, e.g., Reichman, ÒCollapse of the Patent-Copyright Dichotomy,Ó note 8 in text, at pp.
485-86, 492-96; see also Sam Ricketson (1987), 
The Berne Convention for the Protection ofLiterary and Artistic Works: 1886-1986, Queen Mary College, at pp. 231-32.2See 17 U.S.C. 
¤102(b) (1994); text accompanying note 16 in text.3See TRIPS Agreement, note 111 in text, articles 9(2), 10(1); Reichman, 
ÒKnow-How Gapin TRIPS,Ó note 120 in text, at pp. 775-84.
4Cf. Jaszi, note 15 in text, at p. 596; Litman, 
ÒPublic Domain,
Ó note 9 in text, at p. 967.
5See  notes 89-90 in text.
6See Lanham Trademark Act, 15 U.S.C. 
¤1052 (1994 ed.).  However, there is an infinite
array of trademarks, and the use of marks to distinguish quality producers inherently pro-
motes competition without creating legal barriers to entry.  See, e.g., Stephen Ladas (1975),
Patents, Trademarks, and Related Rights, Harvard University Press; William M. Landes andRichard A Posner (1987), ÒTrademark Law: An Economic Perspective,Ó J. L. Econ., 30:265.
7Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, ÒImplementing theInformation Dissemination Provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995,Ó Memoran-
dum by Alice M. Rivlin, September 22.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS151as such, a type of ownership that the copyright paradigm expressly precludes.The drafters of the sui generis right play this down by insisting that third parties
always remain free to generate their own databases.  But this opportunity exists

only for data that are legally available from public sources and whose cost of inde-pendent regeneration is not prohibitively high in relation to the gains expected fromthe exercise, if any.  As for proprietary data not legally available for second comers

to exploit, there is no opportunity to avoid the originatorÕs exclusive rights to pre-vent extraction or reuse of existing data.  In such cases, the investor
Õs exclusiverights necessarily vest in the data as such.A deeper point is that, regardless of whether it is possible in theory to regener-ate the data from publicly available sources, investors in database production canalways deny third parties the right to use preexisting data in value-added applica-
tions,8 even when the third parties are willing to succumb to royalty-bearing licens-
es;9 and there is no escaping such licenses unless the database publisher either
declines to exercise his or her rights, or engages in an abusive exercise of market
power.  In other words, except when the new proprietary rights are abandoned or
misused, the concept of incremental or Òcumulative and sequential innovation,Ówhich is central to the development of modern technological paradigms,10 has
been banished from the universe of database production, despite the economicwaste and inefficiency inherent in such policies.A second, and closely related way in which the database investorÕs scope ofprotection under the 1996 European Directive exceeds that of authors under theclassical copyright paradigm is to be seen in the treatment of derivative works.Under copyright laws, the scope of an authorÕs exclusive right to make a derivativework extends only to the original, expressive matter added to the underlying work.It cannot protect either ideas or preexisting expressive matter, including any matter
that has entered the public domain.11 But the 1996 Directive recognizes no such
legal distinctions and, as just explained, it harbors no working conception of apublic domain whatsoever.  Unless local European courts applying the domestic

laws that implement the Directive take pains to limit this omission, the upshot willbe that each new extension of the database makerÕs exclusive rights by dint of hisor her Òsubstantial investmentÓ in updates, additions, and revisions
12 will, in effect,
requalify that investor for protection of the database as a whole, for additional 15-year periods, and not just for the revised or added matterÑthe Òderivative workÓÑas would occur under the copyright laws.  This, in turn, reinforces the monopolistic
8See, e.g., Samuelson, 
ÒMissing Foundations,Ó note 34 in text.
9However, a refusal to license, coupled with a dominant position in the marketplace, couldtrigger an antitrust violation or a related charge of abuse of intellectual property rights.  See,

e.g., E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52 in text, article 16(3); Hunsuker, note 32.10See, e.g., Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G. Winter (1982), 
An Evolutionary Theory ofEconomic Change, pp. 255-62; Richard R. Nelson (1994), 
ÒIntellectual Property Protectionfor Cumulative Systems Technology,Ó Colum. L. Rev
., 94: 2674, 1676; see also Robert P.Merges and Richard R. Nelson (1990), ÒOn the Complex Economics of Patent Scope,
Ó Colum.L. Rev., 90:839, 881.11See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. ¤¤101, 102,103, 106, 501 (1994).12See notes 89-90 in text.(continues)Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152BITS OF POWERsive rights set out in the Directive itself and from the Council of MinistersÕclosed-door decision to delete from its 1995 Common Position the initial draft
DirectiveÕs compulsory license requirement facing sole-source providers.92As defined in article 7(2) of the 1996 Directive, the investorÕs sui generisextraction right covers even temporary transfers of data to on-line receivers,
much like the authorÕs broadened rights to prevent reproduction in copyright lawunder article 5(a).93  The investor
Õs reutilization right covers on-line use or trans-missions of data, including those in value-added or derivative formats, much like
the authorÕs broadened ÒcommunicationsÓ rights under article 5 (b), (d), (e).
94  In
this and other respects, including the omission of any requirement for a compul-
sory license against sole-source providers, the drafters of the 1996 Directive have
integrated the sui generis regime into the broader regulatory framework for na-tional and international information infrastructures that the European Union and
U.S. intellectual property authorities are now jointly promoting.95effects inherent in the originatorÕs ability to deny third parties the right to buildincrementally and sequentially upon preexisting scientific and technical knowledge.A third way in which the scope of protection for investors in database produc-tion exceeds that afforded authors of copyrightable literary and artistic works re-sults from the much narrower range of public interest exceptions applicable to
investors.13 In effect, the sole important exception available to all users of nonco-
pyrightable electronic databases under the Directive is the right to extract or reuti-lize Òinsubstantial parts of the database.Ó14 Even this exception applies only to
Òlawful usersÓ of the database (i.e., presumably subscribers to an on-line service or
purchasers of a CD-ROM), which suggests that in most cases, the exception mere-ly validates acts incidental to obtaining the value for which one has paid.  More-

over, a lawful user of a noncopyrightable database cannot extract or reuse eveninsubstantial parts of its contents in Òrepeated and systematicÓ ways that 
Òconflictwith a normal exploitation of that database or . . . unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the maker.Ó15 Arguably, this could preclude most value-add-
ed uses of an insubstantial part of the database, regardless of the commercial ornoncommercial purpose of the users.13For the general range of public-interest exceptions under copyright laws, see text ac-
companying notes 16-20 in text.14See E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52 in text, article 8(1).  However, member states
may allow Òextraction for private purposes of the contents of a non-electronic database.
Ó  Id.,
article 9(a).15E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52 in text, article 7(5); see also id., article 8(2) (forbid-ding any acts by lawful users that Òconflict with normal exploitationÓ or 
Òunreasonably preju-dice the legitimate interestsÓ of its maker).
BOX 5.4Continued
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS153Potential Effects of an Exclusive Property Rights ApproachUnlike earlier versions, the final 1996 Directive does give European Unionmember states the option of allowing authorized extraction of a substantial part
from a noncopyrightable database Òfor the purposes of illustration for teaching orscientific research, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by
the noncommercial purpose to be achieved.Ó96  This exception is available only to
a Òlawful userÓ and only for the purpose of 
ÒextractionÓ but not for that of
reutilization, and it will exist only in those member states that opt to enact it.97If a member state enacts this provision, the scientific or educational userÕsexempted extraction must satisfy both the noncommercial purpose test and the
general obligation Ònot [to] perform acts which conflict with normal exploitation or[that] unreasonably prejudice [the makerÕs] legitimate interests.Ó98  Because the
normal use of a scientific database in an academic institution typically is to serve as
a research and educational tool, this exemption could merely permit illustration of
conclusions reached, but not uses for other scientific or educational purposes, such
as browsing or even extractions from and use of the collected data for the purpose
of reaching the conclusions that one may then freely Òillustrate.Ó99Of course, local legislators might manufacture loopholes through which towiden this exception,100 and database publishers might refrain from imposing
harsh or oppressive terms and conditions that unduly impinge upon scientific and
educational uses.  The fact remains, however, that nothing in the Directive as

finally enacted requires such accommodations.  Its
 sui generis
 provisions contain
no real equivalents of the private use, fair use, and related exceptions that tradi-
tional copyright laws afford scientific and educational users of core literary and
artistic works.  Moreover, database publishers who acquired market power

through restricted on-line transmissions reportedly have recently imposed ques-
tionable contractual conditions on libraries and academic subscribers.101It follows that under the 1996 Directive, the most borderline and, in the sensethat they are basic building blocks of knowledge, questionable of all objects to
receive intellectual property protectionÑcompilations of data and facts, scien-tific or otherwiseÑparadoxically obtain the strongest scope of protection avail-able from any intellectual property regime except, perhaps, for the classical patent
paradigm itself.102  Nor are the breadth of protection and the monopolistic power
it tends to breed likely to be offset by greater competition in the market for
electronic databases, especially now that the 1996 Directive as finally adopted no
longer contains the compulsory license requirement that had initially been de-
vised for this purpose.Formally, of course, third parties still remain free to compile a databaseexactly like one already in commerce, because independent generation of the
relevant data at oneÕs own time and expense is always permitted.  In practice, this
option ignores the economic realities of the database industry, in which start-upBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154BITS OF POWERcosts can be relatively high, the prospects for market sharing have seldom beenrealized, many valuable data sets are unavailable from public sources, and the
existence of one complex database seems empirically to constitute a de factobarrier to entry that is seldom overcome.  Moreover, as discussed in previous

chapters, many databases in the natural sciences contain unique, nonreproducible
observations that are by definition available only from a sole source.  This lack of

effective competition, with its inherent possibilities for discouraging add-on prod-

ucts and for engaging in abuses of market power, was downplayed by the Euro-
pean Council of Ministers in 1995, even though it had been uppermost in the
minds of the European CommissionÕs own drafters a short while earlier.  Article
16 of the final Directive thus merely calls for 3-year reviews to determine whether
existing antitrust laws prove inadequate to deal with the Òabuse of a dominantposition or other interference with free competition,Ó in which case proposals for
Ònon-voluntary licensingÓ may once again be considered.
103The fear of market failure and of chronic underprotection that initially moti-vated the quest for a sui generis regime to protect electronic databases has thusgiven way to the creation of Òmini-monopolies over informationÓ104 and to an
underlying logic that is inconsistent with the public interest in the full and open
flow of scientific data.  The original goal of providing some incentives to aug-

ment the publishersÕ investment in compiling electronic databases has generated
a set of norms that could render many scientific and technological undertakings
prohibitively expensive.  As explained below, the short-term social benefits of

this so-called Òextraction rightÓ may thus conceal the long-term social costs of
diminished research and development capabilities at scientific and educational
institutes, including public and semipublic institutions that are already indirectly
subsidizing private research and development.105Overlapping U.S. and European Union International ModelsWhen the European Commission began its deliberations concerning data-base protection, the climate in which intellectual property policy discussions at
both the national and the international level took place differed from that prevail-
ing today.  The fate of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations and

its intellectual property component, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), remained uncertain.  The U.S. intellectual

property authorities had not yet begun to survey the issues posed by widespread
transmission of digitized information over telecommunications networks.  The

Supreme Court had just denied copyright protection to telephone directories in
Feist and had recently invalidated state protection of subpatentable industrial
designs.106  These decisions proclaimed renewed faith in a 19th-century vision of
the competitive ethos without recognizing the unresolved problems of gaining
returns from investments in subpatentable information goods under 21st-centuryBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS155conditions.107  It also seems noteworthy that a few years earlier, the chairman of
the House Subcommittee on Intellectual Property had set very high standards that
would have to be met before Congress would consider proposals for additional
forms of sui generis intellectual property protection that deviated from the classi-
cal patent and copyright paradigms.108Against this background, the European CommissionÕs early drafts for a Direc-tive on databases adopted a defensive posture with respect to foreign publishers,
which proposed a strict criterion of material reciprocity.  Databases made in coun-

tries that did not enact sui generis 
legislation akin to that envisioned by the Direc-tive would consequently remain vulnerable to wholesale copying within the Euro-
pean Union itself.109  This decision to discriminate against foreign nationals
operating in nonharmonizing states was modeled on the earlier and equally contro-
versial decision by the United States to impose a material reciprocity clause under
the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984.110  Although both decisions rested
on dubious legal grounds even before the TRIPS Agreement was adopted, and even
though that agreement rejects this approach, at least in spirit,111 a version of the
reciprocity provision nonetheless entered the European CommissionÕs final Direc-tive on the Legal Protection of Databases, as adopted in 1996.112A Coordinated High-Protectionist StrategyBy 1995, however, when the European UnionÕs Council of Ministers met toadopt its Common Position on the pending database Directive, the climate sur-
rounding worldwide intellectual property policymaking had profoundly changed.
Universal intellectual property standards embodied in the TRIPS Agreement had
become enforceable within the framework of the World Trade Organization,113largely as the result of sustained pressures by a coalition of powerful manufactur-
ing associations in Europe, the United States, and Japan.114  The success of this
venture presages further alignments of interests by U.S. and European Union
officials with a view to forging a common, strongly protectionist strategy for
intellectual goods in the post-TRIPS environment.115Included within this strategy was a packet of complementary proposals foramending or expanding the Berne Convention.  Known as the ÒDigital Agenda,Óthese proposals were considered in a December 1996 Diplomatic Conference
hosted by WIPO.116  Some of the proposals, which the European Union
Õs ownintellectual property authorities placed on the agenda for that conference, would
have conformed international copyright law to the regulatory framework for a
global information infrastructure that the U.S. Information Infrastructure Task
ForceÕs (IITF) White Paper on the national information infrastructure recentlyendorsed.117  The White Paper took the view that on-line providers are, or should
be, strictly liable for digital transmissions of copyrighted works, even if this
obliges providers to serve as Òcopyright policeÓ without regard to their ability to
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156BITS OF POWERperform such functions.118  It also proposed a battery of measures that would
prohibit the decoding of encrypted transmissions (or the tampering with other
electronic safeguards) as copyright infringement and that would forbid altering
Òcopyright management information, including the terms and conditions for ac-cess to on-line transmissions.Ó119Despite the innocuous appearance of these and related proposals, they arebroadly drafted and may result in indirectly overruling numerous judicial prece-
dents, including some that permit reverse-engineering of the noncopyrightable
components of computer programs.120  These proposals might also help to immu-
nize copyright owners from claims of misuse for imposing harsh or oppressive
conditions on users in the form of nonnegotiable electronic contracts.121  The
single most troubling aspect about the White Paper (and the legislative proposals
it has spawned) is, as so many qualified observers have concluded, that it favors
Òreducing the application and scope of the fair use doctrine in cyberspace.Ó122Another proposal, the WIPO Draft Database Treaty,123 called for worldwide
protection of noncopyrightable databases under sui generis intellectual property
regimes.  A Committee of Experts prepared the WIPO Draft Database Treaty,

which draws from both the European UnionÕs model and from draft U.S. legisla-tion.  It was placed on the December 1996 Diplomatic Conference agenda at the

behest of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO).124  The Diplomatic Con-ference was thus asked to convert the WIPO Draft Database Treaty into interna-
tional law, even though the United States lacked any corresponding domestic
regime as of the time of its writing.125  In addition, there has been no empirical
test of the controversial final 1996 European Directive in actual practice,126 and
no preliminary reports or studies evaluating even the economic justification for
such measures have been issued by WIPO or by any other reputable international
institution.127  The Diplomatic Conference postponed action on this proposal and
charged WIPO to set a timetable for further deliberations.Against this background, the changes to the European Commission
Õs Data-base Directive made in the Council of MinistersÕ Common Position of 1995, in-
cluding deletion of the compulsory license provision and other measures that
strengthened the exclusive rights apparatus,128 reflect the coordinated strategies
that the European Commission and the U.S. intellectual property authorities are
now jointly pursuing.  If implemented as proposed, these strategies could gradually

extend international norms concerning the legal protection of databases from the
Berne Convention (or related instruments) to the TRIPS Agreement, which em-
powers the Council for TRIPS to Òundertake reviews in the light of any relevantnew developments which might warrant modification or amendment of this Agree-
ment.Ó129  This, in turn, could eventually obviate the long-term effects of the
reciprocity clause in the 1996 European Directive by replacing it with a set of
harmonized norms binding on all World Trade Organization member states, like
those already adopted for semiconductor chip designs in articles 35-38 of the
TRIPS Agreement.130Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS157H.R. 3531ÑThe Proposed U.S. Database Investment andIntellectual Property Antipiracy ActThe bill proposing a U.S. law to protect noncopyrightable databases, whichwas introduced to the House of Representatives at the behest of the PTO,131articulated a still more protectionist strategy than that of the European 1996
Directive.  Under H.R. 3531, as under the final 1996 Directive, a compiler would

qualify for exclusive rights to prevent extractions and reuses of the whole or
substantial parts of any database by dint of his or her having made substantial
investments in the collection, assembly, verification, organization, or presenta-
tion of its contents.132  These exclusive rights would attach automatically upon
the expenditure of resources, and if the owner continued to invest in updating or
otherwise maintaining the database in question, its 25-year initial term of protec-
tion could be renewed continually, without limit,133 in all the contents of that
database.  This provision thus ignores the constitutional enabling clause, which

requires intellectual property rights to be limited in time.134Furthermore, when one scrutinizes the details of the pending U.S. proposal,one finds that its definition of ÒdatabaseÓ is much broader than that of the 1996
Directive.  It contemplates, for example, that noncopyrightable components of

computer programs could qualify for protection as databases, and it provides no
apparent criterion for excluding even facts or data compiled for scientific and
historical works.135  Moreover, the database maker
Õs exclusive rights to extract,use, or reuse all or a substantial part of the contents are reinforced by allowing
database makers to control any use that Òadversely affects the actual or potentialmarket for that databaseÓ in addition to uses that otherwise 
Òconflict with thedatabase ownerÕs normal exploitation.Ó136  This specification, which is not found
in the 1996 Directive, has the potential for impeding virtually any judge-made
exceptions analogous to Òfair useÓ under copyright laws, because any such ex-
ception would almost certainly affect the Òpotential marketÓ for any given data-
base.137  At the same time, the database owner
Õs potentially perpetual ÒderivativeworkÓ right (flowing from continuing updates), which is subject to no public
domain exceptions whatsoever, becomes even easier to obtain than under the
1996 Directive, because the U.S. bill would condition the renewal right merely
upon Òany change of commercial significanceÓ to the database contents and not
solely on additional Òsubstantial investments.Ó138The pending bill then expands the U.S. database ownerÕs scope of protectionwell beyond that of the 1996 DirectiveÕs sui generis regime by introducing an
array of measures that, when read together, could produce formidable
anticompetitive effects.  For example, the 1996 Directive
Õs principal concessionto usersÑthe exception for extraction of insubstantial parts139Ñ is ostensibly
broadened in H.R. 3531 to permit uses or reuses of insubstantial parts,140 but it is
then significantly narrowed in at least two ways.  First, there is a new provision

that not only forbids Òrepeated or systematic use or reuse of insubstantial partsÓBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158BITS OF POWER(like the comparable provision of the European Directive),141 but also expressly
forbids extraction or uses even of insubstantial parts Òthat cumulatively conflict. . . with . . . normal exploitation . . . or adversely affect . . . the actual or potential
market.Ó142  This latter clause acquires further strength by means of still other
provisions that seem to outlaw extraction or reuse of even insubstantial parts of a
protected database in any product or service that directly or indirectly competes
with the database from which it was extracted in any market, however distant.143Also forbidden are extraction, use, or reuse of even insubstantial parts Òby or formultiple persons within an organization or entity in lieu of . . . authorized addi-
tional use or reuse . . . by license, purchase, or otherwise.Ó144Given such restrictions, one is hard-pressed to imagine unauthorized uses ofan insubstantial component that the drafters of the U.S. bill would deem legiti-
mate.  To forestall even this remote possibility, the bill allows publishers contrac-

tually to override even the formal right of lawful users to extract or use insubstan-
tial parts, in contrast with the express nullification of similar contractual
provisions in the 1996 Directive.145  One knowledgeable source reports that some
U.S. database publishers, opposed to this constraint in the 1996 Directive, ex-
pressed an intent to exercise permissible contractual overrides in practice.146  Asimilar intention seems manifest in the clause allowing publishers to impose
separate licenses for networked use of a database within organizations, including
nonprofit academic and scientific institutions, which can be construed as cover-
ing the extraction, use, or reuse even of insubstantial parts.147Taken together, these and other provisions of the proposed H.R. 3531 rein-force the single most disturbing aspect of the 1996 European Directive, namely,
that it precludes formation of an evolving public domain from which third parties
can freely draw.148  To this end, the bill expressly confines permissible acts of
Òindependent creationÓ to data or materials not found in a database subject to the
proposed sui generis regime.149  This restriction applies regardless of whether the
unauthorized extraction or use is made for purposes of noncommercial scientific
endeavor or for commercially important value-added products that build incre-
mentally on existing compilations of data.  Every unauthorized use or reuse of

existing data thus potentially violates the database ownerÕs unbounded derivativework right.  Furthermore, the existence of this potential violation is determined

without regard to the substantiality of the second comerÕs own expenditure ofeffort or resources, to the similarity or differences of the latterÕs product orservice, or to the public-good aspects of the activities undertaken.150The monopoly conferred on database owners under the pending U.S. legisla-tion is then perfected by recognizing no public interest exceptions whatsoever.
Even the weak exception for extraction (but not reuse) Òfor the purposes ofillustration for teaching or scientific researchÓ that the 1996 Directive allowed
European Union member states to enact151 is omitted from both H.R. 3531 and
the U.S. submission to WIPO.152The sole concession to science and education in H.R. 3531 is a provision notBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS159found in the European Directive that expressly denies coverage to Òa databasemade by a [federal] government entity.Ó153  Because most databases of primary
importance to science are funded by federal government agencies, this provision
appears to recognize that such databases merit different treatment from those
normally covered by the proposed sui generis regime.  The message is rendered
ambiguous, however, because it does not expressly apply to databases funded by
government and also because of language in the same provision to the effect that
Òany database otherwise subject to this Act . . . is not excluded herefrom becauseits contents have been obtained from a governmental entity.Ó154  This language
appears to allow private firms that invest in data obtained from federal govern-
ment sources to qualify for protection.  However, it also can be read as implicitly

inviting federal governmental agencies to derogate from the traditional U.S. posi-
tion, reiterated in a recent Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directive,
which limits such agencies to the recovery of dissemination costs from commer-
cial applications of government-funded data by the private sector.155  If govern-
ment agencies were to move beyond the cost-recovery threshold, the continued
ability of scientists to access such data on favorable terms, which current policy
seeks to guarantee, would then be called into question.Disregarding the status of databases made by governmental entities, H.R.3531 would render virtually any act of Òcollecting, assembling, or compiling . . .data . . . from . . . a database subject to this ActÓ a prohibited or infringing act.
The perpetrator could never justify such acts as incidental to other acts of inde-
pendent creation, or as incidental to recognized public interest exceptions, or
even as a legitimate means of building on preexisting data sets.156  Nor does H.R.
3531 express any concern that application of its exclusive rights might lead to
abuse of a dominant position or to other anticompetitive acts that might require
Ònonvoluntary licensingÓ at some point in the future.
157Ancillary provisions of H.R. 3531 also embody some of the current admini-strationÕs most controversial proposals concerning the regulation of national andglobal information infrastructures.  For example, one provision, following a pro-
posal from the IITF White Paper, would outlaw making or distributing any tech-
nical device (or performing any technical service) the primary purpose of which
is to circumvent self-help technological security measures that  publishers rely on

to help protect the contents of their databases.158  Another provision, also inspired
by the White Paper, would forbid tampering with database management informa-
tion attached to copies of database contents or otherwise distributing copies in a
form that bears false information about ownership or other aspects of managing
the relevant proprietary rights.159Self-help measures, such as encryption for networked transmissions, oftenserve valid commercial purposes, and they may be indispensable for the protec-
tion of privacy.160  However, such measures also may unduly reinforce the
publisherÕs power to impose harsh contractual terms in two-party deals,161 aprospect that H.R. 3531 completely ignores.  There are concerns as well that
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160BITS OF POWERpublishers will use these provisions to fend off legitimate public interest chal-lenges to the scope of protection obtained under the proposed sui generis
 regime.
If, for example, decrypting a coded transmission is necessary to extract part of a
database for noncommercial scientific purposes, and that act of decryption itself
constitutes a tort,162 researchers are unlikely to explore the potential availability
of judge-made public interest exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by the
new regime.163In sum, by providing a longer period of protection, more powerful exclusiverights, no public interest exceptions or privileges, harsh criminal penalties,164 and
ancillary rules reinforcing self-help policing of on-line transmissions, the pro-
posed U.S. law H.R. 3531 would grant database owners greater monopoly power
than that emanating from the European UnionÕs 1996 Directive.  In so doing, the
drafters of H.R. 3531 take no notice of the important role that affordable, unre-
stricted flows of data have traditionally played in supporting U.S. research and
education, or in other sectors vital to economic development.  The proposed

regime thus risks triggering a chain of unintended consequences that could ulti-
mately compromise both the foundations of basic science and the technological
superiority of the national innovation system.165The Rush to LegislateIn mid-1996, the PTO (which now speaks for the copyright office in interna-tional affairs) presented proposals similar to those set out in the IITF White Paper
before WIPO, with a view to amending the Berne Convention and to adopting new
instruments related thereto at the December 1996 WIPO Conference.166   However,
the Diplomatic Conference rejected many of these proposals and adopted a more
socially balanced approach to the protection of copyrighted works digitally trans-
mitted over telecommunications networks.  Whether WIPO member states
Ñin-cluding the United StatesÑwill enact this more balanced approach into their do-mestic laws remains to be seen.  In May 1996, the U.S. negotiators at WIPO also

presented the draft of an international treaty to protect noncopyrightable data-
bases,167 and on August 30, 1996, the chairman of the Committee of Experts
published a WIPO Draft Database Treaty.  The conference postponed immediate

action on this treaty, but at a meeting of the WIPO Governing Body in March 1997,
a new timetable was established for further work.This unnecessarily fast pace has so far allowed little time for public hearingsor for national science groups and other interested parties to organize, analyze the
proposals, and contribute to their shaping.168  If successful, it would convert the
IITF White PaperÕs Òreform proposalsÓ for a 
sui generis law to protect non-
copyrightable compilations of data into international minimum standards of intel-
lectual property protection binding on all signatories to the Berne Convention.169This Òwhiplash effectÓ would then oblige the United States to implement these
same standards in its domestic laws, as a matter of international law, even ifBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS161Congress had not already adopted similar legislation in the interim.170  The haste
with which both the U.S. and the European Union authorities have moved to
implement these measures at the international level171  thus raises still further
questions about the extent to which the public interest has been compromised.The case for moving so far and so fast rests largely on the supposed difficul-ties of enforcing territorially grounded intellectual property rights in cyberspace172and on the fear of Òdetaching information from the physical plane, where prop-erty law of all sorts has always found definition.Ó173  From a legal perspective,
these developments raise daunting problems of conflicts of law, a field that has
never found it easy to accommodate intangible property.174  Yet, it will not do toexaggerate these difficulties while ignoring the harmonizing effects of the TRIPS
Agreement, which requires all countries that belong to the World Trade Organi-
zation to adopt both the universal minimum standards of the Berne Convention
(whether or not they adhere to that convention) and the additional standards
concerning computer programs, compilations, and related subject matter set out
in the TRIPS Agreement itself.175  Regardless of whose law applies, in other
words, digitally transmitted information goods will eventually become subject to
the same international minimum standards of protection in all developed coun-
tries and in most developing countries as matters stand.176To be sure, these standards harbor Ògray areasÓ that are open to different
interpretations, notably with respect to the scope of copyright protection afforded
borderline works, such as computer programs and those databases that otherwise
meet the domestic criteria of eligibility.177  But the developed countries have only
just begun to grapple with these issues, and there is no basis for an empirically
grounded consensus even with regard to computer programs or industrial designs,178let alone databases and other electronic information tools.  As previously demon-

strated, moreover, a solid body of scholarly opinion holds that Òa combination oftechnological restrictions (such as encryption), contractual arrangements and crimi-
nal sanctions (for unauthorized decryption)Ó constitutes overprotection that raises a
far greater risk than the risk posed by underprotection.179  Taking the IITF White
PaperÕs controversial proposals to a premature diplomatic conference without al-lowing time for adversely affected users, especially the scientific and educational
communities, to participate in the discussions thus lacked justification in terms of
sound public policy.CHARTING A WELL-CONSIDERED COURSE IN THE NEW ERAPutting Science into the PictureAt the time of this writing, neither the scientific nor the educational commu-nity has played any part in the relevant deliberations concerning the legal protec-
tion of databases, and they have not been consulted on any official basis.  If

matters proceed without adequate input from researchers and educators, Con-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162BITS OF POWERgress could enact the proposed sui generis database regime, despite the risk that
Òit would allow a limited group of database creators to control the disseminationof informationÓ and that the 
Òresulting restrictions on the transfer of knowledgewould be detrimental to society, as information lies at the core of social advance-
ment.Ó180In most cases the proposed sui generis regime will simply engraft a strong
legal monopoly onto the preexisting natural monopolies that are typical of the
database industry.  As noted in Chapter 4, it is the social costs of these double-

barreled monopolies to the public at large that must actually be taken into ac-
count, along with their overall impact on a scientific community whose leading
role in world technological production is linked in still unexplored ways to the
traditional funding of scientific data by government.Clearly, U.S. policy makers should not incur such risks without evaluating inadvance the possible repercussions that sui generis
 database laws might have on
the nationÕs scientific and technological capabilities and future progress, andwithout taking measures to alleviate them before embarking on such an uncharted
course.  By the same token, the scientific community has a vital stake in the

formulation of new database laws, in order to ensure that legal incentives to
stimulate investment in the production and distribution of data do not end by
impeding the full and open flow of those same data to basic science.The scientific community can ill afford to remain indifferent to these propos-als for database protection, if only because its whole modus operandi has been
based on the principle of full and open exchange of data.  This principle is

indirectly undermined by the pending proposals concerning legal regulation of
the national information infrastructure and directly threatened by the drive to
institute sui generis intellectual property rights in the contents of electronic and
other databases.  As regards the database laws in particular, the foregoing analy-
sis suggests that science and education have two paramount concerns that need to
be pursued in the course of future legislative deliberations:¥Sui generis laws to protect databases should, on the whole, reflect a
proper balance between public and private interests, including the public interest
in free competition, that is, between public goods and private intellectual prop-
erty.¥Such laws should contain measures specifically designed to preserveand promote the scientific and educational enterprise, including the need to
facilitate and encourage the establishment and maintenance of databases essential
to the work of science.Reconciling the Needs of Science with Those of a Competitive MarketThe advent of new proprietary rights where none previously existed willinfluence the collection and distribution policies of all data providers, includingBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS163government-funded providers and other sources that currently follow nonprofitpricing policies.  As funding sources shrink and foreign governments operating

under the European UnionÕs 1996 Directive shift to profit-oriented policies, moreand more data of interest to science will be covered by proprietary rights, and
fewer data will be made available to science on a cost-of-dissemination basis.
The tensions already reflected in the recent OMB circular181 will become more
generalized, even though different disciplines will experience different degrees
of hardship.The experience with Landsat is indicative of transnational problems likely toarise when states adopting different policies invoke their sovereign rights to
buttress their respective positions.  For example, some of the international ground

stations that receive Landsat data reportedly object to the traditional U.S. policy
of making data available at the cost of fulfilling a request.  They want to continue

to charge whatever the market will bear, and they are pressing the United States
to change its policy and laws.  If the cost-recovery approach is not extended to

ground station agreements in other countries, this would leave academics and
other nongovernmental users to pay prices that they simply cannot afford.As discussed in Chapter 4, the adverse effects of Landsat commercializationon the scientific community were easy to document, although the value of lost
research opportunities remains hard to quantify in terms of objective social costs.
In other cases, however, it will prove harder to show the effects on science,
especially if a commercialized database has many private downstream users who
are better able to afford the rates, and there is no powerful upstream user commu-
nityÑakin to the global change research users of Landsat dataÑcapable of voic-ing its distress in terms that cannot be ignored.  In such cases, the high cost of data

may simply inhibit project formulation when there is no realistic possibility of
funding that cost.  Yet, because academic scientists are relatively few in number

and not typically a presence in day-to-day decision making at the policy level,
their lost research opportunities may simply go unreported and unrecorded.182Although such lost research opportunities are difficult to predict or quantify
accurately, the areas likely to be most adversely affected include data-intensive
research in the observational sciences that rely on unique, multiple, or continu-
ously updated data sources.Of course, the law of diminishing returns also applies, and commercial provid-ers may find that no one will access their files if they charge too much.  Before this

point is reached, however, the more likely resultÑas suggested by the LandsatexampleÑis that the provider may determine that the price/volume point on thedemand curve at which the service is expected to be viable can be afforded by only
a few well-financed scientists.  This does not provide general access for those

unable to pay at that level, including both students and scholars with limited grant
funds, not to mention scientists and other potential users in poorer communities.More generally, such an approach ignores the contribution of basic scienceto the ability of U.S. firms to predominate in markets for technology and informa-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164BITS OF POWERtion goods.  Despite a general consensus on the need for sustained levels of
investment in research and development, the proposed database laws could change
the status quoÑwithout anyoneÕs wanting it to happenÑby elevating the price ofthe one raw material to which U.S. researchers have always had ready access.  If
less available scientific information were to translate to fewer applications of
economic importance, the end result would be a loss of U.S. technological com-
petitiveness in an integrated world market.183Preserving the Public-Good Aspects of ScienceÑWhat Is Needed?The negative prospects outlined above do not mean that the interests ofresearch and education are best served by the absence of legal protection for the
contents of databases.  As Chapter 4 suggests, a socially balanced, procompetitive

database regime might indirectly help science to contain costs by bringing market
forces to bear on some of the pressure points.  It would provide a greater stimulus

to third-party investors who might compete with sole-source data generators or
distributors (when the market segment in question can feasibly support multiple
providers), or who might adapt sole-source data sets to applications of particular
interest to science.  While this stimulus might not change the overall market

structure or significantly reduce the formation of natural monopolies, in the short
term at least it could help to trigger countervailing tendencies and thus lead to
lower prices and fewer restrictions on access, particularly if novel, value-added
products become of greater importance to science over time.Conversely, if a socially imbalanced, overly protective database law convertsexisting impediments into insuperable legal barriers to entry, the adverse effects on
scienceÑabsent offsetting legal safeguardsÑwould soon make themselves felt(see Box 5.5).  In this context, the scientific and educational communities
Ñlikevalue-adding users and second comers in general184Ñwould arguably fare bettereither under a simple unfair competition law that prohibits wholesale copying or
under a sui generis regime built on more refined liability principles than under anyregime based on exclusive property rights.A liability model creates no legal barriers to entry in its own right, nor needit significantly strengthen the sole-source data providerÕs market power.  A liabil-
ity regime also can eliminate the Òrefusal-to-dealÓ problem, by addressing the
serious concerns of those who fear the power of sole-source data providers to
restrict access to data on a variety of grounds.  When an automatic license is built

into a modern liability regime, it tends inherently to solve the problem of abuse
without recourse to antitrust law.  For these reasons, the European Commission
Õsinitial preference for a liability regime, rather than an exclusive property right,185merits careful consideration by the U.S. scientific community as a possible re-
sponse to the overall challenge posed by the drive for sui generis database laws.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS165With or without the more procompetitive conceptual framework of a liabilitymodel, a socially balanced database law should preserve and promote the public-
good aspects of science and education.  This goal requires careful crafting of its

technical legal machinery, as well as the inclusion of safeguards that address the
specific needs of the scientific and educational communities.BOX 5.5Possible Consequences of an Overly ProtectionistDatabase RegimeUnder an exclusive property rights model, a database ownerÕs absolute mo-nopoly could disincline him or her to allow scientists access to certain files, espe-
cially if the owner feared that the uses in question could lead to value-added prod-ucts that diminished his or her market power.1 Providers and distributors wouldalso be likely to charge higher prices for all uses, to demand payment for certain
uses that were previously free, and to resist pressures for price discriminationfavoring scientific users.As matters stand, the electronic publishersÕ growing capacity to charge for each
and every use of on-line data (or at least for every documented access to thedatabase) and to track and monitor every user potentially liable for these chargesmeans that it becomes increasingly capable of serving Òas its own collection soci-ety, subject to no consent decrees, no membership controls and no external regu-lation.Ó2 In this milieu, even blanket licenses can be set unrealistically high for
large-scale nonprofit users, such as libraries, universities, and research institu-
tions, and the net impact of the licensing fees will further depend on other contrac-tual conditions that accompany the licenses.  Even when a blanket license fee is
relatively low, for example, if the institution is obliged to purchase many licenses
for different researchers or groups of researchers, the total cost may still becomeprohibitive.  The existing tendencies of some publishers to approach academic
and scientific users one by one and to impose harsh or oppressive terms3 could
only be strengthened by the enactment of a new and powerful intellectual propertyright covering the contents of electronic databases as such.1Here one would expect further tensions stemming from the scientific communityÕs ownefforts to internalize electronic publication of research results at the expense of both commer-
cial publishers and professional societies.  Cf. Paul Ginsparg, note 35 in text.
2Reichman, Electronic Information Tools, note 15 in text, at p. 464.
3See note 3 in text (OTA report); Reichman, 
ÒElectronic Information Tools,
Ó note 15 in text,
at p. 464 (noting that licensing agreements Òmay consequently require libraries to waiveprivilegesÓ under new or existing laws, including copyright law, 
Òand to limit usersÕ access to
[the protected] matter beyond what their own understanding of the . . . [laws] would require.
Aggressive licensing of electronic information tools could thus distort the public service mis-
sion of libraries by making them involuntary collection agents for publishersÓ).  Cf. also
American Geophysical Union v. Texaco, Inc., 60 F. 3d 913 (2d Cir. 1995) (oil companyÕsunauthorized copying of articles from its own libraryÕs technical journals for archival use by itsown research scientists was not fair use under copyright statute where blanket licensing
schemes were available); Patterson and Lindberg, note 21 in text, at pp. 159, 181-90.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166BITS OF POWEREnsuring Legal Safeguards for AccessExclusive control over data, like exclusive control over ideas, raises seriousconcerns, including First Amendment concerns, that are particularly germane to
open scientific inquiry.186  While meeting these concerns does not necessarily
imply that data should become available without charge or proprietary interests,
it does mean the following:¥The law itself should define the parameters of an evolving public domainfrom which investigators can freely extract and use data for certain purposes.¥The law must also guarantee scientific and educational users access tothat domain on reasonable terms and conditions.¥The definition of a protectible database should be narrowed so as toexclude ideas and contents of scientific theories.¥Database owners should never possess the right to preclude access tootherwise publicly available data when sought for purposes of basic scientific
research.The terms of access would then depend in part on the size and scope of any freeuse and fair use zones built into a proper sui generis law for the benefit of
scientific and educational users.187Publishers are likely to oppose such exceptions because they represent a defacto subsidy to educational and scientific users, which in an on-line environment
can no longer be hidden behind the ancillary need to overcome transaction
costs.188  Nevertheless, the case for maintaining such exceptions is even stronger
with regard to the contents of databases than to other objects of intellectual
property protection.  As in other cases, publishers require state intervention in the

marketplace to enforce the fictitious portable fences on which the protection of
intangible literary productions depends.  In this case, however, the objects of

protectionÑdataÑare functionally determined elements or particles of knowl-edge that fall well below the Ògrain sizeÓ threshold of existing intellectual prop-
erty laws.189  While database publishers need not contribute any intellectual
achievement for which a reward is justifiable in terms of social costs, they have
now staked a claim to subject matter that world intellectual property law had left
unprotected as a building block of scientific and technological progress.In seeking an unprecedented level of state intervention, therefore, it seemsonly logical that publishers should exchange a measure of support for the public-
good uses of scientific data for lessened risk aversion and for a measure of
artificial lead time in which to recoup their investments and turn a profit.  This

logic is reinforced by the fact that much, if not most, of the data likely to be
commercialized under the proposed sui generis regime will, at some stage, have
been a product of public-good undertakings funded largely by governments.
Requiring publishers to further the public-good aspects of scientific data hardlyBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS167seems unreasonable in this context, especially in view of the potential for rent-seeking that inheres in a market structure dominated by sole-source providers.At the same time, one cannot push the concept of fair use to the point ofrequiring the private sector to make up for diminished government support of
scientific research in general and of the generation of data in particular.
Policymakers must, indeed, take pains to avoid a worst-of-both-worlds outcome,
in which government support for the production of scientific data declines, while
private investment in the generation, distribution, and application of data lan-
guishes for lack of adequate incentives.  To the extent that private industry

develops electronic information tools specifically to promote scientific investiga-
tion or other educational endeavors, the imposition of a subsidy favoring science
becomes harder to justify and even counterproductive, given that scientific and
educational institutions must pay for the many tools they use.  This said, data

nonetheless constitute a unique kind of tool, and no amount of investment can
justify their greatly diminished availability for scientific inquiry.Appropriate fair use provisions should thus be seen as part of a new culturalbargain that responds to serious concerns about the ability of data publishers to
control access to scientific data as such.  Implementing this bargain will require

careful distinctions between uses that are ÒfreeÓ and those that providers must
permit, but on fair and reasonable terms and conditions.For example, scientists must freely be able to use the data underlying exist-ing scientific theories to verify or challenge those theories and to develop new
ones.  Similarly, researchers should have completely free use of their own notes

and working files in the conduct of their investigations, regardless of whether
these files are embodied in electronic or print media.  By the same token, a

scientist who creates a new database while using another lawfully obtained data-
base covered by a sui generis law, along with other data, should owe nothing but
reasonable use or access charges to the proprietary rightholder if he or she did not
reproduce a substantial component of the protected data in the new database.
Indeed, a sui generis law should never prevent anyone, including scientists, from
reproducing or using an insubstantial part of the contents of a protected database
for virtually any lawful purpose.Ascertaining fair uses that database owners must permit the scientific andeducational communities to make on more favorable terms than those applicable
to ordinary commercial users constitutes a more delicate task.  As discussed

throughout this report, whenever a given database is funded by government, a
bedrock concept of fair use should require that the scientific and educational
communities have access to its contents at no more than the marginal cost of
reproduction and dissemination.190In other words, data generated by public funds should come freighted with abuilt-in, cost-based discount for scientific research and education as a condition
of further commercialization by others.  This principle mainly preserves the

status quo, at least for U.S. scientists, without shifting the costs of generating andBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168BITS OF POWERdistributing raw or processed scientific data onto private publishers.  As long as
enlightened government policy continues to favor substantial funding of the data-
generating processes, this principle would promote science by preserving the
public-good aspects of the data thus collected, without unduly inhibiting private
incentives to invest.  By the same token, it would prevent the private sector from
displacing (or appropriating) the public-good aspects of government-funded data
merely because sui generis legislation had been enacted to stimulate investment
in distribution or value-added applications.  While such a policy may conflict

with the 1996 European Directive, depending on how the European Union mem-
ber states choose to implement the relevant provisions, its adaptation in the
United States could influence other countries, including even some European
Union member states, which might decide to exercise their implementing option
in precisely this way.191Conversely, when the private sector or other nongovernmental entities fundthe generation or distribution of data, a different fair use calculus should come
into play.  Here the problem is that the ability of science to pay the going,

commercial rates is not commensurate with its resources or with the public inter-
est in a strong, basic scientific establishment.  The solution is not to shunt the

problems of science onto publishers, who have their own business risks to man-
age, but to ensure that publishers charge scientific and educational users fair and
reasonable prices that take account of the overriding public interest at stake.Achieving this goal, however, is complicated by the difficulties of weaningsole-source providers from the rent-seekersÕ mentality if market forces them-
selves do not compel more favorable treatment of scientific and educational
users.  The appropriate response is to incorporate legal standards into the data-

base law that can create sufficient leverage for scientific and educational users to
obtain such treatment.  The gentlest and least market-distorting form of leverage,

in turn, is the legal uncertainty with which legislatures can endow the relevant
fair use provisions.  This strategy gives both sides the maximum incentives to

negotiate their own licenses providing for price discrimination, product differen-
tiation,192 and other forms of relief on terms that seek to reconcile the different
interests at stake.Various technical devices, adopted singly or in combination, can be em-ployed to bring about this result.  For example, a general clause governing li-

censes in the database law can expressly provide that all licensing and distribu-
tion agreements effected under such a regime must be made Òon fair andreasonable terms, with due regard for the needs of the scientific and educational
communities, for the public interest in preserving competition, and for the needs
of national economic development.Ó193  Such clauses, which have already been
used in some database transactions,194 would then be construed in the light of
other provisions favoring publishers, so as not unduly to impair the commercial
value of the database or the ownerÕs return on his or her investment.195  This
approach should at least induce publishers to develop favorable subscription ratesBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS169for academic and research institutions rather than insisting on per-use chargesthat may or may not apply in other circumstances.The use of compulsory licensing can also increase the bargaining power ofprivileged users.  As previously indicated, a properly crafted liability regime

protecting investment in databases (which some investigators recommend) could
itself incorporate an automatic license favoring second comers and value-adding
users, which would kick in after an initial period of guaranteed lead time.196  Arefinement of this mechanism could then allow the scientific and educational
communities to trigger a special compulsory license for essential needs in the
event that publishers fail to provide reasonable terms and conditions.197  If Con-
gress ultimately adopts an exclusive rights regime for database owners, rather
than an unfair competition model or a more refined liability model, such a regime
could nonetheless include non-voluntary license provisions to meet the needs of
these communities.  In theory, such a clause permits either side to seek a judicial
decision triggering, or blocking, the compulsory license for privileged uses.  In

practice, a built-in duty to negotiate before seeking such a license,198 coupled
with the uncertainty inherent in the applicable legal standards (and the well-
known limits of judicial capability), should almost invariably lead to an accom-
modation between publishers and the research and educational communities that
would remove the bone of contention.Assessing Long-term EffectsEven if the research and educational communities persuade Congress to taketheir needs into account when fashioning a sui generis database law, their atten-
tion must remain focused on its operational consequences, assuming that the
above-mentioned issues have been resolved.  The introduction of new legal in-

struments, and a shift toward the commercialization of data, may profoundly
change current institutions, especially those bearing on the funding of scientific
research.  The effects of these changes certainly will need to be assessed and

monitored over time.Where necessary, steps must be taken to ensure that new institutions suitedto the maintenance of scientific progress are set in place before existing institu-
tions are undermined or eliminated.  The public funding of basic scientific data

collection and dissemination should remain sufficiently robust to support the
level of technological applications that has enabled U.S. firms to retain a com-
petitive edge in the global marketplace.  In this connection, if conciliatory efforts

fail to dissuade foreign government science agencies from overcharging research-
ers and educators (i.e., charging more than marginal cost) for essential scientific
data, countervailing pricing strategies and other tactics may become unavoidable.
In any event, government agencies, the research and education communities, and
database makers will have to cooperate at the implementation stage, with a viewBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170BITS OF POWERto reconciling the greater role of the private sector with the public-good aspectsof national science policy.From a long-term perspective, the research and education communities mustface up to the fact that new technologies for generating, evaluating, and distributing
data will continue to change many institutions on which basic science has tradition-
ally relied.  While certain to be disruptive, such changes, suitably guided, could

foster and enhance vast new opportunities for the sciences, provided that the scien-
tific community moves to meet the challenges in a timely and sustained fashion.For example, new modes of organizing and distributing the funds needed togenerate data may be devised, while the prospects for internalizing transmission
and publication costs through the use of electronic communications networks
merit careful study.  To the extent that widespread commercialization or privati-

zation of data does result from the adoption of new intellectual property rights
and other factors, it could stimulate the scientific community to organize its own
institutions or mechanisms for the management and dissemination of scientific
data, which could operate outside the commercial arena.  Because the research

and educational communities are both producers and consumers of data, collec-
tive action along these lines could make science itself an increasingly important
player in the market for databases generally, as well as a stabilizing force in
determining the balance between public and private interests.199  How to organize
such large-scale undertakings will require careful thought and study in order to
avoid sacrificing or compromising other goals of scientific endeavor, or under-
mining traditional norms of science emphasizing objective pursuit of knowledge
based on full and open exchange of data.Meanwhile, the adoption of different legal regimes to protect database mak-ers by countries with different agendas and at varying stages of economic devel-
opment could further complicate the full and open flow of scientific data across
international frontiers.  Measures to harmonize the domestic database-protection
laws, or at least their effects on the transnational flow of scientific data, will
therefore require intergovernmental study, as will measures and proposals affect-
ing the regulation of national and global information infrastructures.  Pressures to

integrate these and other international intellectual property standards ever more
deeply into the global trade apparatus will certainly mount as countries move to
implement and expand the TRIPS Agreement and related international conven-
tions within the framework of the World Trade Organization and that of WIPO,
which continues to administer the Paris and Berne conventions.The ensuing tensions and conflicts will make it more necessary than ever todevelop a framework treaty to safeguard the full and open exchange of scientific
data in an increasingly commercialized environment.  The difficulty of regulating

both public and private interests within such a treaty should not be underestimated,
however, while the developing and least-developed countries are likely to play a
more conspicuous role in intellectual property policymaking as time goes on.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS171RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING LEGAL DEVELOPMENTSAFFECTING ACCESS TO DATAThe new proposals supporting an overly protectionist property rights regimefor the contents of databases and for on-line transmissions of data and other
scientific information have reached an advanced stage of legislative consider-
ation at both the national and the international levels.  The committee believes

that these legislative changes do not reflect adequate consideration of the poten-
tial negative impacts on scientific research and education and that they have been
proposed for implementation at an unnecessarily precipitous pace.  The commit-
tee therefore recommends that the Office of Science and Technology Policy,
leaders from the science agencies and professional societies, and all those con-
cerned with sustaining the health of the scientific enterprise should immediately
take the following actions:1.Present to all relevant legislative forums the principle of full and open
exchange of scientific data resulting from publicly funded research, and clarify
the importance of sustaining such exchange to the nationÕs future whenever theseforums consider laws that would apply to exchange of scientific data.2.Demand that national and international legislative processes now in
progress slow to a rational pace, and that the deliberations become more public to
allow the scientific and educational communities to present their views and con-
cerns to lawmakers.3.Advocate the incorporation of equivalents of 
Òfair useÓ as part of any
regulatory structure applying to databases as such, or to on-line storage and
transmission of data and other scientific information.  As a corollary, ensure that
the public-good aspects of scientific data are preserved and promoted in laws and
regulations governing intellectual property on the Internet and in any future
electronic networked environments.4.Work with Congress and the official U.S. representatives to the World
Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization to ensure
that the nationÕs interests in maintaining preeminence in science and technologyare not undermined.5.Pursue these issues not only within the United States, but also interna-
tionally through international scientific organizations and U.S. foreign-policy
channels as they deal with trade and other agreements affecting intellectual prop-
erty protection.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172BITS OF POWERNOTES1.For clarification and further documentation of legal issues discussed in this chapter, see the
article by J.H. Reichman and Pamela Samuelson (1997), ÒIntellectual Property Rights in Data?,ÓVanderbilt Law Review, 50(1):51-166.2.U.S. Constitution, Article I, Section 8, clause 8.
3.See, e.g., Office of Technology Assessment (1986)
, Intellectual Property Rights in an Age ofElectronics and Information, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.,  pp. 59-97;
Anne Wells Branscomb (1994), Who Owns Information?  From Privacy to Public Access,
Basic Books, pp. 1-8.4.See, e.g., Commission of the European Communities (1988), 
ÒGreen Paper on Copyright andthe Challenge of TechnologyÑCopyright Issues Requiring Immediate Action,Ó  June 7 (here-
inafter E.C. Green Paper);  Laurence Kay (1995), 
ÒThe Proposed E.U. Directive for the LegalProtection of Databases:  A Cornerstone of the Information Society?,
Ó Eur. Intell. Prop. Rev.(hereinafter EIPR) 17:583.5.World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (1996) 
ÒBasic Proposal for the SubstantiveProvisions of the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Databases to be Considered by
the Diplomatic ConferenceÓ (Memorandum prepared by the Chairman of the Committee of
Experts), WIPO doc. CRNR/DC/6, Geneva, August 30 (hereinafter WIPO Draft DatabaseTreaty).6.Both international copyright law under the Berne Convention and the domestic laws of most
developed countries require that authors of literary works obtain a Òmoral rightÓ to proper
attribution for their published creations.  See, e.g., Berne Convention, article 6
 bis.
  Neverthe-
less, the U.S. Congress has so far declined to implement this obligation except with regard tovisual or graphic artists (see 17 U.S.C. 106A (1994)), which leaves the problem of attributionlargely to the vagaries of state and federal unfair competition law.7.See, e.g., Frank Gotzen (1987), 
ÒGrands Orientations du Droit dÕAuteur dans les Etats Membresde la C.E.E. en Mati‘re de Banques de Donn”es,Ó Banques de Donn”es et Droit dÕAuteur, pp.85-98 (IRPI ed.); Paul Edward Geller (1991), ÒCopyright in Factual Compilations: U.S. Su-preme Court Decides Feist Case,
Ó Int. Rev. Ind. Prop. Copyright L. (IIC) 22:802; Erbert J.Dommering (1991), ÒAn Introduction to Information Law: Works of Fact at the Crossroads ofFreedom and Protection,Ó Protecting Works of Fact: Copyright, Freedom of Expression, andInformation Law, 1-40 (E.J. Dommering and P. Bernt Hugenholz, eds.).  However, the Nordic
countries constituted an interesting exception by instituting sui generis laws to protectnoncopyrightable compilations at a relatively early period.  See, e.g.,
 Gunnar W.G. Karnell(1991), ÒThe Nordic Catalogue Rule,Ó Protecting Works of Fact
, pp. 67-72.8.See, e.g.,
 J.H. Reichman (1995), ÒCharting the Collapse of the Patent-Copyright Dichotomy:Premises for a Restructured International Intellectual Property System,Ó Cardozo Arts & Enter-tain. L. J., 13:475.9.See, e.g
., Jessica Litman (1990), ÒThe Public Domain,Ó Emory L. J., 39:965, 1015 (ÒGiving anauthor a copyright in . . . a basic building block of her art . . . risks denying that basic buildingblock to all other authors who come into even fleeting contact with the first authorÕs workÓ).10.See Reichman and Samuelson, note 1, at pp. 58-72, 137 (citing authorities).

11.See, e.g
., Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470 (1974); Uniform Trade Secrets Act,
14 ULA ¤1(4) (1985).  See generally J.H. Reichman (1992), 
ÒOverlapping Proprietary Rightsin University-Generated Research Products: The Case of Computer Programs,Ó Columbia-VLAJ. Law & Arts, 17:51, 93-98.12.Legal liability attached only to third parties who engaged in improper means of reverse engi-
neering, such as bribing employees or resorting to industrial espionage.  In such cases, the free-

riding offender was required to compensate the innovator only for the lost profits that wouldhave accrued during the hypothetical period that would have been required to reverse engineerthe product in question by honest means.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS17313.See, e.g
., Paul Goldstein (1996), 
Copyright: Principles, Law and Practice, ¤1.2, 2d ed., Little,Brown; William Kingston (1990), Innovation, Creativity and Law, Klwer Academic Publish-ers, Dordrecht, pp. 83-85; see also Ejan Mackaay (1982),
 Economics of Information and Law
,Klwer-Nijhdt, pp. 115-17 (noting market distortions ensuing from public good problems anduncertainties that would require a higher expected return).14.See, e.g
., 17 U.S.C. ¤202 (1994) (distinguishing ownership of copyrightable work from owner-ship of material support);  J.H. Reichman (1989), 
ÒIntellectual Property in International Trade:Opportunities and Risks of a GATT Connection,Ó Vand. J. TransnatÕl L., 22:747, 800-06.15.See, e.g.,
 Peter A. Jaszi (1996), ÒGoodbye to All ThatÑA Reluctant (and Perhaps Premature)Adieu to a Constitutionally-Grounded Discourse of Public Interest in Copyright Law,Ó Vand. J.TransnatÕl  L., 29:595, 599-600 (stressing Òeconomic and cultural bargain between authors andusers . . . at the heart of U.S. [copyright] law, as reflected in the Patent and Copyright Clause
[of the Constitution], and a parade of Supreme Court precedentsÓ).  See also Robert A. Kreiss
(1995), ÒAccessibility and Commercialization in Copyright Theory,Ó UCLA L. Rev. 43:1, 6-22;J.H. Reichman (1993), ÒElectronic Information ToolsÑThe Outer Edge of World IntellectualProperty Law,Ó Int. Rev. Indus. Prop. Copyright L., 25:446, 461 (stressing that Òthese fictitiousportable fences neutralize essential attributes of property that possession would ordinarily con-ferÓ).16.See 17 U.S.C. 
¤102(a), (b); Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 111 S. Ct.1282 (1991).17.See
, e.g., 17 U.S.C. ¤108 (reproduction by libraries and archives), 109(a) (first-sale doctrine),110(a) (face-to-face teaching activities), 110(b) (broadcasts of nondramatic literary or musicalworks for certain educational purposes), 114 (limiting rights and scope of protection in soundrecordings), 115 (compulsory license for musical works recorded on sound recordings), 117
(archival uses of computer programs), 118 (exemptions for use by noncommercial broadcast-ers), 120 (right to photograph architectural works) (1994).18.17 U.S.C. 
¤107 (1994).19.See, e.g
., 17 U.S.C. ¤107 (1994); Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 114 S. Ct. 1164 (1994);
Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U.S. 539 (1985).
20.See, e.g
., American Geophysical Union v. Texaco, 60 F.3d 913 (2d. Cir. 1995); Sega Enter-
prises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F. 2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992); Pamela Samuelson (1993), 
ÒFairUse for Computer Programs and Other Copyrightable Works in Digital Form: The Implications
of Sony, Galoob, and Sega
,Ó J. Intell. Prop. L., 1:49.21.See, e.g., Paul Goldstein (1994), 
CopyrightÕs HighwayÑFrom Guttenberg to the CelestialJukebox, pp. 129-30 (stating that 
Òthe risk has grown that ÔprivateÕ copies will displace the
retail sales and rentals of the authorized originals from which publishers, record companies,and motion picture producers earn their revenuesÓ).  The extent to which private photocopying
of journals for research purposes without compensation remains a fair use is controversial from
a global perspective.  See, e.g., William R. Cornish (1994), 
ÒCopyright in Scientific Works(Scientific Communications, Computer Software, Data Banks):  An Introduction,
Ó EuropeanResearch StructuresÑChanges and Challenges: The Role and Function of Intellectual Prop-erty Rights, pp. 47-50 (Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, ed.) (stressing that academics 
Òwho are alsoauthors, find their interests . . . and . . .  judgment . . . pulled in two directions on these issues
Óand no settled solution has emerged); Jane C. Ginsburg (1992), ÒReproductions of ProtectedWorks for University Research or Teaching,Ó J. Copyright SocÕy 39:181, 188-89, 192-211
(discussing legal license regimes and collection societies).  But see L. Ray Patterson and Stanley
W. Lindberg (1991), The Nature of Copyright, pp. 191-196 (arguing that private use for non-profit purposes is always allowed).22.See, e.g., Wendy J. Gordon (1982), 
ÒFair Use as Market Failure:  A Structural and Economic
Analysis of the Betamax Case and Its Predecessors,Ó Colum. L. Rev., 82:1600.  For recent
tensions with this theory, compare, e.g., P. Goldstein, note 13, ¤10.1 (evaluating public andBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174BITS OF POWERprivate benefits test of fair use in terms of transaction costs) with Goldstein, Celestial Jukebox,note 21, at pp. 223-24 (Òcelestial jukebox may reduce transaction costsÓ and 
Òperceived needfor safety valve such as fair use,Ó which would lead to a copyright law with 
Òno exemptionsfrom liabilityÓ).  But see Goldstein, 
Celestial Jukebox at p
. 230 (stressing the enduring impor-tance of Òexemptions or compulsory licenses for educational and research usesÓ).23.See, e.g.,
 Feist
, 111 S. Ct. at 1292 (stressing adverse effects on free flow of information byÒcreat[ing] monopol[ies] in public domain materialsÓ); Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises,471 U.S. 539, 555 (1985), stressing First Amendment values in free flow of factual informa-tion; Financial Information, Inc. v. MoodyÕs InvestorÕs Serv., Inc., 808 F. 2d 204, 207 (2d Cir.1986), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 820 (1987) (stressing 
Òrisk [of] putting large areas of factualresearch material off limits and threatening the publicÕs unrestrained access to informationÓ).See also Philip H. Miller (1991), ÒLife After Feist: The First Amendment and the CopyrightStatus of Automated Databases,Ó Fordham L. Rev. 60:507; Michael J. Haungs (1990), 
ÒCopy-right of Factual Compilations: Public Policy and the First Amendment,Ó Colum. J. Law &Social Problems, 23:347, 364; Robert C. Denicola (1981), ÒCopyright in Collections of Facts:A Theory for the Protection of Nonfiction Literary Works,Ó Colum. L. Rev., 81:516, 525.  For
the view that legal protection of facts and data as such is consistent with the First Amendmenton certain conditions, such as the availability of noncommercial fair use and compulsory li-
censes, see, e.g., Jane C. Ginsburg (1992), ÒNo ÔSweatÕ? Copyright and Other Protection ofWorks of Information After Feist v. Rural Telephone
,Ó Colum. L. Rev., 92:338, 384-87.24.See 17 U.S.C. 
¤106(1), (2) (1994); Feist Publications, Inc., v. Rural Telephone Service Co.,111 S. Ct. 1282, 1289-91 (1991); Key Publications, Inc. v. Chinatown Today Publishing Enter-prises, Inc., 945 F 2d 509 (1991);  Kregos v. Associated Press, 937 F. 2d 700 (2d Cir. 1991);Victor Calli Enterprises, Inc. v. Big Red Apple, Inc., 936 F. 2d 671 (2d Cir. 1991); BellSouthAdvertising & Publishing Corp. v. Donnelly Information Publishing, Inc., 999 F. 2d 1436 (11thCir., en banc, 1993), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 943 (1994).  If courts strictly apply 
Feist at boththe eligibility and the scope of protection phases, and thus continue to reject stronger protectionbased on Òsweat-of-the-browÓ investment theories that some jurisdictions had embraced prior
to Feist, the effect is to Òstrip . . . away or sharply reduce . . . the copyright protection affordeda variety of Ôinformation products,Õ from directories and mailing lists to computerized data-
bases.Ó  Ginsburg, 
ÒInformation After Feist,Ó note 23, at p. 339. 
 See also Denicola, note 23(advocating compilerÕs copyright to overcome lack of incentives);  Jane C. Ginsburg (1990),
ÒCreation and Commercial Value: Copyright Protection of Works of Information,Ó Colum. L.Rev., 90:1865  (advocating copyright protection of low-authorship factual works, including
databases, but proposing compulsory license for derivative users of data.  For comparative law,

see especially Alain Strowel (1993), Droit dÕAuteur et CopyrightÑDivergences etConvergences  (Bruglaut, Brussels) and L.G.D.J. (Paris), pp.  29-30, 264-66, 391-474.
25.See, e.g
., CCC Info. Servs. Inc. v. Maclean Hunter Market Reports, Inc., 44 F. 3d 61 (2d Cir.1994); Lipton v. Nature Co
., 71 F 3d 464 (2d Cir. 1995); Warren Publishing, Inc. v. MicrodosData Corp., 52 F. 3d 950 (11th Circ. 1995).26.See, e.g
., Ginsburg, ÒInformation After Feist,Ó note 23, at pp. 367-73; Wendy J. Gordon (1992),ÒOn Owning Information: Intellectual Property and the Restitutionary Impulse,Ó Va. L. Rev.,78:149;  Dennis S. Karjala (1994), 
ÒMisappropriation as a Third Intellectual Property Para-digm,Ó Colum. L. Rev., 94:2594.  But see Leo J. Raskind (1991), 
ÒThe Misappropriation Doc-trine as a Competitive Norm of Intellectual Property Law,Ó U. Minn. L. Rev., 75:875.
27.See, e.g
., Reichman, ÒCollapse of the Patent-Copyright Dichotomy,Ó note 8, at pp. 512-17, 513,n. 176; also, quoting J.H. Reichman (1994), ÒLegal Hybrids Between the Patent and CopyrightParadigms,Ó Colum. L. Rev., 94:2504, n. 401:Factors pulling for over- or underprotection already exist on both sides of the classical line ofdemarcation [between the patent and copyright subsystems]. On the copyright side . . . for example, a
broad derivative work right sometimes overprotects by favoring overlapping claims to incrementalBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS175innovation while restricting access to ideas, methods and processes by indirect means and for a verylong duration . . . Yet, underprotection can result from the inability of copyright-like models to protect
the internal dynamic features of technological innovation, in which idea and expression merge, and
also from the lack of any exclusive right to control end use . . . Similarly, on the industrial property
side . . ., Òoverprotection results from the progressive monopolization of ever smaller aggregates ofinventive activity, which elevate social costs in return for no clearly equilibrated social benefits.  Yet,

the nonobviousness standard [of patent law] and its variants can also induce states of chronic
underprotection by excluding the bulk of the incremental innovations that underlie todayÕs most prom-ising technologies.28.See, e.g
., Debra B. Rosler (1995), ÒThe European UnionÕs Proposed Directive for the LegalProtection of Databases: A New Threat to the Free Flow of Information,Ó High Tech. L. J.,10:105; Paul Durdik (1994), ÒAncient Debate, New Technology: The European CommunityMoves to Protect Computer Databases,Ó Boston Univ. IntÕl L. J., 12:153, n. 1 (citing E.C.sources showing that U.S. and European producers account, respectively, for about 56 percentand 25 percent of Òworld electronic information services output,Ó but that the European share
had been Òonly one-tenth the size of the U.S. marketÓ in 1980.  For the view that U.S. domi-
nance of the private sector stems from its loose copyright regime, which Òmost closely approxi-mates a free market for data compilationsÓ based on superior product development, see Charles
von Simson (1995), ÒFeist or Famine: American Database Copyright as an Economic Model
for the European Union,Ó Brooklyn J. IntÕl L., 20:729.
29.See, e.g
., Rosler, note 28.  For evidence of a similar phenomenon with regard to databases that
serve the legal community, see, e.g., West Publishing Co. v. Mead Data Central, Inc.
, 799 F. 2d1219 (8th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1070 (1987); see also L. Ray Patterson and Craig
Joyce (1989), ÒMonopolizing the Law: The Scope of Copyright Protection for Law Reports andStatutory Compilations,Ó UCLA L. Rev., 36:719.30.See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. 
¤105 (1994) (ÒCopyright protection under this title is not available for anywork of the United States government.Ó  A 
Òwork of the United States governmentÓ is a 
Òworkprepared by an officer or employee of the U.S. government as part of that personÕs officialduties.Ó 17 U.S.C. 
¤101 (1994)).31.Nevertheless, some disputes are likely to be adjudicated, owing to the uncertainties that arise
from the application of overlapping legal regimes to new technologies and to the gaps orambiguities in internal university legislation.  See, e.g., Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss (1987),
ÒThe Creative Employee and the Copyright Act of 1976,Ó U. Chi. L. Rev., 54:590, 597-98, 640-41; Reichman, ÒOverlapping Proprietary Rights,Ó note 11.
32.Leslie A. Kurtz (1996), 
ÒCopyright and the National Information Infrastructure in the UnitedStates,Ó EIPR, 18:120.  See also
 Pamela Samuelson, ÒTechnological Protection for Copy-righted Works,Ó paper presented to the Thrower Symposium, Emory Law School, Feb. 22,
1996 (stating that, although digital technology Òposes a serious challenge for copyright ownersbecause works in digital form are vulnerable to uncontrolled replication and dissemination in
networked environments,Ó it is 
Ònot just part of the problem; it may also be part of the solu-tionÓ).33.Gregory M. Hunsuker (1997), 
ÒThe European Database Directive: Regional Stepping Stone toan International Model?,Ó Fordham Intell. Prop., Media & Entertain. L., forthcoming.34.Hunsuker, note 33. See also
 Pamela Samuelson, ÒMissing Foundations of the Proposed Euro-pean Database Directive,Ó paper presented to the Specialist Meeting on Law, Information
Policy, and Spatial Databases, sponsored by the National Center for Geographic Informationand Analysis, Arizona State University College of Law, Oct. 28-30, 1994  (stressing impor-
tance of add-on or value-added products in the digital environment).35.See, e.g., Paul A. David and Dominique Foray (1995), 
ÒAccessing and Expanding the Scienceand Technology Knowledge Base,Ó Science, Technology, Industry Rev
. 16(3):38-59; and PaulGinsparg (1995), ÒWinners and Losers in the Global Research Village,Ó paper presented to
UNESCO Conference on Electronic Publishing, February 19-23, 1996, Paris; see also, CristianoBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176BITS OF POWERAntonelli (1992), ÒThe Economic Theory of  Information Networks,
Ó in 
The Economics ofInformation Networks (C. Antonelli, ed.), Elsevier Science Publishing Co.
36.See, e.g., David and Foray, note 35;  see also Cristiano Antonelli, note 35, at pp.  5-28.

37.See, e.g., Hunsuker, note 33, at p.
 1 (quoting sources that estimate the value of the globalinformation industry to reach $3 trillion by early in the next century); W. Joseph Melnick(1994), ÒA Comparative Analysis of Proposals for the Legal Protection of Computerized Data-bases: NAFTA vs. the European Communities,Ó Case Western Reserve J. Int
Õl. L., 26:57, 59,n.14 (quoting sources that estimate E.C. database market at $10.2 billion, which amounted toabout 30 percent of the world market in 1994).38.See, e.g., E.C. Green Paper, note 4; National Information Infrastructure Task Force (1995)
,Report of the Working Group on Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastruc-ture (Sept.) (hereinafter U.S. White Paper).  In a larger perspective, however, it has been
argued that the legal problems of electronic databases are assimilable to those of industrialdesigns, computer programs, plant varieties, biogenetically engineered products, and numerousother forms of design-dependent, subpatentable innovation that fall into a widening penumbra
between the increasingly obsolete patent and copyright paradigms.  See, e.g
., Reichman, 
ÒLe-gal Hybrids,Ó note 27 (proposing a third intellectual property paradigm for investors in
subpatentable innovation based on liability principles); Pamela Samuelson, Randall Davis,
Mitchell Kapor, and J.H. Reichman (1994), ÒA Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection ofComputer Programs,Ó Colum. L. Rev., 94:2308 (proposing such a regime for computer pro-grams).39.See, e.g.,
 CCC Intro. Servs. Inc. v. Maclean Hunter Market Reports, Inc.,
 44 F. 3d 61 (2d Cir.
1994) (CCC took Òvirtually the entire compendiumÓ of Maclean
Õs used car valuations andÒeffectively offers to sell its customers MacleanÕs Red Book through CCCÕs databaseÓ); War-ren Publishing, Inc. v. Microdos Data Corp., 52 F 3d 950 (11th Cir. 1995) (statistically,MicrodosÕ work contained from 96 to 99 percent of Warren
Õs data on nationwide cable TVservices).40.See, e.g., Office of Technology Assessment (1992), 
Finding a Balance: Computer Software,Intellectual Property, and the Challenge of Technological Change, U.S. Government PrintingOffice, Washington, D.C., pp. 166-79 (deploring contracts in which software licensors obligedlibraries to abrogate Òrights described in the copyright law,Ó among other practices); OTA
Report, note 3, at p. 163; Cornish, note 21, at p. 50 (despite case for a measure of free reprogra-phy for purposes of academic research, Òacademic institutions are regarded as relatively softtargets by publishing interests [in U.K.], which have looked at them as suitable points forinserting initial wedgesÓ).  See generally
 Reichman, ÒElectronic Information Tools,Ó note 15,at pp. 461-68 (ÒPublic Interest at Odds with the Two-Party DealÓ); Marshall Leaffer (1994),ÒEngineering Competitive Policy and Copyright Misuse,Ó U. Dayton L. Rev., 19:1087, 1094.41.See the introductory discussion in Chapter 3.

42.See, e.g., Samuelson et al., 
ÒManifesto,Ó note 38; see also Joseph Straus and Rainier Moufang(1990), Deposit and Release of Biotechnological Material for the Purpose of Patent Procedure,Nomos Verlags Gesellschaft (discussing biotechnical research and development), and Dan L.
Burk (1991), ÒBiotechnology and Patent Law:  Fitting Innovation to the Procrustean Bed,
ÓRutgers Comp. Tech. L.  J
., 17:1, 33-34.43.See, e.g., John Browning (1996), 
ÒCyber View: Playing Facts and Loose,Ó Scientific American(June): 30-32 (warning about unintended effects of legal restrictions on searching and gather-ing data).44.Charles von Simson (1995), 
ÒFeist or Famine: American Database Copyright as an Economic
Model for the European Union,Ó Brooklyn J. Int. L., 20:729, 768.45.If the second comer independently generates its own data, or combines its inputs with the first
comerÕs data to produce value-adding applications, the former contributes knowledge, capital,and skilled efforts to the data-generating communitiesÕ overall endeavor.  These second com-
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS177ers, who do not merely duplicate or ÒcloneÓ the first comer
Õs product, are hardly free riderseven when they do not contribute directly to the first comerÕs production costs under a licensedroyalty transaction.  See, e.g., Samuelson, 
ÒMissing Foundations,Ó note 34; see generallyReichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at pp. 2521-23, 2535-39.46.See Reichman and Samuelson
, note 1, at pp. 66-70, 124-30.47.In one recent case, for example, a database maker spent about $10 million to compile some
95,000,000 residential and commercial listings from some 3,000 telephone directories.  A
purchaser who paid $200 for a compact disk electronically extracted and recompiled part of thedata and then made his listings available over the Internet.  In 
Pro CD Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 908F. Supp. 640 (W.D. Wis. 1996), the federal district court rejected the plaintiffÕs copyright claimas well as state law claims in contract and unfair competition law (see also Hunsuker, note 33,at pp. 13-14), but was reversed on appeal, in ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F. 3d 1447 (7th Cir.1996).48.Jessica Litman (1992), 
ÒAfter Feist,Ó U. Dayton L. Rev., 17:607, 611 (adding that, 
Ò[i]ndeed, alarge number of on-line database . . . [publishers] availed themselves of those strategies well
before the Feist decision
Ó).49.See Reichman, 
ÒElectronic Information Tools,Ó note 15, at pp. 461-67 (ÒPublic Interest atOdds with the Two-Party DealÓ); Jane C. Ginsburg (1993), ÒCopyright Without Walls?:  Specu-
lations on Literary Property in the Library of  the Future,
Ó Representation, 42 (Spring):53, 60-63.50.See, e.g
., Goldstein, 
Celestial Jukebox, note 21, at pp. 223-24; Jessica Litman (1994), ÒTheExclusive Right to Read,Ó Cardozo Arts & Entertain. L. J., 31:29, 32; Samuelson, ÒTechno-logical Protection,Ó note 32.
51.See note 3 reporting OTA concerns in this regard; Kurtz, note 32.

52.See
 Directive 96/9/E.C. of the European Parliament and of the Council of  March 11, 1996, on
the legal protection of databases, 39 O.J.L.77/20, March 27, 1996 (hereinafter E.C. Directiveon Databases or Final E.C. Directive); see also E.C. Council of Ministers, Common PositionNo. 20/95, adopted 10 July 1995, with a view to adopting Directive 95//E.C. of the EuropeanParliament and of the Council . . . on the legal protection of databases, 95/C288/02, O.J.C.288/
14 (Oct. 10, 1995) (hereinafter E.C. Common Position).53.See H.R. 3531, U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, 104th Cong., 2d Sess., May 23, 1996,
Database Investment and Intellectual Property Antipiracy Act of 1996.54.See WIPO Draft Database Treaty, note 5, article 5 (I) (proposing a truncated version of the
Berne ConventionÕs fair use clauses).55.Cf., e.g., Kreiss, note 15, at
 pp. 33-34; Mark A. Lemley (1995); ÒIntellectual Property andShrink-wrap Licenses,Ó So. Cal. L. Rev., 68:1239-1294; Leaffer, note 40; David A. Rice (1992),ÒPublic Goods, Private Contract and Public Policy: Federal Preemption of Software LicenseProhibitions Against Reverse Engineering,Ó U. Pitt. L. Rev., 53:543.  But see 17 U.S.C.
¤108(1)(4) (1994) (allowing contractual obligations to override specified library privileges);Ginsburg, ÒSpeculations,Ó note 49.
56.See, e.g.,
 Jaszi, note 15, at p. 599 (criticizing replacement of Òcultural bargainÓ theory of
copyright law with new, trade-driven goal, which seeks to Òenhance . . . the wealth and overallfinancial well-being of companies which invest in the production of and distribution of copy-righted worksÓ);  see also
 David Nimmer (1995), ÒThe End of Copyright,Ó Vand. L. Rev., 48:1385.57.Ginsburg, 
ÒSpeculations,Ó note 49, at p. 60.58.See, e.g., Ginsburg, 
ÒSpeculations,Ó note 49, at pp. 60-63 (arguing for freedom of publishers tocondition librariesÕ access to digitally delivered information on compliance with a variety of
restrictions, regardless of principles such as fair use, because information providers need notresort to libraries as conduits for digital information in the future except, perhaps, as Òfull-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178BITS OF POWERservice help-lineÓ).  But see Jane C. Ginsburg (1994), 
ÒSurveying the Borders of Copyright,Ó J.Copyright SocÕy,  41:322: 325-26 (arguing for legal restraints on such contractual conditions).
59.See, e.g., Goldstein, 
Celestial Jukebox, note 21, at p. 230 (ÒExemptions and compulsory li-censes for research and educational uses recognize the transcendent claim these uses have on acopyright system whose founding premise is that a culture can be built only if toilers in thevineyard are free to draw on the works of their predecessorsÓ); Marci A. Hamilton (1996), ÒTheTRIPS Agreement:  Imperialistic, Outdated and Overprotective,
Ó Vand. J. TransnatÕl L., 27:613,623-33 (advocating construction of Òfree-use zone . . . in the online eraÓ); Samuelson, Techno-logical Protection, note 37.  For the view that developing countries should formulate their owndoctrines of misuse to govern information providersÕ contracts,
 see J.H. Reichman (1997),ÒFrom Free Riders to Fair Followers: Global Competition Under the TRIPS Agreement,Ó NYUJ. IntÕl L. Pol. (forthcoming).60.See, e.g., Hamilton, note 59, at pp. 628-29.
61.See, e.g., Goldstein
, Celestial Jukebox, note 21, at p. 230 (stressing need for exemptions andcompulsory licenses favoring Òresearch and educational usesÓ as transcendent claim rooted in
cumulative progress of knowledge).62.As mentioned above, the copyright laws of most developed countries exclude functionally
determined databases and do not protect disparate data even when a given compilation as a
whole happens to satisfy the eligibility requirements of those laws.  This principle was incorpo-
rated into Article 10 of the TRIPS Agreement of 1994, which requires copyright protectionwhen Òthe selection or arrangement of . . . contents constitute intellectual creations,Ó but stipu-
lates that such protection Òshall not extend to the data or material itself.Ó63.See
 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, March 20, 1883, as last revisedat Stockholm, July 14, 1967, 21 U.S.T. 1583, T.I.A.S. No. 6923, 828 U.N.T.S. 305 (hereinafter
Paris Convention); Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Sept. 9,1886, as last revised at Paris, July 24, 1971, S. Treaty doc. 99-27, 99 Cong. 2d Sess. (1986),828 U.N.T.S. 221 (hereinafter Berne Convention).  For the official line of demarcation between
ÒwritingsÓ and 
ÒproductsÓ that underlies these Conventions, and its gradual disintegration un-
der pressure from a proliferating set of hybrid (i.e., sui generis) regimes that deviate from thepatent and copyright models, see, e.g., Reichman, 
ÒCollapse of the Patent-Copyright Di-chotomy,Ó note 8, at pp. 
 480-512; see also Reichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at pp.
 2448-2519.64.While the Commission claims that a key motive is the need to harmonize European Union law,
critics debunk this claim because Article 10 of the TRIPS Agreement partly performed thisfunction, and also because the E.C.Õs database regime, as finally adopted, actually discouragesharmonization on the crucial issue of fair use.  See, e.g., Charles R. McManis (1996) ÒTakingTRIPS on the Information Superhighway: International Intellectual Property Protection andEmerging Computer Technology,Ó  Villanova L. Rev., pp. 207-288.  The predominant objec-
tive, among those stated, is to increase the share of European database producers (includinggovernments) in the world market.  See, e.g
., E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, Recital 11.
65.See, e.g.,
 Commission of the European Communities (1991), 1991 Report on the Impact Pro-gram: Main Events and Developments in the Electronic Information Services Market, COM(93) 156 final; Commission of the European Communities (1990), Working Program of theCommission in the Field of Copyright and Neighboring Rights, COM (90) 584 final;  Rosler,
note 28, at pp. 105, 107, 110-13.  The IMPACT program specifically addressed the goal of
improving the position of the European UnionÕs member countries in the emerging globalmarket for information goods.  Among the strategies it endorsed were proposals to strengthen

intellectual property rights, to protect new technologies, and to stimulate both internationaltrade and European economic development.66.See, e.g
., Rosler, note 28, at pp. 109-10, 133-39.  The Commission stressed the vulnerability ofdatabase publishers to market failure, but devoted little or no published attention to theBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS179countervailing  risk of technologically induced overprotection.  It nonetheless attempted to deal
with this latter problem by means of a compulsory license, but was foiled by the Council ofMinisters at the last moment.67.See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, articles 3-6 (copyright), 7-11 (sui generis right).  Forearlier versions, see Commission of the European Communities (1992), Proposal for a CouncilDirective on the Legal Protection of Databases, COM (92) 24 finalÑSYN 393 (First E.C.Directive on Databases); Commission of the European Communities (1993), Amended Pro-
posal for a Council Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases, COM (93) 464 finalÑSYN 393 (Amended E.C. Directive on Databases); Council of the European Communities,
Common Position, note 52.68.See, e.g.,
 Gunnar Karnell (1991), ÒThe Nordic Catalogue Rule,Ó Protecting Works of Fact, pp.67-72 (E.J. Dommering and P.B. Hugenholtz, eds.), Klwer.  Laws implementing this regime
Òprohibit slavish reproduction, in whole or in part, of Ôcatalogues, tables, and similar compila-tions in which a large number of particulars have been summarizedÕ including databases, for
ten years after first publication . . . [I]ndustrious effort and investment rather than creativity are
the prerequisites.Ó  Reichman, 
ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at pp. 2492-93 (quoting Karnell and
noting predigital ambiguities of this law).69.Reichman, 
ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at p. 2493; see also Jean Hughes and Elizabeth Weightman
(1992), ÒE.C. Database Protection: Fine Tuning the CommissionÕs Proposal,Ó EIPR, 14:146,148 (Directive goes beyond the Nordic rule and protects against reuse of the data compiled).70.See generally
 Common Position, note 52 at pp. 14-29.71.See E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52.
72.See Haungs, note 23; Miller, note 23; and Rosler, note 28, and accompanying text. 
 See alsoGinsburg, ÒInformation After Feist,Ó note 23;  Litman, 
ÒPublic DomainÓ; Melville B. Nimmerand David Nimmer (1996), Nimmer on Copyright, ¤¤1.10[C][2]. 1.10 [D], Matthew Bender.73.See
 First E.C. Directive on Databases, articles 1(1), 2(5);  Commission of the European Com-
munities (1992), Explanatory Memorandum to the Proposal for a Council Directive on theLegal Protection of Databases, COM (92) 24 finalÑSYN 393, at pp. 21-22, 25, 35, 41) (here-inafter First Explanatory Memorandum);  Amended E.C. Directive on Databases, articles 2.2, 6

(all stressing the goal of protecting the compilerÕs industrious effort and investment againstparasitic appropriation by competitors).  A true liability regime does not bestow winner-take-all
rewards in exchange for certain technical achievements.  Rather, a liability regime (such as the

model trade secret law used in the United States) aims primarily to restore and preserve thebases for healthy competition by discouraging certain market-distorting forms of conduct thatprevent innovators from appropriating the fruits of their investment.  As long as innovators

obtain adequate lead time and second comers contribute directly or indirectly to the innovatorsÕcosts of research and development, a liability regime declines to endow these same innovatorswith an absolute right to control the uses of their innovative products or with any legal barriers
to entry by others.  See, e.g., Reichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at pp. 2434-42, 2496, 2504-2558.74.See, e.g., Samuelson, 
ÒMissing Foundations,Ó note 34; Rosler; note 28.
75.Now Preambular Recitals 6-7; First Explanatory Memorandum, note 73.
76.Cf. Uniform Trade Secrets Act 
¤1(4), 14 U.L.A. 438 (1985) (UTSA) (adopted by a majority ofstates); Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition Law ¤¤39-45 (1993); David D. Friedman,William Landes, and Richard Posner (1991), ÒSome Economics of Trade Secret Law,Ó J. Econ.Persp. (Winter), at 61 et seq.; Wendy J. Gordon (1992), ÒOn Owning Information:  IntellectualProperty and the Restitutionary Impulse,Ó Virginia L. Rev., 78:149.  See also 
InternationalNews Service V. Associated Press, 248 U.S. 215 (1918).77.See First E.C. Directive on Databases, note 67, articles 1(1), 2(5), 9(3); Technically, the right
arises with the creation of the database and lapses 10 (now 15) years from the date it was first
lawfully made available to the public.  The provision forbidding unauthorized reuse of the
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180BITS OF POWERcompilerÕs factual contents closed a gap in the Nordic catalogue rules, which case law had notyet resolved.  See notes 68 and 69 and accompanying text.  Already at this first draft stage,
however, the language chosen to implement the CommissionÕs Òunfair competitionÓ approach
was contradicted by other language describing the database makerÕs Òexclusive right to preventunauthorized extraction and reutilizationÓ of contents.  See, e.g., First Explanatory Memoran-
dum, note 73, at p. 53.78.See First E.C. Directive on Databases,
 note 67, articles 8(1), (2); see also Amended E.C.Directive on Databases, note 67, article 11(1), (2).  Of course, if multiple data providers ser-
viced a given market segment, the draft DirectiveÕs procompetitive thrust was satisfied withoutrecourse to a compulsory license.  However, the opportunity to choose among providers seems
to be rare in practice because the bulk of all electronic compilations of data reportedly ema-nates from sole-source providers, and this ÒnicheÓ marketing appears characteristic of both the
private and the public sector.  In all such cases, the compulsory license would lie, and origina-
tors, including public bodies benefiting from a natural monopoly, would be obliged to grantlicenses for commercial reexploitation of their data on fair and nondiscriminatory terms.79.In this respect, the early draft version seems to have anticipated some of the findings concern-
ing the procompetitive characteristics of liability-based intellectual property regimes that legaltheory was investigating at about the same period of time.  See, e.g., Samuelson et al., 
ÒMani-festo,Ó note 38, at p. 2308; Reichman,
 ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at p.
 2432.80.See
 Commission of the European Communities, Amended Proposal for a Council Directive onthe Legal Protection of Databases, COM (93) 464 finalÑSYN 393, at p. 4 (1993) (hereinafterSecond Explanatory Memorandum) (declining to accept E.U. ParliamentÕs request for specialexemptions in favor of education and research).81.See, e.g., the discussion in Chapter 4.

82.See Amended E.C. Directive on Databases,
 note 67; Reichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, atpp. 2494-98 (analyzing and criticizing these proposals).83.See
 E.C. Common Position, note 52; Hunsuker, note 33 (approving this version); von Simson,note 44 (criticizing this version); Reichman and Samuelson, note 1 (criticizing this version).84.See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, articles 7(1) (ÒMember States shall provide for aright for the maker of a database which. . .Ó), 16(1) (requiring Member States Òto comply withthis Directive before 1 January 1998Ó).85.E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 1(2) (broadly defining a database as 
Òa collectionof independent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodical way andindividually accessible by electronic or other meansÓ).86.See text accompanying notes 76 and 77.

87.E.C. Directive on Databases,
 note 52, article 7(1).88.See, id., article 1(1) at 24 (
ÒThis Directive concerns the legal protection of databases in anyformÓ).  Both the First Proposed Directive, note 67, article 1(1), and the Amended E.C. Direc-
tive on Databases of 1993, note 67, article 1(1), covered only electronic databases.  The E.C.
Common Position found this distinction unworkable and could not justify differing levels ofprotection on this basis.  See, e.g., Hunsuker,
 note 33, at p. 6 n. 14 (citing authorities andadding that ÒtodayÕs high speed scanners and optical character recognition software makeelectronic conversion of nonelectronic databases almost as easy as electronic conversion ofelectronic databasesÓ).89.See E.C. Directive on Databases,
 note 52, articles 7(1) (providing initial 15-year term from dateof completion), 7(2) (extending protection for an additional 15 years if the database Òis madeavailable to the public in whatever mannerÓ before expiration of the initial term), 7(3) (allow-
ing 15-year renewals for Ò[a]ny substantial change, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, tothe contents of a database . . .  from the accumulation of successive additions, deletions or
alterations, which . . . result in . . . a substantial new investmentÓ).90.See id
., article 7.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS18191.See E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, articles 3 and 5.
92.See E.C.
 Common Position, note 52, articles 8-9, 16(3).93.Compare
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 7(2)(a) (defining ÒextractionÓ to mean
Òthe permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of the contents of a database toanother medium by any means or in any formÓ) with id., article 5(a).94.Compare id
., articles 7(2)(b) (defining ÒreutilizationÓ to mean 
Òany form of making available tothe public all or a substantial part of the contents of a database by the distribution of copies, byrenting, by on-line or other forms of transmissionÓ) with id., article 5(b), (d), (e).  A database
embodied in a hard copy and sold as such remains subject to the first-sale doctrine even under
the sui generis right, which means that the database maker cannot 
Òcontrol resale of that copy[by the vendee] within the Community.Ó  Id., article 7(2) (b).  Moreover, public lending of such
a copy, say, by a library, Òis not an act of extraction or re-utilization.Ó  Id., article 2.
95.See note 5 and accompanying text (citing 1996 WIPO documents favoring an international
database regime as proposed by the United States and international copyright reforms concern-ing on-line transmissions as proposed by the European Union).96.E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 9(b).
97.See id., articles 9, 9(b).
98.See id., articles 8(2), 9(b).

99.See, e.g., McManis, 
ÒEmerging Computer Technology,Ó note 64, at 256 (stating that 
Ò[a]nyother substantial extraction from an electronic database [besides illustration for teaching  or
scientific research] will be infringing, irrespective of whether the extraction is for a commercial
purpose, such as market research or private investment decisions, or for a wholly non-commer-cial purpose, such as religious canvassing, political polling, genealogical research, or pursuit ofany . . . hobby or avocationÓ). McManis contrasts this provision unfavorably with Òthe excep-tions and limitations that safeguard the public interest in copyright law.Ó  Id., at p. 54, n. 204,
pp. 56-57.100.See, e.g., Hunsuker, note 33 (stressing fact that article 9(b) speaks of extraction for the 
pur-poses of illustration for teaching or scientific research, whereas article 6, concerning copyright-able databases, speaks of Òthe sole purpose of illustration for teaching or scientific researchÓ).101.See note 3 (findings of OTA Report).
102.See generally Reichman, 
Collapse of the Patent-Copyright Dichotomy, note 8, at pp. 488-489(discussing economic implications and contradictions of such paradoxes).103.See E.C.
 Common Position, note 52, article 16(3); E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article16(3).104.Rosler, note 28, at pp. 138, 140 (stressing tendencies of 
Ò[m]onopolists typically [to] chargelarge premiums for their goodsÓ).105.See, e.g
., Rosler, note 28, at pp. 141-43; Reichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at pp. 2496-98.
106.See
 Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co
., 111 S. Ct. 1282 (1991); BonitoBoats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., 489 U.S. 141 (1989).107.See, e.g., Reichman, 
ÒElectronic Information Tools,Ó note 15, at pp. 466-67, 472-75.108.See
 Robert W. Kastenmeier and Michael J. Remington (1985), ÒThe Semiconductor ChipProtection Act of 1984:  A Swamp or Firm Ground?,
Ó Minn. L. Rev., 70:417, 438-42 (stating
that proponents of new intellectual property laws have the burden to Òshow . . . that a meritori-ous public purpose is served by . . . proposed congressional action,Ó and setting out a four-
pronged test of public interest that should be met in each case).109.Simon Chalton (1994), 
ÒThe Amended Database Directive Proposal: A Commentary and Syn-opsis,Ó EIPR,
 16:94, 99 (stressing that national treatment would apply to copyrightable data-
bases, but not to the extraction right).  The reciprocity approach, in a more nuanced form, was
retained in the final directive.  See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 11.110.See 17 U.S.C. 
¤¤902(a)(1)(A)-(C), 913, 914 (1994);  Jay A. Erstling (1989), 
ÒThe Semiconduc-tor Chip Protection Act and Its Impact on the International Protection of Chip Designs,Ó RutgersBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182BITS OF POWERComputer Tech. L. J., 15:303; Charles R. McManis (1988), ÒInternational Protection for Semi-conductor Chip Designs and the Standard of Judicial Review of Presidential ProclamationsIssued Pursuant to the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984,Ó Geo. Wash. J. IntÕl L.Econ., 22:331.
111.Final Act Embodying the Result of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Negotiations, Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, signed at Marrakesh, Morocco, April 5,
1994, Annex 1C, Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPSAgreement), articles 1(2), (3), 2(1), 3(1), 4, 9(1), 39;  McManis, 
ÒEmerging Computer Technol-ogy,Ó note 64, at pp. 253-62; Paul E. Geller (1995), ÒIntellectual Property in the Global Market-place:  Impact of TRIPS Dispute Settlement,
Ó  IntÕl L., 29:99, 110.112.See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 11 and Preamble, Recital 56.113.See, e.g.,
 J.H. Reichman (1995), ÒUniversal Minimum Standards of Intellectual Property Pro-tection Under the TRIPS Component of the WTO Agreement,Ó, IntÕl L., 29:347-51;  Adrian
Otten and Hannu Wager (1996), ÒCompliance with TRIPS: The Emerging World View,Ó Vand.J. TransnatÕl L., 29:391.114.See, e.g.,
 Intellectual Property Committee (USA), Keidanren (Japan), and  UNICE (Western
Europe) (1988), Basic Framework of GATT Provisions on Intellectual Property: Statement ofthe Views of the European, Japanese and United States Business Communities; see also R.Michael Gadbaw (1989), ÒIntellectual Property and International Trade:  Merger or Marriage
of Convenience?,Ó Vand. J. TransnatÕl L., 22:223.115.See, e.g., Hanns Ullrich (1995), 
ÒTRIPS: Adequate Protection, Inadequate Trade, AdequateCompetition Policy,Ó in
 Antitrust:  A New International Trade Remedy
?, Pacific Rim Law &Policy Assoc. at pp. 153, 184-207 (John O. Haley and Hiroshi Iyori, eds.); Ralph Oman (1994),
ÒIntellectual Property After the Uruguay Round,Ó J. Copyright SocÕy, 42:18 (approving thistrend); see generally Reichman, ÒFrom Free Riders to Fair Followers,Ó note 59.116.See, e.g
., Morton David Goldberg (1996), 
ÒThe Digital Agenda in the U.S. and WIPO,Ó paper
presented to the Fourth Annual Conference on International Intellectual Property Law andPolicy, Fordham University School of Law, April 11-12 (hereinafter Fourth Fordham Confer-ence); Paul Waterschoot (Director, DG XV/E, European Commission) (1996), ÒIntellectualProperty and the Global Information InfrastructureÑThe E.U. Perspective,Ó  paper presented
to the Fourth Fordham Conference; see also Shira Perlmutter (Associate Register for Policy
and International Affairs, U.S. Copyright Office) (1996), ÒDevelopments in WIPO: A StatusReport on the New Instrument and Protocol,Ó paper presented to the Fourth Fordham Confer-
ence.  However, the delegations to the Geneva Diplomatic Conference in December 1996
rejected or modified many of these proposals, and a more socially balanced treaty was actually
adopted.  See WIPO Copyright Treaty, WIPO doc. No. CRNR/DC/89, December 20, 1996,
adopted by the Geneva Diplomatic Conference on the same date.117.See 
Committee of Experts on a Possible Protocol to the Berne Convention, Proposals of theEuropean Community and Its Member States, Geneva, May 22-24, 1996, WIPO doc. BCP/CE/VII/1ÑINR/CE/VI/1, May 20, 1996; and U.S. White Paper, note 38.118.See, e.g
., U.S. White Paper, note 38, at pp. 114-24; P. Samuelson, ÒCopyright Grab,Ó Wired4.01:136, 190-91; McManis, note 64, at pp. 68-70 (criticizing this view).119.See, e.g., U.S. White Paper, note 38, at
 pp. 230-34; McManis, note 64, at pp. 271-79.  There are
also privacy reasons behind these measures.  Cf. Branscomb, note 3 (who approves of the

encryption and information management proposals).120.See, e.g., Reichman and Samuelson, note 1; McManis, note 64, at p.
 73.  See also, J.H.
Reichman  (1995), 
ÒThe Know-How Gap in the TRIPS Agreement:  Why Software Fared
Badly, and What Are the Solutions,Ó Hastings Commun. Ent. L. J. (Commun./Ent.), 17:763,
779-84 (citing authorities).121.See, e.g., McManis, note 64, at
 pp. 274-76 (stressing proposal to limit removal of electronicÒshrink-wrap licensesÓ as component of U.S. White Paper
Õs overall efforts Òto reduce . . .application and scope of fair use doctrineÓ).  For judicial and scholarly opposition to such
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS183licenses, see note 55;  see also Charles R. McManis (1993), 
ÒIntellectual Property Protectionand Reverse Engineering of Computer Programs in the United States and European Commu-nity,Ó High Tech. L. J., 8:25, 88-96 (concluding that contracts, or at least shrink-wrap licenses,
that prohibit reverse engineering are preempted by federal intellectual property law); Julie E.Cohen (1995), ÒReverse Engineering and the Rise of Electronic Vigilantism: Intellectual Prop-erty Implications of ÔLock-outÕ Programs,
Ó So. Cal. L. Rev., 68:1091.  But see Raymond T.
Nimmer (Reporter for the Drafting Committee on Uniform Commercial Code, Article 2B (li-censes)), U.C.C. Revision: Information A.S.E. in Contracts (April 15, 1996) (arguing thatproposed Art. 2B of U.C.C. should make such licenses presumptively valid);  Pro-CD, Inc. v.Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447 (7th Cir. 1996) (upholding shrink-wrap license concerning electronic
database).122.McManis, 
ÒEmerging Computer Technology,Ó note 64, at p. 67 (citing authorities); Hamilton,note 59, at pp. 628-29.123.See note 5.
124.See
 Committee of Experts on a Possible Protocol to the Berne Convention, Proposal of theUnited States of America on Sui Generis Protection of Databases, Geneva, May 22-24, 1996,WIPO doc. BCP/CE/VII/2-INR/CE/VI/2, May 20, 1996 (hereinafter U.S. Proposal on Data-bases); see also Mark Powell (1996), ÒThe European UnionÕs Database Directive:  An Interna-
tional Antidote to the Side-Effects of Feist,
Ó paper presented to the Fourth Fordham Confer-ence.  Powell notes that the E.C. Directive will be incorporated into the laws of Norway,
Iceland, and Liechtenstein under existing trade agreements with the E.U.; that Òthe Commis-sion will encourage Central and Eastern European countries to adopt similar legislationÓ in
their Association Agreements; that the E.U.-Turkey Customs Union Decision explicitly obligedTurkey to align its legislation on databases with the Directive; and that its reciprocity clause
Òwill be used by the Commission as a bargaining chipÓ in dealing with third countries.
125.Powell, id.
126.See, e.g
., Powell, note 124, at pp. 2-3 (objecting that Òit is questionable whether an interna-tional instrument should be founded on a legal measure with no proven track record and whichcontains such novel legal concepts . . . especially since . . . [n]either database makers nor users
were satisfied with the compromise reached in the DirectiveÓ); see also Pamela Samuelson(1994), ÒThe N.I.I. Intellectual Property Report,Ó Communications of the ACM, 37:17. (findingit Òpeculiar that the WIPO experts should even consider recommending a treaty on databaseprotection when the idea for such a law is so new and untestedÓ).127.See, e.g., Powell, note 124, at p.
 16 (stating that the Òeconomic case for the creation of a right toprevent extraction and/or re-utilization of non-original contents by users has never been satis-
factorily explainedÓ); see also id., at p. 55 (stressing that an Òinternational treaty, . . . is trickierto modifyÓ than domestic models and suggesting that the Diplomatic Conference should con-
fine itself to a Òset of general principlesÓ for legal protection of databases that would be re-
viewed within a fixed period of time).128.  See, e.g., Jens L. Gaster (Principal Administrator, DG XV-E-4, European Commission) (1996),ÒThe New E.U. Directive Concerning the Legal Protection of Data Bases,Ó  paper presented to
the Fourth Fordham Conference (conceding that Òthe sui generis right was considerablystrengthened during the legislative processÓ and that attacks on the right to extract even insub-
stantial parts of a protected database were barely repelled).129.TRIPS Agreement, note 111, article 71; see also id
., articles 68-69.  While parties to the Berne
Convention remain free to adopt higher copyright standards among themselves (see BerneConvention, note 63, article 20), these arrangements would not become binding on other Berne
members in the absence of a unanimous decision.  See id., article 27(3).  Unless such standardswere incorporated into the TRIPS Agreement, parties to a special arrangement under Berne (orrelated to Berne) would run some risk of having to extend the higher standards to nonsignatory
members of the WTO, under the most-favored-nation clause of the TRIPS Agreement.  See
TRIPS Agreement, note 111, article 4.  While applications of Article 4 remain inherently
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184BITS OF POWERuncertain, and this outcome would depend on the interpretation of various provisions in boththe TRIPS Agreement and prior international agreements (see notes 63 and 111 and accompa-nying text), the goal is clearly to develop Òa model in the search for a global solution regardingthe protection of databases which is presently discussed at WIPO.Ó  Gaster, note 128.
130.See
 TRIPS Agreement, note 111, articles 1(3), 2(2), 3(1), 35-38; J.H. Reichman, ÒUniversalMinimum Standards of Intellectual Property Protection Under the TRIPS Agreement,Ó Int
Õl. L.,29: 374-375.131.See U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, H.R. 3531, 104th Congress, 2d Session, May 23,
1996, sec. 1 (short-titled ÒDatabase Investment and Intellectual Property Antipiracy Act of1996Ó) (hereinafter H.R. 3531).  This bill was introduced by Carlos Moorhead, chairman of the
House Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property, and referred to the Committee on theJudiciary.132.See
 id., sections 2, 3(a).133.See id.,
 sections 2, 3(a), (b), 6.134.U.S. Constitution, Article I, Section 8, clause 8.

135.See, e.g., Reichman and Samuelson, note 1 at pp. 102-09, 132-36.  Because the European
Community has codified a doctrine of ÒthinÓ copyright protection of computer programs, it
expressly subordinated the protection of databases to that policy (see E.C. Directive on Data-bases, note 52, article 2(a)); in contrast, because the U.S. federal courts have resisted a policy ofÒthickÓ or strong copyright protection for computer programs, there is reason to fear that the 
suigeneris database law may be used to overturn these precedents.
136.H.R. 3531,
 note 131, section 4(a)(1).137.This provision is thus consonant with several other key provisions that greatly strengthen the
scope of protection in general.  See infra
 text accompanying notes 138-155.
138.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, article 6(b); notes 89-90 and accompanying text.139.See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 8(1) at p. 26.  Gaster,
 note 128, at pp. 9, 11(indicating that protection of the right to extractÑbut not to reuseÑan insubstantial componentwas an integral part of the compromise that led to otherwise strengthened protection).140.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, section 4(a)(2).141.Id.; E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 7(g).
142.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 4(a)(1), (2), 5(a).143.See id
., section 4(a)(2), 4(b).  This restriction covers markets in which the database owner has a
demonstrable interest or expectation in licensing or otherwise reusing the database, as well asmarkets in which customers might reasonably be expected to become customers for the data-base.144.Id., section 4(b) (4).
145.See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 15 (expressly voiding contractual provisionsto this effect).146.See
 Powell, note 124, at pp. 40-43.  See also U.S. Proposal on Databases, note 124, article 7(2)(ÒNo Contracting Party shall impair the ability to vary by contract the rights and exceptions torights set forth hereinÓ).147.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 4(a) (2), 4(b) (4).148.See
 text accompanying notes  91-92 and Box 5.4;  Reichman and Samuelson, supra  note 1, pp.
103-109.149.See, e.g., H.R. 3531, note 131, section 5(B), which states: 
ÒNothing in this Act shall in any wayrestrict any person from independently collecting, assembling or compiling works, data ormaterials from sources other than a database subject to this Act.Ó150.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 4, 5, 6.151.See
 E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 9(b); see also id., articles 9(a) (allowingextraction for private purposes from nonelectronic databases), and 9(c) (allowing extraction
and reuse for purposes of Òpublic security or an administrative or judicial procedureÓ).Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS185152.See H.R. 3531, note 131, section 5;  U.S. Proposal on Databases, note 124, article 5.  The U.S.
Proposal to WIPO appears less watertight, because it does permit contracting parties, Òin theirdomestic legislation, [to] provide for exceptions to or limitations on the rights,Ó so long as such
exceptions or limitations Òdo not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation . . . and donot unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the rightholder.Ó  Id., article 5.3.  Because
the U.S. Proposal links this exception to the notion of a ÒsubstantialÓ taking for purposes of
infringement and also to the express notion that use of preexisting protected matter is notindependent creation (see id., articles 3.1, 3.2), the drafters clearly aim to forbid any exceptionsthat permit extraction or use of a substantial part of the database for any purpose.  At the same

time, the U.S. Proposal to WIPO is more amenable to local variants that expand upon uses ofinsubstantial components than is H.R. 3531, and to this extent it moves further towards the E.C.Directive.153.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, section 3(c), which provides: ÒExcept for a database made by agovernmental entity, any database otherwise subject to this Act, is not excluded herefrombecause its contents have been obtained from a governmental entity.Ó154.See H.R. 3531, note 131.
155.See Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 
ÒImplementing theInformation Dissemination Provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995,Ó Memoran-
dum by Alice M. Rivlin, September 22, 1995 (cautioning agencies that use the services ofprivate contractors not to impose, or permit the intermediary to impose, restrictions that inter-fere with the agenciesÕ own dissemination responsibilities;  and reiterating 
Òthe basic standardthat agencies shall not charge use fees for government information which exceed the cost ofdisseminationÓ).156.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 4, 5(a)(b); text accompanying notes 140-147 (stressing built-in restrictions on claiming use of an insubstantial part in practice).157.Cf. E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 16(3) (requiring E.C. Commission to report, at
three-year intervals, concerning these issues and the need to establish Ònon-voluntary licensingarrangementsÓ).158. See, e.g., H.R. 3531, note 131, section 10 (ÒCircumvention of Database Protection SystemsÓ);U.S. Proposal on Databases, note 124, article 8 (Prohibition of ProtectionÑDefeating De-vices).159.See, e.g
., H.R. 3531, note 131, section 11 (
ÒIntegrity of Database Management InformationÓ).160.See, e.g.,
 Branscomb, note 3, at pp. 175-77.161.See
 text accompanying note 15.162.See H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 10, 11.

163.See further 
infra text accompanying notes 137-138.164.See
 H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 8, 13.165.See David and Foray, note 35.

166.See Perlmutter, note 116; Morton David Goldberg (1996), 
ÒThe Digital Agenda in the U.S. andWIPO,Ó paper presented to the Fourth Fordham Conference.
167.See note 124.

168.Cf., e.g., Dirk J.G. Visser (1996), 
ÒCopyright in CyberspaceÑNational Dutch Report,Ó paperpresented to the International Association for Literary and Artistic Property (ALAI) StudyDays, Amsterdam, June 4-8, at p. 12, quoting the Dutch Federation of Organizations in theLibrary, Information and Documentation FieldsÕ (FOBID) recent complaint to the Minister of
Justice:To its unpleasant surprise FOBID has found that in the [E.C.] Green Paper [see note 4] little or noattention is paid to the statutory limitations on copyright, such as library privileges and rules on educa-
tional, scientific and private use.  Many existing limitations are technology dependent.  It has to be

examined whether and to what extent these limitations should be maintained or adapted in the  digital

environment.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186BITS OF POWERTo this and similar complaints, VisserÕs report makes the following reply:[M]any limitations are the result of successful Òlobbying.Ó  Intermediaries and users applying for
specific limitations must realize that right owners, who will oppose any limitation as a matter of
principle, are generally very well represented at the (national and international) legislative level.  Thus,

the extent to which copyright limitations will be preserved or extended in the digital environment will
eventually be determined by the ability of intermediaries and users to have their voice heard on the
political level.Visser, at p. 13 (quoting P.B. Hugenholtz and D.J.G. Visser (1995), Copyright Problems ofElectronic Document Delivery:  A Comparative Analysis
, Report to the Commission of theEuropean Communities (DG XIII), Brussels/Luxembourg, p. 62.)  See also Robert J. Hart,ÒIntellectual Property and the Global Information InfrastructureÑThe Perspective in Japan,Australia, and Canada,Ó paper  presented to Fordham
Õs Fourth Conference (stressing that onlyAustraliaÕs proposals concerning regulation of national information infrastructures have so farreflected concerns for Òfair useÓ and related exceptions).
169.See Berne Convention, note 63, article 20 (authorizing member states 
Òto enter into specialagreements among themselves . . . [that] grant to authors more extensive rights than those
granted by the ConventionÓ).170.The next step would be to use the Council for TRIPS and relevant provisions of the TRIPS
Agreement as a springboard for binding non-Berne countries, and especially developing coun-
tries, to the same standards.  See, e.g., J.H. Reichman (1995), 
ÒUniversal Minimum Standards,Ónote 130, at pp. 345, 383-85; J.H. Reichman, 
ÒFrom Free Riders to Fair Followers,Ó note 59(urging developing countries to resist these pressures).171.See, e.g
., E.C. Commission, Green Paper on Copyright and Related Rights in the InformationSociety (July 19, 1995);  Paul Waterschoot, 
ÒAn Overview of Recent Developments in Intellec-tual Property in the European Union,Ó paper presented to Fourth Fordham Conference, note
116.172.See, e.g., McManis,
 note 64, at p. 211.173.John Perry Barlow (1994), 
ÒThe Economy of Ideas:  A Framework for Rethinking Patents and
Copyrights in the Digital Age (Everything You Know About Intellectual Property is Wrong),ÓWired 2.03, at p. 84 (March).174.See, e.g., Paul Edward Geller (1996), 
ÒConflicts of Law in Cyberspace: Rethinking Interna-tional Copyright in a Digitally Networked World,Ó Colum.-VLA J. L., 20:571;  I. Trotter Hardy(1994), ÒThe Proper Legal Regime for ÔCyberspace,ÕÓ U. Pitt. L. Rev., 55:993; Jane C. Ginsburg
(1995) ÒGlobal Use/Territorial Rights: Private International Law Questions of the Global Infor-mation Infrastructure,Ó J. Copyright Soc. USA, 42:318.175.See, e.g.,
 Reichman, ÒUniversal Minimum Standards,Ó note 130, at pp. 347-51, 365-73.176.For the possibility that some developing countries might postpone the obligation to implement
these standards beyond the 11-year transitional period specified by the TRIPS Agreement, ongrounds of hardship, see Reichman, ÒUniversal Minimum Standards,Ó at p.
 353, note 130.177.See, e.g., Reichman, 
ÒFrom Free Riders to Fair Followers,Ó note 59 (arguing that if developingcountries interpret Ògrey areasÓ of TRIPS Agreement in a procompetitive manner, it could
benefit consumers, users, and second comers everywhere).178.See, e.g., Reichman, 
ÒKnow-How Gap in TRIPS,Ó note 120, at pp. 779-84 (uncertain scope ofcopyright protection for computer programs); Reichman, ÒLegal Hybrids,Ó note 27, at pp.
2459-64, 2488-90 (uncertain status of industrial designs under diverse regimes, including copy-
right law).179.McManis, 
ÒEmerging Computer Technology,Ó note 64, at p. 284; see also Kurtz, note 32, at pp.120, 121, 124 (stressing risk that a chronic state of overprotection could Òchoke off opportuni-ties for academic research and educational uses of intellectual propertyÓ).180.Rosler, note 28, at pp. 141-42.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS187181.The OMB circular 
supra, note 155, suggests that pressures to privatize the distribution of
government-funded data had already become a problem before the advent of the proposeddatabase law in the United States.182.See also Kurtz, note 32, at p. 121 (stating that overprotective legal monopolies 
Òcan . . . be asstifling to creation as underprotection . . . [and they] can choke off opportunities for academicresearch and educational uses of intellectual propertyÓ).  Even though the sole-source provider
may not wish to price itself out of the market, this will be cold comfort to Òthose who cannotafford to pay, and [could thus] lead to a society of information haves and have nots.Ó183.See David and Foray, note 35.

184.See Reichman and Samuelson, note 1, at pp. 113-30, 137-63.
185.See
 text accompanying notes 73-74.186.See, e.g., Ginsburg, 
ÒInformation After Feist,Ó note 23, at pp. 384-387.
187.The ambivalence of the final E.C. Directive in this regard is explained in part by the fact that no
serious fair-use provisions had previously been developed in the presence of the compulsorylicense that the Council of Ministers deleted at the last moment, and in part by the growing
disinclination of both the European UnionÕs and the United StatesÕ intellectual property au-
thorities to recognize fair use in the digital environment.188.Goldstein, 
Celestial Jukebox, note 21, at pp. 220-22. Gordon, ÒFair Use as Market Failure,Ónote 22.189.Samuelson et al
., ÒManifesto,Ó note 38, at pp. 2385-86 (discussing limits of legal protection forsingle features of computer programs).190.See, e.g., OMB Circular A-130, U.S. Government Printing Office.  For the problem of leakage
as a limit on price discrimination, see Chapter 4.191.See E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, article 6(2).

192.For example, 
ÒNASA and Orbital Sciences . . . reached an agreement regarding the Sea WiFSmission for ocean color data,Ó a private endeavor 
Òfor which NASA provided upfront moneyfor a data purchase . . . [so that] the companies . . . [could] get financial backing.Ó  Under this
agreement, Òthe company had exclusive rights to exploit the data for a number of days, afterwhich the data went to NASA for scientific purposes.Ó  Letter from  Joanne  Gabrynowicz, July
25, 1996.  Reportedly, this agreement was possible owing to the perishability of ocean color
data for commercial purposes.  However, for some scientific disciplines, which depend on real-
time observations, delay as a form of product differentiation is not feasible.  This, in turn,

suggests the importance of legal measures that permit providers and users to adjust the conceptof fair use (or fair and reasonable terms) to the needs of different categories of users.193.See, e.g
., Reichman and Samuelson, note 1, at pp. 158-61.  For the general importance of such
a clause in the post-TRIPS environment, especially with regard to transfer of technology agree-ments, see Reichman, ÒFrom Free Riders to Fair Followers,Ó note 59.
194.For example, licenses 
Òissued pursuant to federal law for private remote sensing systems re-quire that system operators make their commercially obsolete data available to the NationalData Archive on Ôreasonable terms and conditions.Õ  The government does not require that they
[be] give[n]. . . the data, nor does it set the criteria by which the decision is made.  But if, and

when, a company decides to purge data, it triggers the requirement, [which] . . . amounts to thegovernment having the right of first refusal.Ó  Letter from Joanne Gabrynowicz, July 25, 1996.
195.See, e.g., E.C. Directive on Databases, note 52, articles 7(5), 8(2) (forbidding lawful user of
database to perform acts that Òconflict with normal exploitationÓ or that 
Òunreasonably preju-dice [the makerÕs] legitimate interestsÓ;  see also H.R. 3531, note 131, sections 4(a), (b), 5.196.See Reichman and Samuelson, note 1, at pp. 145-51.

197. Goldstein, 
Celestial Jukebox, quoted note 21; see also Ginsburg, ÒInformation After Feist,
Ó note
23, at pp. 386-87 (deeming compulsory licenses indispensable under a noncopyright protectionscheme).Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188BITS OF POWER198.Cf. TRIPS Agreement, note 111, article 31(b) (allowing right of states to impose compulsory
licenses on foreign patentees only if, prior to the grant, Òthe proposed user has made efforts toobtain authorization from the right holder on reasonable commercial terms and conditionsÓ).199.See, e.g., Hunsuker, note 33.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TREND TOWARD STRENGTHENED INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS1891895APPENDIXESBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A191191APPENDIXAAbbreviations and AcronymsADDSAfrican Data Dissemination Service
ADSAstrophysics Data System

ASCIIAmerican Standard Code for Information Interchange

ATMasynchronous transfer mode

AURAAssociation of Universities for Research in Astronomy

AVHRRAdvanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
BASISBattelle Automatic Search Information System

CDCCenters for Disease Control and Prevention
CDFCollider Detector at Fermilab

CDIACCarbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center

CD-ROMCompact Disk-Read Only Memory

CECCommission of the European Communities

CEOSCommittee on Earth Observation Satellites

CGIARConsultative Group on International Agricultural Research

CIESINConsortium for International Earth Sciences Information
NetworkCINDASCenter for Information and Numerical Data Analysis and
SynthesisCOBIOTECHCommittee for Biotechnology (ICSU)

CODATACommittee on Data for Science and Technology (ICSU)

COSTEDCommittee on Science and Technology in Developing
CountriesBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192BITS OF POWERDISdata indexing system; data and information system
DMCData Management Center (IRIS)

DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid

DOCDepartment of Commerce

DODDepartment of Defense

DOEDepartment of Energy

DOIDepartment of the Interior

DVDdigital versatile disk
ENDF/BEvaluated Nuclear Data File/B
ENSDFEvaluated Nuclear Structure Data File

EOSEarth Observing System

EOSATEarth Observation Satellite Company

EOSDISEarth Observing System Data and Information System

EPAEnvironmental Protection Agency

EROSEarth Resources Observation Systems

ESAEuropean Space Agency
FAMEFatty Acid Methyl Ester
FAOFood and Agriculture Organization

FDSNFederation of Digital Seismic Networks

FITSFlexible image transport system

FTPfile transfer protocol
GISGeographic Information System
GMTGreenwich mean time
HD-ROMhigh density-read only memory
HEPhigh-energy physics

HIPPIhigh-performance parallel interface

HSTHubble Space Telescope

HTMLHyperText Mark-up Language

HTTPHyperText Transfer Protocol
IAEAInternational Atomic Energy Agency
ICSUInternational Council of Scientific Unions

IEEEInstitute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers

IETFInternet Engineering Task Force

IFSInternational Foundation for Science

IGBPInternational Geosphere-Biosphere Programme

IITFInformation Infrastructure Task Force

IMPACTInformation Market Policy Action Program

IPngInternet Protocol next generation
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A193IPRintellectual property right
IRAFImage Reduction and Analysis Facility

IREXInternational Research and Exchange Board

IRISIncorporated Research Institutions for Seismology

ISDNintegrated services digital network

ISOInternational Organization for Standardization
LANlocal area network

MBonemulticast broadcast backbone network
Mbpsmegabits per second

MEMSmicro-electromechanical systems

MIACMetals Information Analysis Center

MSSmultispectral scanner
NASNational Academy of Sciences
NASANational Aeronautics and Space Administration

NCBINational Center for Biotechnology Information

NCDCNational Climatic Data Center

NGDCNational Geophysical Data Center

NGOnongovernmental organization

NIHNational Institutes of Health

NIInational information infrastructure

NISTNational Institute of Standards and Technology

NLMNational Library of Medicine

NNDCNational Nuclear Data Center

NOAANational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

NODCNational Oceanographic Data Center

NRCNational Research Council

NSFNational Science Foundation

NUDATNuclear database (part of ENSDF)
OASOrganization of American States
OECDOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

OMBOffice of Management and Budget

OTAOffice of Technology Assessment
PCpersonal computer
PDFPostScript Data File

POSIXPortable Operating System Interface for Computer Envi-
ronments (an IEEE standard)POTSÒplain oldÓ telephone service

PTOPatent and Trademark Office
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194BITS OF POWERPTTPost, Telephone, and Telegraph ministry
RNAribonucleic acid

SGMLStandard Generalized Mark-up Language
SIMBADset of identifications, measurements, and bibliography for
astronomical dataSMARTSystem for the Mechanical Analysis and Retrieval of Text

SMTPSimple Message Transfer Protocol

SNMPSimple Network Management Protocol

SOTERSoils and Terrain Digital Database

SPECINFOa database from Chemical Concepts GmbH containing
digitized nuclear magnetic resonance data and infrared
spectra for chemical compoundsSTAIRSStorage and Information Retrieval System

ST-ECFSpace Telescope European Coordinating Facility

STNScience and Technology Network International

STScISpace Telescope Science Institute
TCP/IPTransmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
TMThematic Mapper

TRIPSTrade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Agreement onTWASThird World Academy of Sciences
UCUniversity of California
UNCEDUnited Nations Commission on Economic Development

UNCTADUnited Nations Commission on Trade and Development

UNDPUnited Nations Development Programme

UNEPUnited Nations Environment Programme

UNESCOUnited Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Orga-
nizationUNIDOUnited Nations Industrial Development Organization

URLuniform resource locator

URNuniform resource name

USAIDUnited States Agency for International Development

USGSUnited States Geological Survey

USNC-CODATAUnited States National Committee for CODATA
VITAVolunteers in Technical Assistance
VHSvideo home system
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A195WDCWorld Data Center
WHOWorld Health Organization

WIPOWorld Intellectual Property Organization

WMOWorld Meteorological Organization

WTOWorld Trade Organization

WWWWorld Wide Web
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196BITS OF POWER196APPENDIXBGlossaryAccess.The process of obtaining data from a storage device or system.Analog data.Data in the form of continuously variable physical quantities. [C]Animation.The use of computer graphics (or sometimes cinematography) tosynthesize drawings or other objects so as to depict motion.Archival database.A database containing data values and other informationretained over a period of time and represented as an accurate reflection of
the contents at a specified time. [C]Archive.An organized and managed collection of information (in any form)that is protected to ensure its integrity as an authoritative source for the
information stored in it.Artificial intelligence.The capability of a device to perform functions that arenormally associated with human intelligence, such as reasoning, learning,
and self-improvement. [C]Asynchronous transfer mode.The transmission of information in irregularsections, with the time interval of each transmission varying and each sec-
tion being identified by a start and stop signal. [C]Authentication.The process by which a prospective computer userÕs identityis verified by a card, token, or biometric device before system access is
allowed. [C]NOTE: The sources of the definitions appearing in this glossary are indicated by the symbols inboldface square brackets.  These sources are spelled out in detail below.  Where no source is shown,

the definition was crafted explicitly for this glossary by the committee.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B197Backbone.(1) A set of nodes and their interconnecting links providing the pri-mary data path across a network . . . . A backbone may be configured as a bus
or as a ring; (2) in a wide area network, a high-speed link to which nodes or
data switching exchanges are connected. [IBM]Bookmark method.Refers to a system designed to leave a marker in an applica-tion or presentation to which the system will return when the program is next
executed.Bridge.A functional unit that interconnects two local area networks that use thesame logical link control protocol but may use different access control proto-
cols. [IBM]Broadband transmission.
In communications, pertaining to transmission facili-ties whose bandwidth is greater than that available on voice grade circuits and
therefore capable of high-speed data transmission. [L&S]Browser.A program used to scan and search electronic files.Bulletin board.A set of files, stored on a computer, that may be accessed by anyuser with a terminal and that is controlled by a systems operator, who orga-
nizes the files into topical areas.  Files are uploaded and downloaded by users,

and most bulletin boards allow users to exchange electronic mail.  Computer

suppliers often maintain a bulletin board to allow users to have access to
information system updates and to report on problems encountered. [D]Cache.(1) A special-purpose buffer storage, smaller and faster than main stor-age, used to hold a copy of instructions and data obtained from main storage
and likely to be needed next by the processor; (2) a buffer storage that contains
frequently accessed instructions and data; it is used to reduce access time; (3)
an optional part of the directory database in network nodes where frequently
used directory information may be stored to speed directory searches. [IBM]Client/server.A network system designed to share substantial resources thatcannot be provided on every userÕs machine.  The requesting program (client)
sends a request to a program at another site (server) and awaits a response.Compilation.(1) With respect to computer programs, the result of the imple-mentation of a compiler program used to make a high-language program
operable in a computer; (2) the result of aggregating several documents or
files. [C]Cyberspace.The invisible, intangible world of electronic information and pro-cesses stored at multiple interconnected sites, with controlled access and mani-
fold possibilities for interaction.Data.Scientific or technical measurements, values calculated therefrom, andobservations or facts that can be represented by numbers, tables, graphs,
models, text, or symbols and that are used as a basis for reasoning or further
calculation.[C]Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198BITS OF POWERData collection.The process of identifying and accumulating data and/or datasets pertaining to a common subject, application, or theme. [C]Data exchange.(1) The transfer of data between or among more than one com-puter program or system; (2) for people or organizations,  the sharing of data

between or among people and/or organizations.Data integrity.The property/quality of a collection of data being complete, con-sistent, and accurate. [C]Data management/data administration.(1) The function of controlling the
acquisition, analysis, storage, retrieval, and distribution of data; (2) in an
operating system, the programs that provide access to data, perform or moni-
tor organization and storage of data, and control input/output devices. [C]Data processing.The systematic performance of operations on data, such ashandling, merging, sorting, and computing. [C]Data transfer.Transmission, copying, or movement of digitized data from oneplace to another, such as from database to database or computer to computer.
[C].Data validation.A process used to determine whether data are accurate, com-plete, and/or reasonable. [C]Database (also data set).A collection of interrelated data, often with controlledredundancy, organized according to a schema to serve one or more applica-
tions.  The data are stored so that they can often be used by different programs

with little or no restructuring or reorganization of the data.  A systematic

protocol is used to add new data or modify and retrieve existing data. [C]Database management.The activity associated with organizing, storing, andproviding access to a computerized database.  It usually includes responsibil-
ity for ensuring the integrity of the database. [C]DECnet.A family of software products supporting the general interconnectionof computer systems of Digital Equipment Corporation; also used to refer to a
network that uses this software.Decryption.The process that reverses encryption, turning a file into plain text.Derogation.An act partly repealing something, or lessening it in value, force,authority, rank, honor, or the like.Desktop publishing.The local production of high-quality, camera-ready copyby an individual or individuals by means of sophisticated word-processing,
graphics, and other software packages and laser printers.Digital signature.A means by which the recipient of a message can validate thatit came from the person who claims to have sent it.  A sender can create a

signature for a message and encrypt it with his or her private key.  The

enciphered signature can be decrypted only by the senderÕs correspondingpublic key known to the recipient.  A signature encrypted by any other private

key, corresponding to another individual or source, cannot be decrypted by
the same public key.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B199Electronic mail (also e-mail).A method of sending messages from a user on onecomputer to the computer of another user.  In its simplest form, electronic

mail on a local area network operates by storing all mail messages on files on
one machine designated as the post office.  Mail does not move around; users

access the post office when they want to ÒcollectÓ their mail and read it.  On
larger systems, post offices are interconnected and can exchange mail, so that
users on different LANs can also communicate. [IBM]Electronic publishing.(1) Submission of text, graphics, and images in electronicform to a publisher who will work directly on these files with various com-
puter-assisted techniques to ready the material for publication; (2) submission
of articles, data tables, graphs, etc., to an electronic network where they may
be browsed, annotated, critiqued, or downloaded.Encryption.A process that transforms data/information, using a key or keyedprocess, so that only the recipient who has the same key or appropriate keyed
process can read it.  Traditional encryption uses secret keys that must be

exchanged separately among senders and recipients.  The same key used for

encryption of a message is used for decryption.  See also 
public-key encryp-tion.E-print archive.A collective file of full-text electronic journals, available on theInternet, selections from which can be readily downloaded by individual sci-
entists.Evaluated data.Data that have been subjected to evaluation and can be regardedas scientifically correct within the limits specified.Evaluation.The process of establishing the accuracy and integrity of measureddata.  Evaluation involves examination and appraisal of the data presented,

assessment of experimental techniques and associated errors, consistency
checks for allowed values and units, comparison with other experimental or
theoretical values, reanalysis and recalculation of derived quantities as re-
quired, selection of best values, and assignment of probable error or reliabil-
ity. [C]Experimental science.One founded on tests, acts, or operations carried out un-der controlled conditions and intended to discover something unknown or to
test a principle or hypothesis.Extraction.The permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of thecontents of a database to another medium by any means or in any form. [EC]Full and open exchange of data.Occurs when data and information are madeavailable with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis,
for no more than the cost of reproduction and distribution.Functional dependence.In databases, an indication of the interrelationships ofattributes in a relation.  Attribute A of a relation R is functionally dependent

on attribute B of relation R if, at every instant of time, each value of B has
no more than one value of A associated with it. [L&S]
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200BITS OF POWERGigabyte.109 bytes, or 8 
 10
9 bits.
Home page.A file on the Internet that contains information provided by thesponsor of the home page and links to other files (or processes) of the sponsor
or to other locations on the Internet.Hyperlink.The text, number, symbol, or code providing linkage to related itemsin an electronic file or a network of electronic files.Hypermedia.A system of presenting information in discrete units, or nodes, thatare connected by links.  The information may be presented using a variety of

media such as text, graphics, audio, video, animation, image, or executable
documentation.  
[IBM]Hypertext.Text coded with internal cross-references allowing users to link toother related material posted on the network. [C]Image.A visually interpretable representation of objects, text, or graphics asdisplayed, plotted, or printed, that is not semantically coded.Information.Data that have become meaningful as a result of collection, pro-cessing, organization, and interpretation, in light of some hypothesis.Informatics (especially in continental Europe).The study of the quantitativeaspects of information in any form, including patterns of language use, the
production, dissemination, and use of recorded information, and the quantita-
tive aspects of science as a discipline or economic activity. [E]Interactive information system.In computing, a system allowing continuousdialog or two-way communication between a user and the computer. [L&S]Internet.A worldwide network of semiautonomous networks that share a com-mon protocol for internetwork communications and a common form of nam-
ing of user and server nodes.Intranet.A dedicated computer network (either a local-or wide-area network)
within a corporation or other private institution intended to serve its own
needs for data exchange, electronic mail, bulletin boards, etc. with reliability,
performance, and security beyond that provided by the public Internet.ÒKnowbot.Ó
An information robot, a sophisticated browser program for scan-ning networks of files and employing more elaborate detection schemes than
simple Boolean filters.Knowledge.An organized body of information that represents a description andunderstanding of concepts, properties, and relationships as viewed by an au-
thoritative community capable of using it.LaTeX, TeX.
Proprietary word-processing programs especially designed for
technical writing.Link.A physical or logical connection between two data items or records.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B201List server.A mechanism that provides a flow of ÒissuedÓ information to a
routing list maintained by the system.Megabyte.106 bytes, or 8  10
6 bits.
Metadata.Data about data; consists of descriptors of data in a database to pro-vide systematic information for users, application programs, and database
management software.  Metadata may be manipulated and searched and may

themselves be organized in a database. [C]Mirror site.A proxy server acting as a cache containing duplicated data from acentral database so as to facilitate more economic and reliable access by local
users.MooreÕs Law.Computer power (speed) will double every 18 months, for an
effective reduction in price by half.Multicasting.  The transmission of data from one place to many specific ones, as
opposed to broadcasting (which transmits everywhere within a range).  An

example is the transmission of sound and video over the Internet. [D]Multimedia.Any system that combines computer sound and video; may incor-porate an interactive facility.Natural sciences.Branches of science such as biology, physics, and chemistry
that deal with objectively measurable objects or processes observable in na-
ture, as distinguished from the abstract sciences such as mathematics or phi-
losophy.Navigation.Following a path within a file or among files to locate desired infor-mation.Near real time.Approximate simultaneity in time; without delay, compression,
or expansion in the time variable.Neural network.A system of multiple parallel structures, containing a highlyinterconnected set of simple elements, exploiting aspects of their collective
behavior and operating according to a strict, deterministic set of rules for

proceeding from one step to the next.Normalize.To reduce data, data structure, or relations among data to a standardform.  In the case of numeric data, normalization may involve presenting a

data value in terms of its relation to a reference value, e.g., strength at test
temperature as a percent of strength at room temperature.Object-oriented database.A database of objects (entities including data, queues,data structures, procedures, modules, etc.) using the principles of object-ori-
ented programming and the concept of inheritance of methods by new classes
of objects.Observational science.A science founded on observation rather than experi-mentation.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202BITS OF POWEROn-line.Pertaining to an interactive process by which a user and host computerconverse.Overlay.(1) The superposition of two graphical representations for purposes ofcomparison; (2) one of several segments of a computer program that, during

execution, occupy the same area of main [or virtual] storage, one segment at a
time. [C]Packet.In data communication, a sequence of binary digits, including data andcontrol signals, that is transmitted and switched as a composite whole.  The

data, control signals, and possibly error control information are arranged in a
specific format. [C]Parallel communication.A form of communication that simultaneously trans-mits on multiple communication paths controlled as a unit.Portability.Capability for transporting of data or programs between computersor computer systems without any required modification thereof. [C]PostScript.A proprietary (Adobe Systems) page definition language used indesktop publishing and capable of handling full text, mathematics, and graph-
ics.Primary data see raw dataPrivatization.
Transfer from government management and control to manage-
ment and control by a private company or other nongovernmental organiza-
tion.Protocol.In a computer system, a formalized set of conventions, including cod-ing, prescribed responses to received signals and/or coded messages, wiring
patterns, etc., necessary to establish and maintain communication between
two devices or systems.Public good.A product or service typically provided by government that isnondepletable and produces benefits from which others cannot be excluded
and which cannot easily be constrained only to those who pay.Public-key encryption.
A method of encryption/decryption in which the en-
ciphering and deciphering keys are different and not computable from each

other.  A person wishing to receive a secret message can publicly distribute

the enciphering key, which, when used by the originator of a message, pro-
duces an enciphered message that only the secret deciphering key kept by the
recipient can decipher.  The first and still most widely used public-key algo-

rithm is the RSA algorithm; the public key is derived from the product of two
very large prime numbers, and the strength of protection derives from the size
of the prime numbers and the resulting computational difficulty in decompos-
ing the product in those primes.Raw data.Data as originally recorded and that have not been combined, modi-fied, interpreted, or adjusted in any way.Real time.In computing, pertaining to operations that are performed in conjunc-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B203tion with some external process or user and that are required to meet the timeconstraints imposed by that process or user, e.g., control of an airplane guid-
ance system or an on-line information service. [L&S]Relational database.A database composed of flat files, each embodying differ-ent facets of information about the data, organized by linkages representing
one or more relations; the resulting data structure allows the efficient use of
many types of data during queries and can be manipulated with great flexibil-
ity using a formal relational algebra to derive standard (normalized) forms and
to establish equivalencies.Remote access.Capability for communicating with a data processing facilitythrough a data link, usually at a different geographical location.Remote sensing.  Gathering and recording of data through a system of one or
several sensors capable of obtaining data from afar and transmitting the values
to a central computer or other display, recording, or storage device.Retrieval.The location and transfer of selected data or information from a source(long-time memory or another information system) to local computer memory

for subsequent processing, display, or downloading to another device.Router.A computer that determines the path of network traffic flow.  The path
selection is made from several paths based on information obtained from
specific protocols, algorithms that attempt to identify the shortest or best path,
and other criteria such as metrics or protocol-specific destination addresses.
[IBM]Search engine.A device or program for scanning a file to match data patterns forpurposes of retrieval.Secondary user.A user outside the community by or for which the collection ofdata was initiated.Serial communication.Transmission of a sequence of signals on a single com-munication path.Server.A computer on a network that performs functions (e.g., computation,storage, and retrieval) for other computers, terminals, and peripheral devices
on the network.Shareware.Software distributed publicly by individuals who have developed auseful program and wish to share it informally (as contrasted to commercial
marketing) with others. [adapted from C]Spectral data.Data measured for specific wavelengths of radiation related to thephenomenon being observed.  The data may be a continuous function of

wavelength value or may indicate only values at discrete wavelengths.
Sui generis.Of its own kind; unique.Terabyte.1012 bytes, or 8 
 10
12 bits.
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204BITS OF POWERUser friendly.Characteristic of a system that inexperienced or untrained usersfeel comfortable working on, and find helpful and not intimidating.  Gener-

ally, use of such a system does not depend heavily on knowing or remem-
bering procedural details; rather, the system provides hints, guidance, and
choices among alternatives at every stage of the interaction.Validated data.Data values or data sets that have been shown to be generatedaccording to standard test methods and practices or other measures of qual-
ity, reliability, and precision. [C]Verified data.Data that have been shown to be accurately transcribed or trans-formed from other representations.Virtual reality.A computer-generated simulation of reality (or imagined real-ity) with which users can interact using specialized peripherals such as data
gloves and head-mounted computer graphic displays. [L&S]Workstation.(1) A term traditionally used to describe a high-end, high-perfor-mance assembly of equipment, including extensive computer graphics capa-
bility, as an interactive console for performing a specialized function such
as computer-aided design, computer animation, or complex data analysis.
Typically, the workstation includes enough computing power and data stor-
age capacity to operate free-standing from any other computer, although
workstations are often networked to larger systems for data archives, com-
munication with other workstations, etc.  As the technology of personal

computers has improved, they have taken on functions previously handled
on workstations. (2) Any assembly of computer equipment designed to
support the full range of work of an individual.World Wide Web.A tool, based on the hypertext system, for the organizationand representation of on-line information available over the Internet.  To

access the Web, a browser such as Netscape or Mosaic is required.  The user

must know the address of the home page of the institution whose informa-
tion is to be accessed.  The WWW provides the simplest means of navigat-

ing the Internet, giving access to text, images, sound, and video. [D]Sources of Definitions[C] J.H. Westbrook and W. Grattidge, eds. (1991), ÒA Glossary of Terms Relating to Data, DataCapture, Data Manipulation, and Databases,Ó CODATA Bulletin 23, Nos. 1 & 2, 196 pp.
[D] T. Dodd (1995), Computing: The Technology of Information, Oxford University Press, 160 pp.[E] G.L. Tring, ed. (1994), Encyclopedia of Applied Physics, VCH Publishers.[EC] Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council of the European Union on the LegalProtection of Databases (1996), 96/9/E.C., March 11.
[IBM] G. McDaniel, ed. (1994),  IBM Dictionary of Computing, McGraw-Hill, 758 pp.[L&S] D. Longley and M. Shain, eds. (1986), Dictionary of Information Technology, 2nd ed., Ox-ford University Press, 382 pp.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C205205APPENDIXCExamples of Successful International DataExchange Activities in the Natural SciencesThe following examples of international exchange and management of datain the natural sciences cover a diverse set of activities involving international
collaboration in several subdisciplines.  All of them meet the minimum criteria

for successful international exchange of scientific data generated from publicly
funded research.LABORATORY PHYSICAL SCIENCES DATANuclear Structure DataThe Evaluated Nuclear Structure Data File (ENSDF), a mature database thathas existed in electronic form for about 25 years, consists of evaluations of nuclear
structure and decay data.  Obtained by a variety of experiments and often spanning

decades of measurements, most of the data come from primary sources, such as
articles in refereed journals.  The evaluations are carried out by an international

network of individuals and coordinated by the National Nuclear Data Center
(NNDC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory, with the international activities coor-
dinated under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).  In

addition to the United States, evaluators come from Russia, Japan, the PeopleÕs
Republic of China, Taiwan, Kuwait, the Netherlands, France, Sweden, Canada, and
Belgium.The evaluations themselves are reviewed before being disseminated.  In the
past the evaluations were submitted via magnetic tape to NNDC; more recently,
almost all have been submitted via the Internet.  All foreign evaluators now rou-
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206BITS OF POWERtinely transmit evaluations electronically and use electronic mail to communicatewith the coordinators.Although most of the ENSDF file has an 80-character column format inheritedfrom IBM cards, a concentrated effort has been made in the past 2 years to trans-
form the file into a more modern, relational database.  Complete conversion will

not be possible until a commercial database program is available that can meet the
needs of such a large, diverse file, probably after another 2 to 3 years of develop-
ment.  So far, however, the conversion has proceeded smoothly, and it has facili-

tated the development of software overlay programs that give the user transparent
access to the data.  One subset of ENSDF, the nuclear database NUDAT, is a true

relational database that can be accessed on-line.Traditionally, the evaluations of nuclear structure data were disseminated via amonthly hard-copy journal.  Now on-line access, introduced about a decade ago, is

available by logging into the NNDC (guest accounts are available for individuals
who want to explore the files) or via the World Wide Web.1  On-line access is
menu-driven but has limited graphic capabilities.  Users can generate high-quality

PostScript files of tables and level spectra, which can be downloaded to a local
machine.  More than 2,000 registered users from 49 countries on six continents

currently have on-line access to ENSDF.To minimize the problems with intercontinental electronic links, ENSDF hasmirror sites in Vienna and Paris and plans to provide the same at the center in
Obninsk, Russia, when RussiaÕs Internet link is established.  These mirror sites aremaintained by the host foreign government, with support from the IAEA.  While

the mirror sites have minimized problems with trans-Atlantic electronic links, de-
lays do occur with trans-Pacific links (except those with Japan) and links to South
America.  To complement on-line access, various modes of dissemination are being

used, including CD-ROM and floppy diskettes.  Although users in less developed

countries may prefer hard copies, for many the cost of the printed journal is prohibi-
tive.  Therefore, to maximize international data flow, increased access to the Internet

is critical.While nuclear scientists are the most common users of ENSDF, some of thedata have important applications in other areas of science.  For example, radioac-

tive decay data are used in medical physics.  To facilitate access by the medical

community, a dynamically generated form of ENSDF, called MIRD, was created
that can be accessed on-line.  As a portion of the data in the Evaluated Nuclear Data

File/B (ENDF/B),  ENSDF data are also used in the design of nuclear reactors and

devices.  Before the early 1980s the distribution of ENDF/B was restricted, because

the information was considered sensitive with respect to national security.  This

file, which is available electronically and on tape, contains results of nuclear reac-
tion model calculations that could be useful to other scientists, for example, stellar
astrophysicists seeking to understand nuclear processes in stars.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C207High-energy Physics Data
Collider Detector at Fermilab CollaborationThe Collider Detector at Fermilab (CDF) collaboration presents a unique ex-ample of international data exchange and the barriers associated with the
transnational flow of data.  The CDF collaboration includes more than 400 scien-

tists from 36 national laboratories and universities in the United States, Canada,
Italy, Japan, and Taiwan.2  The CDF detector itself cost hundreds of millions of
dollars to construct, and the operating expenses at Fermilab are many tens of
millions of dollars per year.  Because of the high costs in manpower and operations,

the results from this collaboration will not be duplicated.Data at CDF are sorted into various data streams based on the physics:  electro-
weak physics, top quark events, b quark events, events that test quantum chromo-
dynamics, exotica, and so on.  As of the end of 1995 the grand ensemble of data

from CDF was about 108 events at 200 kilobytes per event, or 20 terabytes.  This is
not an easily manageable data set.  The current storage medium is 8-mm tape.

Working data sets are 1/1,000 to 1/100 of the total ensemble.  It is estimated that at

least 90 percent of the analysis is done on the Fermilab computers with data sets at
Fermilab.  Relatively few data are transferred electronically.  The aggregate load on

the network into and out of Fermilab is only about 4 gigabytes per month.  In the

event that data files need to be transferred to another institution, sufficient Òband-widthÓ is obtained with a briefcase full of 8-mm tapes.
While the data analysis is done predominantly at Fermilab, the various sub-groups of the 400-member collaboration, which are organized by branch of physics
and technical activities, must meet frequently.  In the past, meetings were held in a
central location, such as at Fermilab.  More recently, videoconferencing has been

used to link institutions in the United States, Japan, and Italy to facilitate discussion
and analysis of the data.  However, the expense of videoconferencing done by an

integrated services digital network call across international borders is a major im-
pediment to smaller institutions, particularly universities.  Videoconferencing done

by Internet also creates problems, since the international connections generally do
not have high bandwidth.  Although none of the available technology is very good
at this time, videoconferencing has the potential to be the preferred method of real-
time exchange and interpretation of data, so that interactive discussions of the
analysis and interpretation can proceed more efficiently and cost-effectively.With 400 individuals in a multi-institutional, multinational collaboration, thediscussion and dissemination of manuscripts and technical reports could have posed
a problem.  However, CDF manuscripts and reports are prepared in LaTeX with

PostScript output, including encapsulated PostScript figures embedded in the file.

A CDF-Notes database enables note numbers to be assigned and topic/distribution
categories to be selected.  There is also a CDFNEWS procedure for putting the

PostScript file and a brief ASCII description into a centrally accessible directoryBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208BITS OF POWERand sending notification to all collaborating institutions.  Within minutes of learn-
ing about a new posting, scientists can retrieve it and have a hard copy at work or
home at their convenience.Electronic Preprints of Topical Information in Theoretical High-Energy
PhysicsFor researchers in high-energy particle theoryÑincluding phenomenology(theoretical calculations that can be directly related to experiment), more formal
quantum field theory and string theory, and lattice and computational approachesÑrapid access to information has been a higher priority than the, at times minimal,
filtering provided by the conventional refereeing process.  Consequently, since at

least the early 1970s a hard-copy preprint distribution system has supplanted con-
ventional published journals as conveyers of topical information.  With the advent

of standardized word processors in the mid 1980s, together with widespread net-
working connectivity by the late 1980s, researchers regarded electronic transmis-
sion of prepublication information as a natural next step.  When the 
Òe-print ar-chivesÓ based at Los Alamos National Laboratory came on-line in the early 1990s,
they were quickly adopted within these communities as the primary mode of com-
municating topical research information, as well as accessing longer-term archival
material during the periods covered.  The e-print archives have essentially sup-

planted established print journals in these fields.3Table C.1 summarizes the distribution statistics for three e-print archives intheoretical high-energy physics (HEP) at Los Alamos.  Such success has not been

seen for two other experimental physics archives, especially the experimentalTABLE C.11995 Statistics for Three e-print Archives in Theoretical High-
Energy PhysicsNumber ofSubscribersRetrievalsHighly
Start(numbersSubmissionsperRequested
aArchiveDateapproximate)per MonthMonth(percent)
hep-th (abstract theory)8/914,0001961108
hep-lat (computational2/921,00037308
approaches)hep-ph (phenomenology)3/923,000250758
NOTE:The numbers are estimates and averages for 1995.
aThe highly requested articles are those that had more than twice the average number of retrievals.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C209nuclear physics archive (nucl-ex), and only now is there substantial activity on theelectronic archive in theoretical condensed-matter physics, which is much more
closely connected to laboratory science than is high-energy theory.  The users of

and contributors to the HEP e-print archives include about 6,000 high-energy physi-
cists (experimentalists and theorists), most of whom belong to the American Physi-
cal Society.The success of the HEP e-print archives in high-energy theory could be due to
several advantages shared in the subdiscipline:
¥A preexisting formal hard-copy preprint distribution system, so thatcreating and using the electronic version did not represent a major change;¥A standardized word-processing program (LaTeX or TeX), making the
electronic format easily portable;¥A subject esoteric enough that the contributions were of uniformly highquality, making refereeing less crucial to maintaining quality control; and¥A critical mass of participants accustomed to e-mail use.Materials Science DataData in materials science describe a wide variety of properties (e.g., me-chanical, electrical, thermal, and structural) of all types of materials (e.g., metals,
insulators, and semiconductors) under many different conditions.  The data also

relate to differences in methods for preparing and refining materials, and, in
processes such as the doping of semiconductors, to difference in methods for
achieving desired levels of controlled impurity.  They have little or no timeliness,

except insofar as up-to-date data may replace older, less confirmed data.  Hence

the databases have moderate permanence, but grow largely as new materials are
added and conditions and properties are extended.4Although most of the collaborations involve the developed countries, inter-national involvement in data activities is increasingly significant.  Examples in

materials science include the following:¥Structure Reports, a printed crystallographic compendium that is editedat a Canadian university, published in the Netherlands, and has contributors from
all over the world;¥Science Group Thermodata Europe, a consortium of eight different labo-ratories from four European countries that compiles and analyzes thermodynamic
data;¥The Alloy Phase Diagram International Commission, whose membersfrom 12 countries collaborate in the compilation and evaluation of phase dia-
grams of metallic systems;¥The collection of diffusion data from the world literature that are ab-stracted, recompiled, and published in Switzerland and;Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210BITS OF POWER¥Activities of the CODATA task group on materials database manage-ment, with members from seven countries.5The potential benefits of computer access to technical information are thesame for materials scientists and engineers as for researchers in other fields of
technology.  With reference to alloy design, three additional capabilities are seen

to be of increasing importance:¥The facilitation of empirical searches for correlations of fundamentalparameters from very large volumes of data through the making of two-dimen-
sional and higher cross-plots;¥The ability to make and display arbitrary sections of three-dimensionalobjects (e.g., crystal structures or ternary phase diagram modes); and¥The ability to simulate crystal structures, atomic arrays, kinetic pro-cesses, and so forth, given basic information on dimensions, energetics, and
modeling schema.The most comprehensive system of on-line databases relevant to materialsresearch is that provided by the Science and Technology Network (STN) Interna-
tional, which is sponsored by the Chemical Abstracts Service and by information
services in Germany and Japan.  Scientists and engineers are able to search approxi-

mately 20 databases covering the physical and mechanical properties of thousands
of materials, as well as more than 100 factual and bibliographic databases.  Al-

though STN International provides the worldÕs greatest concentration of data on theproperties of materials, it does not include, for example, data on composites, most
ceramics, semiconductors, or elastomers.  The software used by STN is particularly

adept at handling numeric data inquiries and is quite sophisticated in readily ac-
commodating range searching, conversion of units, and handling of many data
variables.6  STN International is accessed via commercial on-line communicationservices.  Searchers are charged only a modest fee for the time connected, with

most of the charge based on the type and amount of data utilized in terms of the
number of records involved.  However, even a low fee can be prohibitive to a

scientist in the developing world.The principal advantages of a system like STN International are (1) the largenumber of databases available on a single system; (2) the ability to use the same
software to search each of the databases; (3) the ability to search all of the databases
at the same time or in groups; (4) the sophisticated search software; and (5) the
ability to access only needed data without having a massive amount of data on
oneÕs own system.Chemical Sciences DataThe work of chemists depends on many sorts of data, including compendiaof text, patents, numerical tabulations, spectra rendered as analog data, and mo-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C211lecular structures presented both as images and in tables of bond lengths andangles.  A typical textual database is the Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical

Substances.7  Another is the bibliographic database of the Chemical Abstracts
Service.8  About 40 percent of the world
Õs patents are for chemical substances;this information is included in DERWENT, the compendium of patents carried
by STN International and other on-line services.9The numerical databases incorporate thermodynamic and thermophysical data,such as heats of formation and melting points; mechanical properties, such as
compressibility; transport properties, such as heat conductivity and viscosity; and
kinetic data, such as rate coefficient and activation energy.  Some databases, par-

ticularly the older ones, such as the Beilstein InstituteÕs compendium of all knownorganic substances and its counterpart for inorganic and organometallic compounds
from the Gmelin Institute, focus on the substances themselves.10  Others, such as
the database on atomic energy levels from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, catalog generic properties of a limited class of species, in this case all
the atomic species for which data are available.  The Cambridge structural data-

base, originally created at the University of Cambridge and now maintained by the
Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre, an independent organization created for
the purpose, is a comprehensive file of evaluated data of crystalline materials and
supporting references of much interest to materials scientists and chemists.11  Stillothers, such as DETHERM from the Fachinformationszentrum Chemie and
SPECINFO from Chemical Concepts GmbH, carry data on specific properties of as
many substances as possibleÑthermophysical properties for DETHERM andnuclear magnetic resonance and infrared spectra for SPECINFO.  One journal, the

Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data, publishes tabulations of evalu-ated data in conventional periodical form; these data generally reappear in large
electronic databases.Many of the large chemical databases originated in Europe, particularly inGermany, where the chemical industry and academic science thrived a century ago.
The older databases appeared as bound volumes.  Then loose-leaf forms became

the mode of presentation.  Now, most of the databases are available on-line and in

computer-readable form such as CD-ROM as well.Chemists and materials scientists who use small amounts of data to identifysubstances during a series of experiments need the data quickly, and so they use
handbooks, local reference libraries or, when they can, on-line material.  Often they

need information on the quality of the data, such as the spectral resolution of
tabulated infrared absorptions.  They also need to be able to search databases for

substances with related structures or properties.  Consequently, software tools for

linking data describing related substances are important for the working chemist.The provision of many kinds of data in chemistry, materials science, andcondensed-matter physics involves deriving and providing analytic representations
of physical and chemical properties.  This practice is important because scientists

and engineers often need accurate values for properties over a range of conditionsBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212BITS OF POWERsuch as temperature and pressure.  A significant effort in data analysis thus is
directed toward finding underlying relationships on which physically and chemi-
cally sound mathematical representations can be constructed.  One example is the

equation of state, which links equilibrium properties such as density and internal
energy with temperature and pressure.GENOMIC SEQUENCE AND RELATED DATAInformation on DNA sequences, complete genomes of organisms, and mac-romolecular gene products is readily available electronically.  These data have

given rise to new concepts in the life sciences and to the development of new
research fields, as well as to discoveries of commercial consequence such as the
development of novel drugs and vaccines, diagnostic tools in medicine, improved
plant varieties with better growth characteristics and improved food properties,
and bacteria needed for environmental remediation.  A crucial component of this

capacity for innovation is large-scale international collaboration in generating,
assembling, and disseminating the necessary data.  The need to collect, analyze,

and manage the data is leading to interdisciplinary research involving computer
science and engineering, database design and artificial intelligence, and basic
biological science.Exchange of this information is accomplished through a number of databasesat several institutions supported by national governmental research funding agen-
cies, primarily the National Center for Biotechnology Information and the Ge-
nome Database in the United States, the DNA Database of Japan, the European
Molecular Biology Organization, and the European Bioinformatics Institute.12Each organization has agreed to collect data deposited by academic, government,
or industrial laboratories, put them into a transparent standard format, exchange
them daily in order to maintain a common international database, and make them
accessible (through the World Wide Web, by e-mail, and so on) for retrieval and
analysis at any time from anywhere in the world.  Databases of sequencing and

protein structure information are linked through the retrieval system to other
related databases (e.g., structural and molecular data, genetic maps, information
on genetic diseases, and life sciences literature), so that a scientist searching for a
particular DNA gene sequence can also examine the crystal structure of the
protein in question and perhaps retrieve information about a related disease in
humans as well.The coordination of this database effort, the definition of standards, andplanning for the future are being done by database staff and advisory committees.
Currently, the international database collection contains about 500 million nucleic

acid bases (the individual chemical compounds that link to make up nucleic acid
(DNA or RNA) sequences) from more than 16,000 organisms.  Data are being

generated so rapidly that the database doubles in size every 12 months.  These

data are essential to ground-breaking work in molecular biology and to progressBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C213in the Human Genome Project, which is determining the sequence of the approxi-mately 109 nucleotides (the combining form of the nucleic acid bases) contained
in human chromosomes.13 It is expected that by the time this effort is complete in
less than 5 years, it will have a great impact on the development of diagnostic and
therapeutic tools for many human diseases that are currently not treatable or
whose symptoms only are amenable to mitigation.Currently, there are no intellectual, political, or proprietary barriers limitinginternational access to and use of these data.  The barriers are technical and

economic.  The most important technical barrier involves equipment and infra-

structure limitations on potential end usersÕ capability to access and then make
use of the wealth of information available.  These data and their free availability

to researchers in the life sciences are contributing to the rapid development of
new concepts and applications, and there is a great desire and consequent pres-
sure by academic and industrial institutions to keep the data freely accessible
internationally in the future.HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE ARCHIVEThe Hubble Space Telescope (HST) is an example of a science program withsignificant international participation and open access to the data.  HST was

developed by NASA with the participation (nominally 15 percent) of the Euro-
pean Space Agency (ESA) under a memorandum of understanding negotiated
between NASA and ESA.  ESA also participates in its operation.  HST is avail-

able for use by the international astronomy community.  All science data are

archived, kept proprietary (to the astronomer who proposed the observation) for
1 year, and then made available to other astronomers.  The archive is accessible to

the public via the Internet.14Science operations for HST are centered at the Space Telescope ScienceInstitute (STScI) in Baltimore, operated by the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy (AURA), a university consortium, under contract to

NASA.  AURA has international affiliates and incorporates ESA representatives
in its oversight of the STScI.  ESA also contributes staff to the STScI; they are

integrated into the total operation.  ESA astronomers participate in HST commit-

tees and advisory structure.  In addition, ESA operates a small Space Telescope

(HST) European Coordinating Facility (the ST-ECF) in Garching, Germany, in
collaboration with the European Southern Observatory.HST observing is open to all astronomers worldwide via a peer reviewsystem.  Under the memorandum of understanding, astronomers from ESA mem-

ber countries are entitled to 15 percent of the observing time on average.  In

practice, they receive at least this amount through the normal peer review system.All HST data are received by the STScI.  They undergo routine processing
and calibration, and both the calibrated and uncalibrated data and the engineering
and other ancillary data are archived.  The primary archive for HST data at the
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214BITS OF POWERSTScI contains about 2 terabytes of data and is growing at the rate of a gigabyte perday.  A duplicate copy of the science data archive is transferred to the ST-ECF, and

a third copy of nonproprietary data is maintained by the Canadian Astronomy Data
Center in Victoria, British Columbia.  Each of these data centers also archives

different sets of related data.  Under NASA policy for HST, nonproprietary data are

freely available, but requests for large amounts of data  must be approved by NASA

headquarters and are subject to a negotiated level of cost recovery, typically the
marginal cost of reproduction.Data analysis software appropriate for HST users was developed and ismaintained by the STScI and is freely distributed to astronomers.  It operates in a

portable data analysis environment, the Image Reduction and Analysis Facility
(IRAF), developed by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories. Although
other large (and small) data analysis systems exist, IRAF has been adopted by a
number of astronomy projects and is used by a large portion of the astronomy
community both in the United States and in other countries.  It incorporates both
general astronomy-oriented data analysis tools and specific packages for indi-
vidual observatories and facilities.GEOPHYSICAL DATAThe World Data CentersIn the Earth sciences, with the impetus of the International Geophysical Yearin 1957, the World Data Centers (WDCs) were set up under the aegis of the
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).15  Their function was to
provide international access to various types of observational geophysical data.
This effort was very successful, and geoscientists since that time have taken
advantage of the WDCs as an effective mechanism for the exchange of data.  The

WDCs circumvented what otherwise would have been insurmountable political
barriers to exchange of scientific data in the era of the Cold War and allowed
scientists from the East and the West to use data collected by both sides.  The

protocol for the WDCs was that any scientist could obtain any of the data residing
in the WDCs without government or other restrictions.  Of course, only subsets of

data collected in different countries were placed in the WDCs, but substantial
amounts were made available.  Initially, the data were in analog form, but in

recent years data holdings have been archived and disseminated in digital form
(e.g., via tapes), and additional WDCs have been established for different types
of geophysical data.  Increasingly, users can browse the data holdings and receive

data via electronic networks.In the United States, national data centers, such as the National GeophysicalData Center operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), serve a dual role, with a subset of their holdings designated as a WDC
and therefore available to any user, domestic or foreign.  Other examples include
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C215the U.S. Geological SurveyÕs Earth Resources Observation Systems (EROS)Data Center, which houses the newly established WDC for land remote sensing,
where a subset of remote sensing data is made available,16 and the Department of
EnergyÕs Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, which also serves as aWDC for trace gases in the atmosphere.17 Although the WDCs provide one very
effective avenue for the transnational flow of geophysical data, many important
observational data sets are not available through the WDCs and must be obtained
through other means, some of which are discussed below.Seismic DataMany thousands of seismic events occur throughout the world each year,some large and destructive.  The detection and location of earthquakes and deter-

mination of their magnitudes require a globally distributed network of well-
calibrated, sensitive seismic stations that continuously record ground motions.
Such a network necessarily involves seismic stations in many countries around
the world.  Data are gathered by a combination of individual institutions and

different regional and global networks operated by individual organizations un-
der agreements with countries or institutions where the stations are located.  The
determination of the location, depth, time of occurrence, and magnitude of an
earthquake makes use of data from ground motions observed by many stations, at
different distances and azimuths from the source.  Monitoring of global seismic

activity therefore involves the transnational flow of data and information both in
real time and on a recurring basis.Global seismic monitoring serves purposes other than earthquake hazardassessment and mitigation, the most important being enforcement of interna-
tional treaties governing underground nuclear explosions.  Underground explo-

sions are recorded by the same seismic stations that record earthquakes;  like

earthquakes, they can be detected and located.  Considerable past and current

research is devoted to developing reliable methods for distinguishing under-
ground nuclear explosions from natural earthquakes and from mining blasts.
Under protocols currently being developed among participating countries, all
parties are to have equal access to continuous real-time recordings from approxi-
mately 50 seismic arrays and from many additional single stations distributed
around the world.  Each country will then carry out its own assessment of re-

corded events.  The transnational flow of these data in near-real time will be

formalized as part of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.In the early part of this century, the international exchange of seismic datawas accomplished by a scientist writing to the seismologist operating each station
of interest and asking to borrow the original (analog) recording of the event being
studied. When the work was complete, the users returned the original recordings
to the respective station operators.  By contrast, a recently implemented data

access capability at the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS)Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216BITS OF POWERData Management Center (DMC) allows any scientist (U.S. or international) to
download via the Internet the signals recorded at approximately 20 global seismic
stations within about 1 hour of an eventÕs occurrence (magnitude greater than 5).18Similarly convenient Internet access to continuous recordings of many other inter-national stations is possible through the DMC, but with a time lag necessitated by
not having real-time or near-real-time data transmission from some of the available
stations.IRISÕs DMC has become the international Federation of Digital SeismicNetworksÕ archive for continuous digital data.  Global digital seismic data from
stations distributed around the globe are available through the DMC.  Users can

browse electronically to determine what data are available and can place requests
for data sets they wish to receive; their requests are filled and the data transferred
either electronically via the Internet (for modest-size data sets) or via high-den-
sity media such as Exabyte cassettes (for large requests).  The DMC also serves

as a broker for individuals who wish to obtain data from foreign stations that are
not routinely archived at the DMC.  This valuable service is accomplished by

means of data transfer links to data archives in other countries; users would
otherwise have to access and transfer data from these various sources individu-
ally.  In this way, the DMC operates as a 
ÒvirtualÓ data center from which the user
extracts desired data, some of which do not physically reside at the center.The World Weather WatchThe World Weather Watch is the most formally organized international glo-bal observation, communication, processing, and archiving system at this time.19This distinction stems from the early recognition that scientific understanding
and prediction of the atmosphere, even for only a day or two in advance, require
observations from very large areas.  Beginning more than 100 years ago, the

observations were sent by communication systems in near-real time through
internationally agreed upon arrangements and procedures.  For the last several

decades, data have been processed and archived on a global basis through a
system of world and regional meteorological centers and world and regional data
centers for meteorology and oceanography.  During this period the World Weather

Watch has developed many of the characteristics required for an effective system
for international exchanges of scientific data and therefore can be considered one
of the primary models for other such systems.The development of the World Weather Watch was accelerated in the 1960sas a result of the potential capability of Earth-orbiting satellites to obtain atmo-
spheric and oceanographic data on a global basis, and the advent of computers
capable of handling large volumes of diverse data for numerical weather predic-
tions on a global basis.  An extensive planning and coordination process was put
in place in the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) to expand the global
observing component of the World Weather Watch through polar and geostation-Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C217ary satellites and additional in situ observation, to develop an improved telecom-munications system capable of exchanging data in real time among all nations,
and to establish a system of supporting data centers.  Three such centers, in

Washington, D.C., Moscow, and Melbourne, were established in the mid-1960s,
along with regional meteorological centers to serve specific continental and oce-
anic areas.  These World Meteorological Centers are responsible for the prepara-

tion and distribution of an agreed upon set of global products to all nations,
through the Global Telecommunications System of the World Weather Watch.
Similarly, the regional meteorological centers prepare products as agreed for
their specific areas of responsibility.  The archival, storage, and retrieval systems

for retrospective use of the data are maintained by the World Data Centers, and,
by virtue of recent expansion, the Regional Data Centers.WMO does not operate any observing stations, telecommunication systems,or processing centers; through its member nations WMO is responsible only for
the planning and coordination of the World Weather Watch.  This includes devel-

oping the scope and extent of the observing networks, the characteristics and
standards of the telecommunication systems, and the products to be prepared at
the centers.  The World Weather Watch, therefore, is built on the national meteo-

rological systems of each member nation.  The national meteorological system in

the United States is quite extensive because of the great impact of weather,
especially severe storms such as hurricanes, tornadoes, blizzards, and flash floods,
on people and industry. Services are provided through a public-private partner-
ship.  The federal government is responsible for public forecasts and forecasts

related to the safety of life and protection of propertyÑsevere weather and floodwarnings for the country and surrounding oceans, and forecasts and advisories
for aviation terminals and en route paths.  The private sector provides tailored

forecasts for specific clients, and through television, radio stations, and, to an
increasing degree, the Internet leads in the dissemination of severe weather and
flood warnings to the public.The federal government operates an extensive satellite and ground-basedobserving system, together with meteorological prediction and data centers, to
obtain the data and products needed to carry out its responsibility for providing
services.  These data and products are made available to the private sector with no

restrictions and at low incremental costs.  These same data and products are used

in fulfilling the requirements and agreements within the World Weather Watch
and for research internationally and nationally.  For example, the data from U.S.

geostationary satellites can be received directly by centers in South America; the
data from U.S. polar-orbiting meteorological satellites are distributed on the

World Weather Watch Telecommunication System; and the products prepared by
the National Meteorological Center near Washington, D.C., which are designed
to meet national requirements, are provided to all countries through the World
Weather Watch.  Likewise, the data are available for all research programs,

primarily through the NOAA National Climatic Data Center and the NationalBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218BITS OF POWEROceanographic Data Center.  Other nations have functioned in a similar way
Ñthe same centers fulfilling both national needs and international commitments.The close interaction between operational meteorological services and re-search in the atmospheric sciences, nationally and internationally, has proved
extremely effective.  During the late 1960s and 1970s, an extensive program
Ñthe Global Atmospheric Research ProgramÑwas undertaken internationally byICSU and WMO to improve the accuracy and extend the time range of weather
forecasts.  A joint mechanism was established within which the ICSU scientists

led the planning of major observational field experiments and WMO led the
implementation through national contributions of member nations.  The largest

and most complex was a global observational experiment during which the World
Weather Watch Global Observation System was augmented with additional ob-
servations from ships, aircraft, and satellites to provide the most comprehensive
set of global observations ever acquired.  Again, the World Data Centers were

responsible for archiving the data from the experiment for use in the associated
research programs.  Simultaneously during this period, the data from the World

Weather Watch were being used by the U.S. government and private sector to
provide services.  Such multipurpose use of meteorological data has historically

been very effective and efficient.However, the traditionally unrestricted exchange of data in meteorology hasbeen placed in jeopardy in recent years.  Pressure on weather services from some

governments to charge users for services other than public weather forecasts and
severe weather and flood warnings has led to proposals to place restrictions on
the use of data and to charge substantially for real-time data or data sets between
data centers.  The meteorological services in Western Europe have been the most

aggressive in charging industries and organizations for specialized services and
private meteorological companies for data.  This situation was a major consider-
ation at the meeting of the WMO Congress in 1995, which adopted an under-
standing by members of the WMO that they would endorse the free and unre-
stricted exchange of data for research and education, and for an agreed set of
dataÑsatellite and in situÑto be exchanged in real time.  However, it included a
provision that an individual country could place restraints on data made available
beyond the agreed level,20 and this has resulted both in a reduction of data freely
available for research as well as in significant adminstrative expenses.NOTES1.See <http://www.nndc.bnl.gov >.
2.See <http://www-cdf.fnal.gov/> for additional information on the Collider Detector at Fermilab.

3.See <http://xxx.lanl.gov/> for the e-print archives.
4.Summaries of data sources for materials science and engineering (both print and electronic)
have been published.  See H. Wawrousek, J.H. Westbrook, and W. Grattidge (1989), 
ÒDataSources of Mechanical and Physical Properties of Engineering Materials,Ó Physik Daten, 30-1,Fachinformationszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany; J.H. Westbrook and W. Grattidge, eds. (1988),Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C219ÒThe  CODATA Referral Database (CRD),
Ó based on the CODATA Database Directories and
the 1988 revision of the UNESCO ÒInventory of Data Referral Sources in Science and Tech-nology,Ó available from CODATA, 51 Boul. De Montmorency, Paris; J.H. Westbrook  (1986),
ÒMaterials Information Sources,Ó Encyclopedia of Materials Science and Engineering, M.B.Bever, ed., p. 527, Pergamon; F.C. Allan and W.R. Ferrell (1989), Database 12,(3):50-58;M.K. Booker (1986)ÒComputerized Materials Databases,Ó Encyclopedia of Materials Scienceand Engineering, pp. 796-800, Pergamon.  The role of the computer in accessing and manipu-
lating materials data for alloy design is discussed by Westbrook in J.H. Westbrook  (1993),
ÒData Compilation, Analysis, and Access: The Role of the Computer,Ó MRS Bull., 18:44-49.R.A. Matula (1989), ÒThe Importance of Numeric Databases to Materials Science,Ó J. Res.Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 94:9-14, emphasizes the importance, in an industrial setting, ofcomputer access to numeric databases in materials science.5.Functioning almost entirely without external financial support and on a volunteer basis, this
CODATA task group coordinates work in this field, promotes standards, communication, andawareness; assists in education and training; and publishes an international register of materials
database managers.6.See <http://www.cas.org/stn.html>.
7.See <http://www.rs.ch/krinfo/products/datastar/sheets/RTEC.htm>.

8.See <http://www.cas.org> for information about the Chemical Abstracts Service.
9.See <http://www.derwent.co.uk>.
10.Access fees to these are often prohibitive.  Several respondents to the committee
Õs ÒInquiry toInterested PartiesÓ (see Appendix D) noted specifically that they would like access to the
Beilstein databases but considered them too costly.11.See the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre home page at < http://csdvx2.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/
ccdchome.html>.12.See the National Center for Biotechnology Information home page at <http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/>.13.See <http:/www.nghgr.nih.bov/HGP/> for additional information regarding the Human Ge-
nome Project.14.See <http://www.stsci.edu/archive.html> for additional information about the Hubble Space
Telescope archive.15.See <http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/wdcmain.html> for a description of the World Data Centers
System.16.See <http://edc.www.cr.usgs.gov> for the EROS Data Center home page.
17.See <http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov> for the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center home page.

18.See <http://www.iris.washington.edu/dmc.new.html> for the IRIS Data Management Center
home page.19.For additional information on the World Weather Watch, see the World Meteorological Orga-
nization home page at <http://www.wmo.ch:80/www/www.html>.20.See R.S. Greenfield, E.W. Friday, and M.C. Yerg (1995), 
ÒWMO Adopts a Resolution Govern-ing the International Exchange of Meteorological and Related Data and Products,Ó Bulletin ofthe American Meteorological Society, 76(8):1478-1479.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220BITS OF POWER220APPENDIXDInquiry to Interested Parties on Issues in theTransborder Flow of Scientific DataDear Colleague:The U.S. National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council (NAS/NRC) is undertaking a study to review important issues and trends in the interna-
tional flow of scientific data, particularly along transborder electronic networks.
The study will characterize the technical, legal, economic, and policy issues that
have an influence (favorable or negative) on access by the scientific community
to scientific data.  The scope of the study includes symbolic and substantive

textual data as well as numerical data; bibliographic data are only included to the
extent that they are related to substantive and numerical data.  The study will

identify and describe both the positive aspects and the barriers or hindrances that
have impacts on research in the natural sciences (physical, astronomical, biologi-
cal, and geological) and across those disciplines.  These will be illustrated by

representative examples.  Finally, it will identify medium- and long-term trends

likely to have significant discipline-specific and interdisciplinary influence on
the access to and use of scientific data, particularly in electronic forms, and,
where appropriate, suggest approaches that could help overcome barriers and
hindrances in the international context.The attached ÒInquiry to Interested PartiesÓ is a tool to help us identifysignificant issues and provide important information to us from the viewpoints of
data users and suppliers regarding transborder dissemination of and access to
scientific data in the natural sciences from the legal, policy, economic, and tech-
nical perspectives.  Because of the nature of this inquiry and the means by which

it is being distributed (i.e., not a demographically controlled sample), we do notBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D221intend it to be a survey base for a statistical study.  Rather, we are interested in facts,
interpretations, opinions, and real examples that will help us gain insight into the
main issues of the study.  We also are seeking illustrative material that we can use

to communicate the situation to the scientific and governmental establishments.The goal of our study is to help improve access to scientific data and servicesinternationally.  We therefore hope that your interests are common with ours, and

that you will assist us by providing your views on these issues by taking some
time to fill out and return this form.  We recognize that not every respondent is

likely to be able to comment on every question, and we do not wish to have the
specific questions to be a limit on what you wish to inform us about.  Therefore,

please skip any questions that you do not feel you can address meaningfully, and
add any points that you would like for us to know or consider.   Feel free to use

additional pages or attach other pertinent information if you have more that you
wish to say to us.Please send your response and any related documentation by 31 January1996 to:Paul F. UhlirDirector, U.S. National Committee for CODATA
National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council
2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20418  U.S.A.

Telephone: (202) 334-3061; Fax: (202) 334-2154
Internet: BITS@NAS.EDUWe very much look forward to hearing from you.Sincerely,
R. Stephen BerryStudy ChairmanINQUIRY TO INTERESTED PARTIES ON ISSUES IN THETRANSBORDER FLOW OF SCIENTIFIC DATAPlease provide the following information:Name:
Address:Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222BITS OF POWERTelephone/fax/e-mail (optional):Brief description of your data activities and discipline background:Are you answering this questionnaire as a scientific data: user (  ), producer (  ),
distributor (  ), vendor (  ), system manager (  ), network operator (  ), policymaker

(  ), or other                         ?  [Please check all that apply.]
1.Barriers to Data Access.
  Some restrictions on access to scientific data
frequently are considered necessary to protect various interests as well as
the integrity of the data. In your experience, have restrictions on data been a
problem?  Can you identify any specific impacts or trends?  Please explain.
2.Pricing of Data.
  If you 
use data for scientific research, please tell us:
(a)What data sets you have recently used for which you or your institution
paid nothing, and in what form did you get these data (e.g.,
WorldWideWeb, other on-line, CD-ROM, diskette, tape, film, paper,
etc.)?(b)What data have you recently used for which you paid any amount
(including the cost of reproduction or communication connectivity); in
what form did you get these data, how were you charged (e.g., flat rate,
charge per use, etc.), and how much?(c)What data would you like to use for your research, but consider them
too expensive/costly?  What is the cost of such data and what is their

value (apart from cost)?(d)For the data listed under (c) above, what arrangements could help
make these data available to you?  In what form would you like to be

able to get these data?Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D223If you supply data for scientific research (and perhaps for other uses), please tell us:
(e)Are you a profit-making enterprise; if not, what is the form and intent
of your organization?(f)What kind of data do you supply that are used by scientific research-
ers?(g)Besides scientific researchers, what kind of other users of your data
are there, if any?(h)Do you provide special pricing for research/academic users?  If so,
what is your pricing policy?(i)What are the media you use to distribute your data (e.g., paper, film,
tapes, diskettes, CD-ROMs, on-line, etc.)?(j)If you sell or otherwise market your data, what is your perception of
the price elasticity and demand for the data you distribute?  What

changes would you make to your data products and services if demand
were to increase?Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224BITS OF POWER3.Protection of Intellectual Property.
(a)What are the principal legal and technical mechanisms actually used
for protecting unauthorized uses of data in your country/institution/
discipline area?(b)Can you provide any information about how such legal or technical
mechanisms are implemented or enforced?  What are the positive and

negative impacts?4.Less Developed Countries.
(a)In your experience, what have been the principal problems associated
with transferring data into or out of Òless developed countries,Ó includ-
ing those nations from the former Soviet Union?(b)What can be done to help alleviate these problems, especially by the
international scientific community?5.Electronic Networks.
(a)Has the development and growth of the Internet and other electronic
networking services affected the way you access or distribute data
internationally?  Please give specific examples if you can.
(b)How do you think the situation with electronic networks will change in
the next 5-10 years or so, and what are the likely impacts to your
activities?Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D2256.Other Technical Issues.
(a)Besides those associated with electronic networks, what are the most
important technical benefits or problems you have experienced in ei-
ther disseminating or accessing data internationally?(b) What changes do you anticipate over the next 5-10 years, and what arethe likely impacts to your activities?7.Scientific Data for Global Problems.
(a)In your view, what is the role of international scientific data for ad-
dressing global problems, now and in the future?  Please elaborate.
(b)What can be done to enhance the availability or exchange of scientific
data to better address these concerns?8.Other Issues.
  Do you have any specific concerns or examples of successes
that you believe should be considered in this study?  In addition, we would

welcome your suggestions for other institutions or individuals to contact
with regard to these questions, as well as any references to key documents.[Note: A summary of the most useful responses will be available on the U.S. National Committeefor CODATA Web site at: <http://www.nas.edu/cpsma/codata.htm>.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX227227AAccess to scientific data. See International
access to scientific data; Data,unrestricted accessAdvanced Very High Resolution Radiometer(AVHRR), 58, 123Africa, 42, 46, 70, 107
African Data Dissemination Service (ADDS),107Agencies. See Federal government science
agenciesAgreement on Trade Related Aspects ofIntellectual Property Rights (TRIPS),
150, 154-156, 161, 170, 178, 183-184Alloy Phase Diagram InternationalCommission, 209American Association for the Advancement ofScience, 92, 94, 109American Astronomical Society, 66
American Geophysical Union, 64American Institute of Physics, 64American Meteorological Society, 64
American Society for Mechanical Engineers, 96Animation, 4, 57, 65, 67-68, 196Anticompetitive exclusive property rights. SeeExclusive property rightsAntitrust law, 142, 164Applied research, 1, 18, 20, 133Archives, 5, 59-60, 72, 82-83, 196.  See alsoLong-term data sets; Retention, long-term; Retrospective data setsArgentina, 54Association for Progressive Communications,42, 46Association of American Geographers, 64Association of Universities for Research inAstronomy (AURA), 117, 213Astronomical Data Center, 66Astronomical sciences, 1, 19, 34, 53-54, 66
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 66Astronomy and Astrophysics, 66
Astrophysical Journal, 66
Astrophysics Data System (ADS), 66, 71Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), 25, 32,35, 196Atmospheric sciences, 55, 57, 78, 216-218Australia, 66Australian Oceanographic Data Centre, 118
Authentication issues, 13, 43Automatic license, 164BBalancing divergent interests, 2, 139-145, 162,164-170IndexBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228INDEXBarriers to access, 3, 4, 8, 76, 89. See alsoEconomic factors and trends;International access to scientific data;
Legal infrastructureBasic research, 1-2, 7, 9, 17-18, 97, 133, 163-164Beilstein databases, 61, 211Belgium, 205Berne Convention for the Protection of Literaryand Artistic Works, 9, 135, 145, 155,160-161, 170, 183ÒBig science.Ó See ÒMegascienceÓ programs
Bilateral agreements, 81Biological data, 56, 72-74, 84Biological sciences, 1, 5, 11, 19, 56-57, 73, 83-88Books. See Publishers, commercial
Brazil, 54
Broadband transmission, 28, 30, 197Bromley Principles, 79, 82Brookhaven National Laboratory, 63, 205
ÒBrowsing,Ó 29, 143, 197CCambridge Crystallographic Data Centre, 211,219Canada, 206Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center(CDIAC), 71, 105, 215, 219Center for Information and Numerical DataAnalysis and Synthesis (CINDAS), 119Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC), 120Chemical Abstracts Service, 211, 219
Chemical sciences, 50-51, 210Chile, 41China.  See PeopleÕs Republic of ChinaCircular A-130, 126, 131, 163, 187Climate. See Global climate change
CODATA. See Committee on Data for Science
and TechnologyCODATA Commission on StandardizedTerminology for Access to Biological
Data Banks, 11, 85, 88, 101CODATA Task Group on FundamentalConstants, 88CODATA Task Group on Outreach, Education,and Communication, 108Cold War, end of, 4, 21, 77, 111, 214
Collaborative research, 6, 14, 21, 29, 31-32, 45,63, 97-100, 207-208Collider Detector at Fermilab (CDF), 207, 218Commercialization of data, 29, 31, 99, 111,168-169. See also Markets
Commercial users, 120, 167Commission of the European Communities(CEC), 8, 145-148, 154-155, 164Committee on Data for Science andTechnology (CODATA), viii, 1-2, 19,85, 88, 219Committee on Earth Observation Satellites(CEOS), 94-95Committee on Geophysical and EnvironmentalData, 79Committee on Science and Technology inDeveloping Countries (COSTED), 108Communications. See also Wireless
communicationcosts of, 27-28, 41, 42, 44
two-way, 6, 13Compact Disk-Read Only Memory (CD-ROM),34, 45, 64, 98, 126, 141Competitiveness, 7, 9, 116, 148, 162. See alsoExclusive property rights; Unfaircompetition lawsCompton Gamma Ray Observatory, 60, 81Compulsory license, 147, 159, 169Computational Materials Science, 67
Computer science research, 13, 43Computers, 13, 40-42, 44, 102, 110. See alsoPersonal computershybrid analog/digital, 26scientific requirements for, 36, 39Computing, costs of, 27-28Conflicts of law. See Legislation
Congressional Budget Office, 58-61, 104
Consortium for International Earth SciencesInformation Network (CIESIN), 94, 99,108Constants. See Fundamental constants; Natural
constantsConstitution. See U.S. Constitution
Consultative Group on InternationalAgricultural Research (CGIAR), 107-108Contracts, 135harsh terms of, 159Copying. See Photocopying
Copyright Act of 1976, 140, 143-144Copyright law, 16, 48, 136-140, 143-144, 156.See also Fair use; Noncopyrightable
databases; RoyaltiesBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX229Costs. See Computing; Data; Reproduction and
distributionCouncil of Ministers, 148, 152, 154-156
Cyberspace, 9, 143, 145, 161, 197DData, 4-6, 21-22. See also Networks
accessing (See International access to
scientific data; Full and open exchangeof data)acquiring, 82
analog, 196collecting, 27-28, 30, 62, 198compatibility of, 5, 88-90
cost of, 6 (See also Data, pricing)
declassification of, 77-78describing, 36, 38, 49-51
digitizing, 2, 11, 73, 101, 111distributing, 4, 6-7, 62-64, 114-116, 129evaluating, 199
exchanging, 21, 83, 198growing volume of, 4, 58historical, 11, 71, 101
indexing, 36, 38interfacing, 75managing, 10, 11, 13, 61-64, 198modeling, 65, 70nondiscriminatory availability, 79
nonproprietary, 79preserving, 57, 61-62, 71pricing, 7, 14, 124-126
primary, 21, 49, 202privatizing, 6-7, 14, 111, 116, 120-124, 202(See also Intranets)
processing, 50, 198providing (See Sole-source data providers)
purging, 82
raw, 202remote access, 203rescuing, 13, 98
retaining (See Data, storing)
retrieval, 83, 206sources of, 11
spectral, 203storing, 4, 21, 38, 82, 110transferring, 198
transnational exchange of, 19, 21, 83, 97-100unique, 163universality of, 48
unrestricted access, 83using (See Documentation of data sets)
validating, 198, 204verifying, 100, 204Database industry, 153Database publishers.  See PublishersDatabases, 199. See also Genome databases;
Noncopyrightable databasescommercial value of, 168converting, 89
electronic, 8Òinsubstantial parts of,Ó 152, 157-158
managing, 198
relational, 203vulnerability of, 140-142Data centers, 5, 21, 60, 83
Data integrity, 198Data Management Center (DMC), 216Decryption, 198. See also Encryption
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 48, 56, 73, 212Derivative work rights, 139, 151DETHERM, 211
Developing countries, 6, 12, 40-42, 90-100accessing data from, 97-100Digital versus analog data, 20
Digital versatile disk (DVD), 34, 45Digitizing. See Data
Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases,European, 9, 142, 148-160Distributed networks of data centers, 83
Documentation of data sets, 5, 11, 76-77, 106EeApJ. See Astrophysical JournalEarth Interactions, 64
Earth Observation Satellite Company(EOSAT), 121Earth Observing System (EOS), 30, 45, 80
Earth Resources Observation Systems (EROS),57, 58, 62, 106, 118, 215, 219Earth sciences, 5, 54-56, 69, 75
Earth system processes, 6, 54, 97Earthquakes, 55. See also Seismic arrays and
stationsEcological Society of America, 64Economic factors and trends, 1, 6-8, 110-131,132-133decreasing computing costs, 3, 27restrictions and barriers, 3, 91-92Education. See Science education
Electronic publication, 64-65, 142, 165, 199Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230INDEXElectronic storage media, 4, 21rapid obsolescence of, 36, 38, 72, 74Encryption, 43, 156, 159-160, 199
Engineering applications, 51England. See United Kingdom
Environmental sciences, 5. See alsoObservational environmental sciencesE-print archive, 199, 208-209European Bioinformatics Institute, 212
European Community, 93, 134, 145-148, 154European Dictionaire Automatique, 33European Directive on Databases. See Directive
on the Legal Protection of DatabasesEuropean Molecular Biology Organization, 212European Southern Observatory, 54
European Space Agency (ESA), 54, 118, 213European Space Information System, 117Evaluated Nuclear Data File/B (ENDF/B), 119,206Evaluated Nuclear Structure Data File(ENSDF), 52, 205-206Exclusive property rights, 136-137, 146Extraction, 157-158unauthorized, 158
unfair, 147ÒExtraction right,Ó 154
social costs, 154, 162FFair use, 8-9, 12, 15-16, 143-144, 167-168, 171
Fatty Acid Methyl Ester (FAME) system, 120
Federal government science agencies, 2-3, 13,20, 44. See also individual agenciesFederation of Digital Seismographic Networks(FDSN), 59, 216Feist Publications, Inc. v. 
Rural TelephoneService Co., 8, 16, 139, 154
Fiber-optic communication, 24, 26Fidonet, 42File transfer protocol (FTP), 131
First Amendment. See U.S. Constitution
Flexible image transport system (FITS), 34Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), 86,93Foreign aid, 12-13, 44, 92France, 206
Freedom of scientific inquiry, 2, 17Full and open exchange of data, 3, 7, 9-10, 15,17, 22, 81-82, 101, 199Fundamental constants, 56Fundamental research. See Basic research
GGemini project, 54Genbank, 117Genome databases, 56, 117, 212-213
Geographic Information System (GIS), 75-76Geological sciences, 1, 19.  See also Earth
sciences; Environmental sciences;
Observational environmental sciencesGeophysical data, 75, 214-218Global Atmospheric Research Program, 218
Global Atmospheric Watch, 69Global Change Research Information Office,55, 69, 79, 82Global climate change, 6, 55Global Climate Observing System, 69, 105Global data sharing. See International access to
scientific dataGlobal observational data sets, 97Global Ocean Observing System, 69, 105
Global Terrestrial Observing System, 69-70,105Government science agencies. See Federal
government science agenciesGreat Britain. See United Kingdom
ÒGroup of SevenÓ nations, 10, 101
HHigh density-read only memory (HD-ROM), 45High Energy Astrophysical Observatory 2, 60
High-energy physics (HEP), 206-208High-performance parallel interface (HIPPI),30Historical data. See Data
House. See U.S. House of Representatives
H.R. 3531. See U.S. Database Investment and
Intellectual Property Antipiracy ActHubble Space Telescope (HST), 4, 60, 110,113, 117, 120, 213-214, 219Human Genome Project, 4, 23, 27, 120, 213,219HyperText Mark-up Language (HTML), 33-34IIcarus, 66
Iceland, 183Image Reduction and Analysis Facility (IRAF),214Incompatibilities. See Standardization
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX231Incorporated Research Institutions forSeismology (IRIS), 57-59, 119, 215-216, 219Incremental cost pricing, 14, 125-126Indonesia, 42Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF)White Paper, 143, 155-156, 159-161Information Market Policy Action (IMPACT)program, 145Information technology, 3-4, 24, 110trends in, 24-46Infrared Astronomical Satellite, 60
Innovations, 1, 133, 136, 140subpatentable, 137In situ measurements, 75, 97
Institute of Physics (U.K.), 64ÒInsubstantial parts.Ó See Databases
Intangible property, 161
Integrated services digital network (ISDN)services, 32Intellectual property rights (IPR), 5, 8-10, 48,132-188Interdisciplinary research, 74-76Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission,70Intergovernmental organizations, 63, 93. Seealso individual organizationsInternational access to scientific data, 2, 40-42,90-100developments affecting, 2-10, 17safeguarding, 7-10, 166-169International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),52, 205International Committee on the Taxonomy ofViruses, 85International cooperation, 19, 83International Council of Scientific Unions(ICSU), 10-13, 44, 55, 88, 99, 101-103,
108, 214, 219International Decade of Natural DisasterReduction, 75International Foundation for Science (IFS), 108International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme(IGBP), 4, 22, 27, 55, 69, 77, 106International Organization for Standardization(ISO), 46International organizations, 6, 12, 93. See alsoindividual organizationsInternational research, 58-61International Research and Exchange Board(IREX), 94, 109International Science Foundation, 109International Telecommunications Union, 13, 44International Ultraviolet Explorer, 60
International Union of Biological Sciences, 85International Union of MicrobiologicalSciences, 88International Union of Pharmacology, 85Internet, 3, 29, 31, 42, 65, 68, 200. See alsoWorld Wide Webcongestion on, 8, 26, 35-37, 126-128Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 12,32, 34, 43Internet Protocol Next Generation (IPng), 35,45Internet II, 13, 35
Intranets, 4, 29, 35, 200Investment, 9, 154, 168. See also Profit; Return
on investment; ÒSubstantial investmentÓincentives for, 141Italy, 207JJapan, 205Journals. See Scientific journals
KKenya, 42ÒKnowbots,Ó 26, 33, 200
Kuwait, 205LLaboratory physical sciences, 5, 51-52, 205data compatibility in, 88-90data exchanges in, 205-212Land Remote Sensing Policy Act of 1992, 121
Landsat, 77, 111, 121-123, 163Language translation, 33Large research programs. See ÒMegascienceÓprogramsLaTeX, 65, 88, 200, 207-208Laws. See Legislation
Legal infrastructure, 1, 8-10, 139restrictions and barriers, 3, 9, 136Legislation, 132. See also Antitrust law;
Copyright law; Trade secret law;Trademark laws; Unfair competitionlaws; individual lawsBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232INDEXconflicts in, 161pending, 9-10, 160-161, 171Legislative process, 8, 15
Liability principles, 137, 148, 164Liability regime, 136Libraries, 8, 145
Licenses, 151, 154. See also Automatic license;
Compulsory licenseLicensing fees, 165
Liechtenstein, 183Long-term data sets, 82. See also Archives;
Retention, long-term; Retrospective data
setsLos Alamos National Laboratory, 30-31, 45, 208MMachine translation, 29Manufacturing applications, 18, 51Marginal cost pricing, 7, 14, 126Market forces, 3, 162-164, 168
Market power, 151, 164abuses of, 154Market price system, 113
Markets, 9, 111-114, 139, 140, 162-164. Seealso Competitiveness
Materials sciences, 67, 106-107, 211Media. See Electronic storage media; Print media
ÒMegascienceÓ programs, 19, 23, 58-61
Metadata, 106, 201.  See also Documentation
of data setsMetals Information Analysis Center (MIAC),119Meteorology, 79, 216Mexico, 76, 98
Microbiology, 96Micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), 25Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE), 193
Modeling and Simulation in Materials Scienceand Engineering, 67
Molecular biology, 67, 212
Monopoliesprofit-making, 7, 151-152, 158, 162public, 116
regulated, 124unrestricted, 7MooreÕs Law, 28, 44, 201Multicast broadcast backbone network(MBone), 31-32, 45Multinational authorship, 21NNational Aeronautics and Space Administration(NASA), 34, 45, 54, 64, 80-81, 93, 117,213-214data availability policy, 80-81National Cancer Institute, 41National Center for Atmospheric Research, 117
National Center for Biotechnology Information(NCBI), 212, 219National Climatic Data Center (NCDC), 72,119, 217National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC), 72,214National Human Genome Research Institute, 22National information infrastructure, 193National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST), 89National Institutes of Health (NIH), 41, 117National Land Remote Sensing Satellite DataArchive, 62National Library of Medicine (NLM), 41National Nuclear Data Center (NNDC), 52, 63-64, 206National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration (NOAA), 62, 98, 116,119, 121, 214, 217-218National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC),98, 217-218National Optical Astronomy Observatories, 214National Research Council (NRC), 20, 38, 45-46, 54, 68-69, 74-75, 103-109National Science Foundation (NSF), 31, 54, 85National security issues, 77
National Space Policy 1996, 62, 79National Space Sciences Data Center, 117Natural constants, 50
Natural language processing, 4, 29, 32-33Natural sciences, 1, 4, 16, 19, 111, 201Netherlands, 205
Networks, 13, 28-30, 83. See also Fidonet;
Internet II; Real-timemonitoring and controlling, 4, 29, 34-35
vulnerability of, 36, 39, 140-142NGOs. See Nongovernmental organizations
Niche markets, 139
Nomenclature, 11, 83-88.  See also Taxonomic
definitions; TerminologyNoncopyrightable databases, 146-147
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 81,94-96. See also individual organizationsBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX233Nonvoluntary licensing. See Compulsory
licenseNordic catalogue rule, 146, 179
Norway, 46, 183Nuclear Database (NUDAT), 206Nuclear Information Service, 118OObservational environmental sciences, 69-83Observational sciences, 5-6, 50, 53, 201Observations, simultaneous, 53
Obsolescence. See Electronic storage media
Oceanographic Society of America, 64, 216Office of Management and Budget (OMB),126, 131, 159Office of Science and Technology Policy, 11,15, 90, 102, 171Office of Technology Assessment (OTA), 176On-line transmissions, 156Open publication. See Publication, open
Organisation for Economic Co-operation andDevelopment (OECD), 10, 20, 27, 101Organization of American States (OAS), 93,108PPaleoclimatology World Data Center, 119
Pan American Health Organization, 93Paris Convention for the Protection ofIndustrial Property, 135, 145, 170, 178Patent and copyright systems, 8. See alsoCopyright law; SubpatentableinnovationsPatent and Trademark Office (PTO), 156, 160Peer review, 11, 101PeopleÕs Republic of China, 72-73, 205Personal computers (PCs), 35, 110Photocopying, 132-134, 155Physical sciences, 1, 4, 19, 51-52
ÒPlain oldÓ telephone service (POTS), 32
Policy. See Public policy; Science policy
Population issues, 74
Portable Operating System Interface forComputer Environments (POSIX), 33Post, telephone, and telegraph ministries(PTTs), 40Predigital status quo, 135-139. See also Digital
versus analog dataPrice ceiling, 14, 126, 129Price differentiation, 6-7, 124-126, 129, 167-168Price discrimination, 14, 116, 124-125, 129Price of data. See Data
Print media, 140. See also Publishers; Scientific
journalsPrivacy issues, 48, 103Private investment, 9incentives for, 141Private monopolies, 116, 142Private sector, 93, 96, 116, 120
Privatizing data. See Data
Processing data. See Data
Product differentiation, 14, 116
Professional societies, 5, 11, 49Profit, 132-133, 166Property rights. See also Intangible property;
Intellectual propertyexclusive (See Exclusive property rights)
protectionist, 14Proprietary period, 11, 79Proprietary rights, 48, 151, 162. See also Data,
nonproprietaryProtectionist strategy, 155-156possible consequences of, 165Publication, open, 17. See also Electronic
publication; Professional societies;Publishers; Scientific journalsPublic domain, 8, 166Public good, 7, 15, 164-170, 202defined, 112-113Public health and safety, 6, 56Public interest, 5-6, 9, 17-18, 161exceptions to, 152, 158Public investment, 14, 115, 128-129, 133Public monopolies, 116Public policy, 1, 7, 62, 124. See also Science
policydebate over, 22Public rights versus private rights, 8, 139-145
Publicly funded research and data, 3, 7, 17,110-131, 133Publishers, 135, 142, 154, 166, 168commercial, 5, 52, 135database, 139, 166QQuality control and assurance, 5, 11, 71, 101Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234INDEXRRamsey pricing, 124Reciprocity clause, 155Recommendations, 10-15, 22, 43-44, 81, 83,100-103, 128-129, 171Regulatory approaches, differing, 145Remote sensing, 204
Reproduction and distribution. See alsoPhotocopyingcost of, 79, 91Research. See Applied research; Basic research;
Collaborative research; Internationalcooperation; International research;
Publicly funded research and data;Users of research dataRetention, long-term, 5.  See also Archives;
Long-term data sets; Retrospective datasetsRetrospective data sets, 78.  See also Archives;
Long-term data sets; Retention, long-termReturn on investment, 48, 168
Reverse-engineering, 147, 156Ribonucleic acid (RNA), 73, 212Rights. See Derivative work rights; Intellectual
property rights; Property rights;Proprietary rights; Public rights versus
private rightsRoyalties, 144Russia, 205, 206SSabre Foundation, 94, 109Satellites, 25, 41, 58, 95, 110Science agencies. See Federal government
science agenciesScience and Technology Network International(STN), 211Science education, 9, 13, 15, 92-93Science Group Thermodata Europe, 209Scientific data. See also Data
accessing (See International access to
scientific data)defined, 16
rapid growth of, 3, 17, 57-58Scientific issues, 47-109defined, 47-49
progress in, 3Scientific journals, 5, 12, 48-49, 52Scientific research. See Applied research; Basic
research; Collaborative research;International research; Publicly funded
research; Users of research dataScientific understanding, 82Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 118
Search capabilities, 89Secondary users of data, 106, 203supporting (See Documentation of data sets)
Seismic arrays and stations, 215Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984,155Shoemaker-Levy Comet, 36, 54SIMBAD (set of identifications, measurements,and bibliography for astronomical data),
71Simple Message Transfer Protocol (SMTP), 33Simple Network Management Protocol(SNMP), 33-34Simulations, 52, 65, 67Soil science, 85
Soil Taxonomy system, 86Soils and Terrain Digital Database (SOTER),85-87Sole-source data providers, 147Space sciences, 53-54, 66, 71-72Space Telescope European CoordinatingFacility (ST-ECF), 196, 213-214Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI),213-214Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, 10,13, 44, 101SPECINFO, 211Standard Generalized Mark-up Language(SGML), 33Standardization, 4, 11, 29, 33-34Storage of data. See Data
Stratospheric ozone depletion, 55
Subpatentable innovations, 137ÒSubstantial investment,Ó 151, 157
Sui generis regime, 137, 145-147, 149-160,
162, 164, 166-169, 203Sweden, 205Switzerland, 209TT-2. See Nuclear Information Service
Taiwan, 205Taxonomic definitions, 11, 84.  See alsoNomenclature; TerminologyBits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific DataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX235Technical factors and trends, 1, 3, 24-40advances in, 4, 25-26concerns over, 35-40Telecommunications. See Communications
Terminology, 83-88TeX, 65, 88, 200, 208-209
Textual format, 20, 45Thematic Mapper (TM), 122-123Third World Academy of Sciences (TWAS),96, 108Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual PropertyRights. See Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual PropertyRightsTrade secret law, 136
Trademark laws, 150Transmission Control Protocol/InternetProtocol (TCP/IP), 33, 42Transnational data flow. See Data, transnational
exchange ofTropical Ocean Global Atmosphere Program, 70
Turkey, 183UUnauthorized use, 158
Unfair competition laws, 139Uniform resource locators (URLs), 66problems with, 23Uniform resource name (URN), 23, 66United Kingdom, 54, 66United Nations Commission on EconomicDevelopment (UNCED), 44United Nations Development Programme, 93United Nations Educational, Scientific, andCultural Organization (UNESCO), 86,92-93, 108United Nations Environment Programme(UNEP), 44, 85, 93, 99United Nations Industrial DevelopmentOrganization, 44, 96U.S. Agency for International Development(USAID), 46, 93, 96, 107U.S. Constitution, 8, 172enabling clause, 157First Amendment concerns, 139U.S. Database Investment and IntellectualProperty Antipiracy Act (H.R. 3531),157-160, 185U.S. Department of Agriculture, 93, 107U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC), 119U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), 31
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), 73, 215U.S. Department of State, 93U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI), 118
U.S. federal government science agencies. SeeFederal government science agenciesU.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 57-58
U.S. government, 93.  See also individualgovernment agenciesU.S. House of Representatives, 8, 155-157
U.S. National Committee for CODATA(USNC-CODATA), x, 23U.S. Supreme Court, 8, 154
Users of research data, 115-116, 125, 163, 169.See also Commercial users; Secondary
users of datasize of community, 14, 129VValue-added products, 7, 133, 140, 152, 164
Vietnam, 96
Volunteers in Technical Assistance (VITA), 94WWireless communication, 4, 24, 28, 30
World Bank, 13, 44, 93World Data Centers (WDCs), 10, 79, 94, 98,101, 214-215-, 219World Health Organization (WHO), 93World Intellectual Property Organization(WIPO), 9, 15, 134, 142-143, 146, 155-
156, 158, 170-171, 184World Meteorological Organization (WMO),55, 70, 93, 116, 216-219World Trade Organization (WTO), 15, 155-156, 161, 170-171World Weather Watch, 69-70, 216-218
World Wide Web (WWW), 26, 30, 42, 65, 68,127, 204, 206XX.400, 33