DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/5830Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and Defense196 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05842-1 | DOI 10.17226/5830Committee on Modeling and Simulation: Opportunities for Collaboration Betweenthe Defense and Entertainment Research Communities, Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, National Research CouncilModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Modeling and Simulation:
Opportunities for Collaboration Between the
Defense and Entertainment Research Communities
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Commission on Physical Sciences,
Mathematics, and Applications
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, D.C.  1997
Modeling andSimulationLinking EntertainmentandDefenseModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of

the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute
of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for
their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proce-
dures approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National

Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the fur-

therance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate
that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr.
Bruce Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is

autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the Na-

tional Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The Na-
tional Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting nation-
al needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of

engineers.  Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of

policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the responsi-
bility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an
adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical
care, research, and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the

principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National
Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scien-
tific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies

and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman and
vice-chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
Support for this project was provided by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office
through Subcontract 4843 from RGB Technology Inc.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions,

or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily reflect the views of the sponsors.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 97-68732
International Standard Book Number 0-309-05842-2
Additional copies of this report are available from:
National Academy Press
2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
Box 285

Washington, DC  20055
800/624-6242202/334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)

http://www.nap.eduCopyright 1997 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiCOMMITTEE ON MODELING AND SIMULATION:
OPPORTUNITIES FOR COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE
DEFENSE AND ENTERTAINMENT RESEARCH COMMUNITIES
MICHAEL ZYDA, Naval Postgraduate School, 
Chair
DONNA COX, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
WARREN KATZ, M
−K Technologies
JOSHUA LARSON-MOGAL, Silicon Graphics Inc.

GILMAN LOUIE, Spectrum HoloByte Inc.

PAUL LYPACZEWSKI, Alias|Wavefront

RANDY PAUSCH, Carnegie Mellon University

ALEXANDER SINGER, Independent Producer/Director

JORDAN WEISMAN, Virtual World Entertainment Inc.
StaffJERRY R. SHEEHAN, Study Director
LISA L. SHUM, Project Assistant

GLORIA BEMAH, Administrative Assistant (through November 1996)
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Chair
FRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara

SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley

JAMES GRAY, Microsoft Corporation

BARBARA J. GROSZ, Harvard University

PATRICK HANRAHAN, Stanford University

JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco

DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin

BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation

EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington

BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JOHN MAJOR, Qualcomm Inc.

ROBERT L. MARTIN, Lucent Technologies

DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley

CHARLES L. SEITZ, Myricom Inc.

DONALD SIMBORG, KnowMed Systems Inc.

LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel Corporation
MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Staff Officer

JULIE CLYMAN LEE, Administrative Assistant

LISA L. SHUM, Project Assistant

SYNOD P. BOYD, Project Assistant
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,
MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONS
ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation, 
Co-chair
W. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, 
Co-chair
PETER M. BANKS, Environmental Research Institute of Michigan
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, University of Pennsylvania

RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University

JOHN E. ESTES, University of California at Santa Barbara

L. LOUIS HEGEDUS, Elf Atochem North America Inc.

JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University

RHONDA J. HUGHES, Bryn Mawr College

SHIRLEY A. JACKSON, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission

KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota

KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory

MARGARET G. KIVELSON, University of California at Los Angeles

DANIEL KLEPPNER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JOHN KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company

MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania

THOMAS A. PRINCE, California Institute of Technology

NICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory

L.E. SCRIVEN, University of Minnesota

SHMUEL WINOGRAD, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

CHARLES A. ZRAKET, MITRE Corporation (retired)
NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
The entertainment industry and the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD)Ñthough differing widely in their motivations, objectives, and cul-tures
Ñshare a growing interest in modeling and simulation.  In enter-
tainment, modeling and simulation technology is a key component of a
$30 billion annual market for video games, location-based entertainment,

theme parks, and films.  In defense, modeling and simulation provides a

cost-effective means of conducting joint training; developing new doc-

trine, tactics, and operational plans; assessing battlefield conditions; and

evaluating new and upgraded systems.
Recognizing this synergy, DOD
Õs Defense Modeling and Simulation
Office (DMSO) asked the National Research Council
Õs Computer Science
and Telecommunications Board to convene a multidisciplinary commit-

tee to evaluate the extent to which the entertainment industry and DOD

might be able to better leverage each other
Õs capabilities in modeling and
simulation technology and to identify potential areas for greater collabo-

ration (see Appendix C for committee members
Õ biographies).  The com-
mittee met in June and August 1996 to plan a two-day workshop that

was held in Irvine, California, in October 1996 (see Appendixes A and B

for the workshop agenda and list of participants).  It met again in No-

vember 1996 to discuss the results of the workshop and to plan the struc-

ture and format of this summary report.
The workshop brought together more than 50 representatives of the
entertainment and defense research communities to discuss technical
challenges facing the two industries, identify obstacles to successful shar-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEing of technology and joint research, and suggest mechanisms for facili-
tating greater collaboration.  Participants were drawn from the film, vid-

eo game, location-based entertainment, and theme park industries; DOD;

defense contractors; and universities.  They included top executives and

government program managers as well as engineers, film directors, re-

searchers from industry and academia, and university faculty.  Through

a series of presentations on electronic storytelling, strategy and war gam-

ing, experiential computing and virtual reality, networked simulation,

and low-cost simulation hardware, the committee attempted to encour-

age dialogue among these diverse stakeholders and stimulate discussion

of research areas of interest to both the entertainment and defense indus-

tries.  Because the workshop represented one of the first formal attempts

to bridge the gap between the entertainment and defense communities,

the committee also hoped to encourage personal contacts between mem-

bers of the two communities as a means of facilitating future collabora-

tion.  As such, the 1996 workshop should be seen as part of an ongoing

process that may continue beyond this project and this report.
This report represents the committee
Õs attempt to capture key themes
of the workshop discussions.  Chapter 1 provides an overview of the

applications of modeling and simulation technology in the entertainment

and defense industries and discusses the historical flows of technology

between them.  It also reviews the potential benefits to collaboration and

outlines the underlying technologies of modeling and simulation in

which collaboration may be possible.  Chapter 2 identifies common tech-

nical needs of DOD and the entertainment industry, identifying and de-

scribing areas in which the entertainment and defense communities ap-

pear to have similar interests and in which collaboration, at some level,

may be possible.  Chapter 3 describes other issues that must be addressed

in order to facilitate collaboration and sharing of research.  These include

the needs to develop the necessary human resources, establish mecha-

nisms for information sharing and technology transfer, strengthen the

research base, and overcome cultural differences between the two com-

munities.  As Chapter 3 notes, collaboration between the entertainment

and defense research communities will require far more than a list of

common research interests.  Structures must be put in place to facilitate

collaboration and to allow greater sharing of information between the

two communities; differences in culture and business practices must be

overcome, though not necessarily altered.  Putting these elements in place
will facilitate collaboration over time on an ever-changing set of common

technologies and research areas.
This report benefited from the contributions of many people through-out the modeling and simulation community.  Workshop participants,

through their presentations and discussion, provided the committee with
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixmuch of the material used in this report.  The committee is especially
grateful to those participants who submitted position papers outlining

the research challenges in their particular fields of interest.  The commit-

tee drew from these papers in preparing this report; the papers are repro-

duced in Appendix D.  External reviewers of an early draft of this report

also provided valuable comments.
Staff members of the U.S. Army
Õs Topographic Engineering Center
and Joint Precision Strike Demonstration provided the committee with

an informative demonstration of state-of-the-art military systems for bat-

tlefield visualization and real-time, man-in-the-loop, networked simula-

tion.  David Wray, of DMSO, provided hours of videotaped visual simu-

lations for the committee to examine and excerpt.  Several volunteers set

up and operated a variety of entertainment and military demonstration

systems during the 1996 workshop to provide participants with hands-

on experience:  Charles Benton of Technology Systems Inc., Michael Bilo-

deau of Spectrum HoloByte Inc., Steven Carter of Thrustmaster Inc., Leon

Dennis of the Armstrong Laboratories at Wright Patterson Air Force Base,
Brian Kalita of BBN Corporation, and Greg Lutz of Motorola
Õs Govern-
ment Electronics Division.  Robin Scheer, of Spectrum HoloByte Inc.,
worked tirelessly to arrange the entertainment demonstrations and to

contact participants for the strategy and war games session of the work-

shop.  Fred Zyda orchestrated audiovisual presentations during the work-

shop, demonstrated video games for participants when called upon, and

selected video clips and edited the videotape for the 
ÒIntroductory Com-
monalities
Ó presentation.
Finally, thanks are due the sponsors of this study.  Anita Jones, as
director of defense research and engineering, conceived of the project

and ensured its realization.  James Hollenbach, Mark Jefferson, and Ju-

dith Dahmann of DMSO, with support from Terry Hines, of the MITRE

Corporation, provided necessary guidance and support for the project

and facilitated the participation of the defense community in its comple-

tion.Michael Zyda, 
Chair
Committee on Modeling and Simulation:

Opportunities for Collaboration Between the
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiDefense and Entertainment Research Communities
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1  INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Defense Modeling and Simulation, 14
Modeling and Simulation in the Entertainment Industry, 19

Connections Between Defense and Entertainment, 23

Notes, 30
2  SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Technologies for Immersive Simulated Environments, 32
Experiential Computing in DOD, 33

Experiential Computing in the Entertainment Industry, 35

Research Challenges, 35
Networked Simulation, 44
Applications, 44

Research Challenges, 44
Standards for Interoperability, 52
DOD Efforts in Interoperability, 54

Interoperability in the Entertainment Industry, 58

Research Areas, 60
Computer-generated Characters, 64
Computer-generated Characters in Entertainment, 65

DOD Applications of Computer-generated Characters, 68

Common Research Challenges, 69
ContentsModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSTools for Creating Simulated Environments, 73
Entertainment Applications and Interests, 74
DOD Applications and Interests, 75

Research Challenges, 76
Conclusion, 79

Notes, 79
3SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Overcoming Cultural Barriers, 84
Different Business Models, 85

Facilitating Coordination and Cooperation, 88
Human Resources, 92

Maintaining the Research Base, 97

Concluding Remarks, 99

Notes, 100
APPENDIXESAWORKSHOP AGENDA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105

BWORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107

CBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS. . . . 110

DPOSITION PAPERS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive Summary
Modeling and simulation technology has become increasingly im-
portant to both the entertainment industry and the U.S. Department of
Defense (DOD).  In the entertainment industry, such technology lies at

the heart of video games, theme park attractions and entertainment cen-

ters, and special effects for film production.  For DOD, modeling and

simulation technology provides a low-cost means of conducting joint

training exercises, evaluating new doctrine and tactics, and studying the

effectiveness of new weapons systems.  Both the entertainment industry

and DOD are aggressively pursuing development of distributed simula-

tion systems that can support Internet-based games and large-scale train-

ing exercises.  These common interests suggest that the entertainment

industry and DOD may be able to more efficiently achieve their individ-

ual goals by working together to advance the technology base for model-

ing and simulation.  Such cooperation could take many forms, including

collaborative research and development projects, sharing research results,
or coordinating ongoing research programs to avoid unnecessary dupli-

cation of effort.
This report summarizes the results of a workshop, convened by the
National Research CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications

Board, that brought together members of the entertainment and defense

industries to discuss research interests in modeling and simulation.  The

workshop revealed several areas in which the entertainment industry

and DOD have common interests (see Box ES.1).  This report examines

the research challenges in these areas with an eye toward identifying
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2MODELING AND SIMULATION
BOX ES.1Research Areas of Interest to the Entertainment Industryand the Defense Modeling and Simulation CommunityTechnologies for Immersion¥Image generationÑgraphics computers capable of generating com-plex visual images.
¥TrackingÑtechnologies for monitoring the head position and orien-tation of participants in virtual environments.¥PerambulationÑtechnologies that allow participants to walk throughvirtual environments while experiencing hills, bumps, obstructions, etc.¥Virtual presenceÑtechnologies for providing a wide range of sensorystimuli:  visual, auditory, olfactory, vibrotactile, and electrotactile.Networked Simulation¥Higher-bandwidth networksÑto allow faster communication ofgreater amounts of information among participants.
¥Multicast and area-of-interest managersÑto facilitate many-to-manycommunications while using limited bandwidth.¥Latency reductionÑtechniques for reducing true or perceived delaysin distributed simulations.Standards for Interoperability¥Virtual reality transfer protocolÑto facilitate large-scale networkingof distributed virtual environments.¥Architectures for interoperabilityÑnetwork and software architec-tures to allow scalability of distributed simulations without degrading per-formance.¥Interoperability standards
Ñprotocols that allow simulators to work
together effectively and facilitate the construction of large simulations from
existing subsystems.Computer-generated Characters¥AdaptabilityÑdevelopment of computer-generated characters thatcan modify their behavior automatically over time.¥Individual behaviorsÑcomputer-generated characters that accurate-
ly portray the actions and responses of individual participants in a simula-tion rather than those of aggregated entities such as tank crews or platoons.¥Human representationsÑauthentic avatars that look, move, andspeak like humans.continuesModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3areas for possible cooperation.  The report does not attempt to provide
answers to existing research questions, nor does it necessarily recom-

mend that cooperative efforts be initiated in the areas discussed.  Such

decisions need to be made on a case-by-case basis by the individual orga-

nizations that might participate.
Cooperative endeavors between DOD and the entertainment indus-
try will face many obstacles.  As the workshop revealed, numerous cul-

tural barriers divide the entertainment industry and DOD, and few mech-
anisms exist to facilitate the sharing of information.  If such obstacles can

be overcome, these differences could be a source of strength, ensuring a

complementarity of interests, capabilities, and approaches that might ben-
efit both communities.  Already, the U.S. Marine Corps is evaluating

commercial computer games for training purposes, the Army is consid-

ering use of game machines as personal training units, and members of

the Air National Guard are evaluating the use of commercial flight simu-

lator programs to supplement standard training regimens.  Such initia-

tives suggest that cooperation is possible but only begin to hint at the

kinds of benefits that might be achieved through greater collaboration in

research, which is the main subject of this report.
Other tasks will also need to be undertaken jointly in order to ensure
¥Aggregation/disaggregationÑthe capability to aggregate smallerunits into larger ones and to disaggregate them back into smaller oneswithout sacrificing the fidelity of a simulation or frustrating attempts at
interoperability.¥Spectator rolesÑways of allowing observers to watch a simulation.Tools for Creating Simulated Environments¥Database generation and manipulation
Ñtools for managing and stor-
ing information in large databases, to allow rapid retrieval of information,
feature extraction, creation, and simplification.¥CompositingÑhardware and software packages that allow designersto combine images taken from different sources (whether live-action foot-
age or three-dimensional models) and to facilitate the addition or modifica-tion of lighting and environmental effects.¥Interactive tools
Ñhardware and software systems that allow design-
ers to use a variety of input devices (more than mouse and keyboard) to
construct models and simulations.BOX ES.1continuedModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4MODELING AND SIMULATION
the future strength of both communities.  DOD and the entertainment
industry will need to foster the establishment and expansion of educa-

tion programs to train students in the technical and nontechnical under-

pinnings of modeling, simulation, and virtual environments.  They also

will need to ensure the viability of the university research base, which

not only will produce these students but will also generate many of the

technical advances upon which future entertainment and defense sys-

tems will be built.
TOWARD A RESEARCH AGENDA
Workshop discussions revealed several research areas that are of in-
terest to both the entertainment industry and the defense modeling and

simulation community:  technologies for immersion, networked simula-

tion, interoperability, computer-generated characters, and hardware and

software tools for creating synthetic environments.  Each of these areas

demonstrates sufficient overlap in interest by DOD and the entertain-

ment industry to suggest that common work may be possible, although

additional study may be required to fully detail the scale and scope of

such work.  While both DOD and the entertainment industry have simi-

lar interests at the research and technology levels, the applications and

end products into which research results will be incorporated may differ

in fundamental ways, reinforcing the notion that the most effective forms

of cooperation will derive more from early stages of research than from

sharing products.  Emphasizing cooperation in research over sharing of

products also helps avoid many of the concerns about intellectual prop-

erty and proprietary interests that could impede collaboration between

the entertainment industry and DOD.
Technologies for Immersion
Both the entertainment industry and DOD are interested in develop-
ing immersive systems that allow participants (whether game players or

soldiers) to enter and navigate simulated environments.  For DOD such

systems can be used to train groups of combatants or, increasingly, indi-

vidual combatants for particular missions when access to the actual loca-

tion is either hazardous or just not possible.  They can also be used to

create virtual prototypes of military systems that designers can walk
through and visualize.  For the entertainment industry such systems are

the basis for virtual reality (VR) experiences being incorporated into loca-

tion-based entertainment centers, theme parks, and video game centers.

Immersive technologies are also finding their way into home applica-

tions, prompted by the greater availability of three-dimensional (3D)Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5graphics on personal computers and reductions in the cost of peripheral
devices, such as joysticks and head-mounted displays.
Immersive environments benefit from a wide range of technologies
that provide the sensory cues necessary for participants to perceive their

environments.  The most basic of these are image generators that create

3D visual displays of the environment itself.  Other technologies include

locomotion platforms and unobtrusive bodysuits that allow participants

to walk through virtual environments and track their movements and

interactions.  Such bodysuits are also used to build keyframes for animat-

ed characters in film and video game productions.
1  DOD is pursuing
these applications as part of its dismounted infantry program, and the

Defense Modeling and Simulation Office recently funded relevant work

at the U.S. Army
Õs Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command.
It is also funding work on generating other sensory stimuli in virtual

environments:  auditory, olfactory, and tactile.  Such work is also the

focus of the commercial VR industry and parts of the entertainment in-

dustry.The entertainment industry and DOD may also be able to benefit
from their complementary approaches to 
selective fidelity
.  Both communi-
ties have learned how to boost the fidelity (or accuracy) of some parts of

a simulated environment and limit the fidelity of others while creating an

engaging simulation experience.  Whereas DOD has tended to empha-

size the fidelity of interactions between objects in a simulated environ-

ment (using science-based models), the entertainment industry has tend-

ed to promote visual fidelity and uses principles of good storytelling to

help participants suspend their disbelief about the reality of a synthetic

experience (whether a VR attraction or a film).  Additional work in these

areas, and sharing of approaches, may allow both communities to create

more engaging simulated experiences while minimizing the technical de-

mands placed on the system itself.
Networked Simulation
The entertainment industry and DOD face similar challenges in cre-
ating networking technologies capable of supporting distributed simula-

tions.  DOD has already demonstrated the capability to link thousands of

participants into a single training exercise and is working on systems that

would engage tens of thousands of participants.  Internet-based game

companies have recently begun to move fast-action video games onto the

Internet and are looking for ways to increase the number of simultaneous

players from 10 or 20 to hundreds or perhaps thousands.  As the number

of participants in Internet-based games and the military
Õs joint training
exercises grows, improvements to simulation networks will be needed to
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6MODELING AND SIMULATION
ensure that communications between participants can be transmitted in a
reliable and timely fashion.
Several technologies can support such requirements.  First, DOD and
the entertainment industry can pursue ways of expanding the bandwidth

of simulation networks to allow more information to be transmitted more
quickly.  Many of the technologies for doing so will derive from technical

advances made by the communications and networking industries, on

which both DOD and the entertainment industry rely.  Other approaches

also are being pursued by DOD and the Internet community, including

multicast and software-based area-of-interest managers.  These tech-

niques can be used to minimize message traffic across the network by

directing copies of a single message to only those recipients who have an

interest in seeing it.  DOD and the games industry are also developing

ways of compensating for the latency of distributed networks through

algorithms for predicting the future location and state of other objects

and for synchronizing events among different participants.
Standards for Interoperability
Both DOD and the entertainment industry are developing architec-
tures and protocols for linking distributed simulation systems.  DOD has

promoted the development of standards for distributed interactive simu-

lation (DIS) that specify the protocols such systems should follow.  It has

also developed a high-level architecture for military simulation systems

that allows different simulator platforms to interoperate and enables re-

use of existing simulation programs.  Commercial industry, in contrast,

has developed standards for enabling different types of computer sys-

tems to play the same game.  Rather than adopt a common set of proto-

cols for allowing games to work with one another, game companies have

each tended to develop their own proprietary protocols that allow copies

of their own games to play against each other but do not allow them to

work with another company
Õs games.  Some of these protocols derive
from DIS standards but are modified to boost the performance of a par-

ticular game.  It is not clear that DOD and the entertainment industry

will adopt common standards on a wide scale as long as proprietary

interests continue to dominate protocol decisions.
Nevertheless, both DOD and the entertainment industry will needto solve common problems in developing their network architectures

and protocols; common research into interoperability standards might
be beneficial.  A careful and considered joint research program is

needed that studies the issues involved in designing a common scal-

able network software architecture capable of supporting large num-

bers of players across wide-area networks.
2  Components of this re-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7search effort include Web-based interoperability standards that
would allow the linking of distributed virtual environments, archi-

tectures for Òplug-and-playÓ interoperability that allow different sim-ulation systems to interoperate, and network software architectures

for maintaining 
persistent universes
Ñsimulated worlds that continue
to exist and evolve even after an individual participant leaves the

simulation.  Little fundamental research is being conducted in these

areas by either DOD or the entertainment industry; rather, both com-

munities are concentrating on developing networked simulation sys-

tems without addressing the basic issues of the network software ar-

chitecture.Computer-generated Characters
The term 
computer-generated characters
 refers to the broad range of
entities in a simulated environment (people, tanks, aircraft, etc.) whose

behaviors are controlled wholly or in part by a computer.
3  They include
the computerized opponents in computer chess games, digital actors that

appear in films and television, and simulated enemy forces in military

training exercises.  Computer-generated characters are a part of virtually

every major DOD simulation and all video games in which players com-

pete against the computer instead of, or in addition to, other players.

They attempt to reproduce realistic intelligent human behavior that pro-

vides participants with a compelling simulated experience.
Additional research would benefit computer-generated characters in
both entertainment and defense applications.  Gilman Louie, of Spectrum

HoloByte Inc., estimates that games companies allocate up to two-thirds

of their development efforts to programming autonomous characters that
cannot be reused in other games.  DOD, while creating more advanced

computer-generated characters, tends to program behaviors into entities,

such as tanks crews, that operate according to strict rules of engagement

derived from military doctrine.  These entities cannot be easily modified

or reprogrammed; nor can they accurately portray the behaviors of indi-

vidual soldiers on a battlefield.  Both DOD and the entertainment indus-

try would like to develop computer-generated characters that have adapt-
able behaviors and can learn from experience.  Some research is ongoing,
under DOD sponsorship, to apply techniques of artificial intelligence and
genetic algorithms to computer-generated characters so that they can

achieve these capabilities.  Other work is needed to develop adequate

models of individual human behaviors and realistic representations of

humans in virtual environments.  Significant work is needed to develop

the capability to define computer-generated characters at a high level of

abstraction that will facilitate their reuse.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8MODELING AND SIMULATION
Tools for Creating Simulated Environments
Workshop participants identified low-cost, easy-to-use hardware andsoftware tools for creating simulated environments as a critical need for
entertainment and defense applications of modeling and simulation.4Such tools are needed to enable the rapid creation and manipulation of

large databases of information describing terrain, buildings, 3D objects,

and dynamic features of virtual environments, and to facilitate the com-

positing of such disparate imagery into a unified simulated world.  Al-

though the entertainment industry purchases a wide variety of graphics

hardware and software from established vendors, it spends little on im-

proving these tools and instead concentrates on short-term solutions to

devise advanced special effects.  Many existing systems are expensive

and difficult to learn.  Additional research is needed to create more inter-

active tools that allow designers to develop simulated environments us-

ing input devices other than keyboard and mouse.  In one system de-

scribed at the workshop, an immersive VR system was developed to

allow filmmakers to manipulate computer imagery in real time.  Such

techniques may have broader applicability in entertainment and defense.
TOWARD GREATER COOPERATION
Promoting cooperation between DOD and the entertainment indus-
try in modeling and simulation will require both communities to over-

come cultural barriers that have, to date, isolated them from one another

and limited the flows of information between them.  Differences in busi-

ness models will need to be overcome if joint research is to be achieved.

At the same time, DOD and the entertainment industry will need to en-

sure that they take the necessary actions, both individually and jointly, to

ensure a continued supply of good people and good ideas for future

modeling and simulation efforts.  Educational programs are needed to

train students in the technical and nontechnical skills that are important

to creating effective simulated environments.  Fundamental research pro-
grams are needed to generate ideas and explore new technologies that

are broadly relevant to modeling and simulation.  DOD and the enter-

tainment industry will need to solicit additional input from the academic

research community to better understand how to accomplish these tasks.
Information Sharing and Technology Transfer
The workshop conducted as part of this study was unique in that it
brought together two communities that traditionally have shared little

information and transferred little technology between them.  Its success
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9attests to the vision of DOD in identifying a potential basis for coopera-
tion and the efforts of the committee to create an atmosphere in which

mutually beneficial exchanges of information could occur.  For the most

part, DOD and the entertainment industry are two different cultures,

with different languages and separate communities of researchers and

managers.  Few opportunities exist for promoting information exchanges

between the two communities.  The ones that do exist
Ñmostly govern-
ment efforts to promote commercialization of technologies developed by

federal laboratories
Ñhave been relatively unsuccessful in creating bridg-
es to the entertainment industry.
Workshop participants suggested that additional mechanisms arenecessary for promoting information exchanges on modeling and simu-

lation technology that would benefit both DOD and the entertainment

industry
Ñeven if they do nothing more than identify research problems
that have already been solved.  These could take the form of formal col-

laborative arrangements between entertainment companies and DOD,
efforts by individual firms to supply modeling and simulation technolo-

gy to both communities, or joint research endeavors mediated by a uni-

versity research center.  Experiments are needed to test the viability and

effectiveness of these different arrangements.  Less formal mechanisms

also could be effective.  Conferences are the primary mechanism for in-

formation exchanges today,  but DOD and entertainment industry repre-

sentatives tend to attend separate conferences.  Some progress could be

made by encouraging cross-attendance at major conferences within each

community or by cross-fertilizing boards of relevant technical and plan-

ning groups and establishing a separate symposium to specifically ex-

plore topics of interest to both communities.  Greater use of the Internet

and World Wide Web also might facilitate greater communication.
Human Resources
At the workshop, representatives of the entertainment industry and
DOD noted an apparent shortage of talented people with the broad range

of skills needed to develop models and simulations.  Both communities

increasingly have trouble finding programmers with experience in con-

tent development and the technical problems associated with multiplay-

er/multiprocessor games and simulations.  Both DOD and the entertain-

ment industry are seeking people who are visually literate:  people who

are skilled in generating economical, high-quality graphics displays and

have a good understanding of human perception so that they can create

worlds that have the desired effect on those who experience them.
Additional efforts will be needed to enhance educational programs
for visual literacy.  At present, only a small number of U.S. universities
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10MODELING AND SIMULATION
offer interdisciplinary programs that combine technical and artistic stud-
ies.  Expansion of such programs will require the creation of interdiscipli-

nary degree programs and reward systems that encourage faculty mem-

bers to pursue such endeavors.  The research community will need to

articulate a research agenda that incorporates the perspectives of techni-

cal and nontechnical disciplines.  Workshop participants believed that

DOD and the entertainment industry could use existing funding mecha-

nisms as a means for encouraging the creation of such programs without

incurring additional costs.
Preserving the Research Base
Ensuring an adequate supply of new ideas and technologies for fu-
ture modeling and simulation efforts requires continued support for rele-

vant fundamental research.  University research is especially important

because it concentrates more heavily on basic than applied research and

has the added benefit of educating students, who then disseminate new

knowledge throughout the research community and industry when they

graduate.Workshop participants concurred that over the past 20 years the na-
ture of research funding in such fields as computer graphics and net-

working has changed.  University researchers have less freedom to select

and pursue research areas they deem interesting.  In part because of
growing demands for accountability, government-funded projects are of-

ten more results-oriented than they used to be, and government agencies

are under greater pressure to demand specific project goals and delivery

dates for each task.  The implication is not only a change in the kind of

research many investigators perform, but also a reduction in the quantity

of research conducted.  Most university researchers reported that they

now spend less time on research and more time filling out grant applica-

tions and seeking funding.  Determining the most suitable method for

government support of university research is beyond the scope of this

study,
5 but members of the university research community present at the
workshop expressed considerable concern about the current trend in gov-
ernment funding.
To date, industry funding has not compensated for changes in feder-
al research funding.  Although industry contributions to university re-

search have grown over the past decade, they are still small.  Moreover,

as in many other industries, entertainment companies tend not to con-

duct long-term basic research, largely because of short planning horizons

and the inability to fully appropriate the results of fundamental research.6Entertainment companies tend to obligate most of their research and de-

velopment expenditures to technical problems related to a particular film
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11or game release rather than to longer-term issues related to future needs.
Industry-sponsored research is more closely tied to particular product

needs, potentially limiting the scope of inquiry and raising concerns that

valuable new information will not be widely disseminated.
Other forms of industry support for university research also appear
to be changing.  Several workshop participants observed that computer

firms do not donate as much equipment to university laboratories as in

the past.  University representatives noted that they rely heavily on such

donations to acquire state-of-the-art equipment for research projects and

education.  Their inability to attract such donations affects not only the

quality of research but also the training of students.
Recent trends in federal and industry funding for university research
in modeling and simulation mirror those of other scientific and technical

fields.  National support for research and development (R&D) is under-

going a period of transformation.  Interest in reducing the federal budget

deficit and in realigning defense needs to match the challenges of the

post-Cold War environment will continue to put pressure on federal
funding for R&D.  Increased competition seems to be changing the na-

ture and structure of industrial R&D.   Such issues must be addressed at

the national level to ensure the continued viability of the technology base

for modeling and simulation.
NOTES1.The need for research into lightweight tracking technology is fully described in an-
other National Research Council report.  See Virtual Reality:  Scientific and TechnologicalChallenges, Nathaniel I. Durlach and Anne S. Mavor, eds.,  National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 1995.2.The term 
network software architecture
 encompasses both network architecture and
software architecture to indicate that the problems of network bandwidth and limited pro-
cessor cycles must be solved together to achieve scalability.
3.The terms 
computer-generated forces
, 
autonomous forces
, 
semiautonomous forces
, and 
au-
tonomous agents
 all refer to computer-generated characters.  The first three terms are widely
used throughout the defense community; the term 
autonomous agents
 refers to a broader
class of entities used for seeking relevant information on computer networks as well as

generating computerized opponents for game players.
4.The need for such tools is also described in
 Virtual Reality:  Scientific and TechnologicalChallenges,
 note 1 above.
5.The National Research Council
Õs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
is conducting two other studies that may more fully investigate this topic.  The first will
look retrospectively at the role of government, industry, and universities in key innovations
in information technology.  The second will look prospectively at institutional arrange-

ments for ensuring the continued leadership of the U.S. information technology industry.
6.The difficulty of appropriating profits from investments in basic research has been a
long-standing issue in economics and management.  For greater discussion of this topic, see

Teece, David J., 1988, 
ÒProfiting from Technological Innovation:  Implications for Integra-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12MODELING AND SIMULATION
tion, Collaboration, Licensing, and Public Policy,
Ó in 
Readings in the Management of Innova-
tion,
 Michael L. Tushman and William L. Moore, eds., Ballinger Publishing Company, Cam-
bridge, Mass., pp. 621-647; and Levin, Richard et al., 1987, 
ÒAppropriating the Returns from
Industrial Research and Development,
Ó Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, No. 3, pp.
783-831.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.131Introduction
From three-dimensional (3D) graphics on home video games to the
special effects and animation sequences created for feature films, it is
apparent that the entertainment industry has emerged as an innovative

source of modeling and simulation technology.
1  The U.S. Department of
Defense (DOD) has an even longer history of investing in modeling and

simulation to support objectives such as training and analysis programs

and has supported the development of many of the fundamental com-

puter graphics and networking technologies that underlie both military

and entertainment applications of modeling and simulation.  Though the

two communities differ widely in their structures, incentives, and moti-

vations, opportunities may exist for the entertainment industry and the

defense modeling and simulation community to work together to ad-

vance the state of the art in modeling and simulation technology.  By

sharing research results, coordinating research agendas, and working col-
laboratively when necessary, the entertainment industry and DOD may

be able to more efficiently and effectively build a technology base for

modeling and simulation that will improve the nationÕs security and eco-

nomic performance.
2This report explores the potential for greater cooperation between
the entertainment industry and DOD in modeling and simulation.  It

draws heavily on a workshop convened by the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council in October

1996 that brought together representatives of the entertainment industry

and the defense modeling and simulation community to discuss issues of
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14MODELING AND SIMULATION
mutual interest and identify areas for cooperation.  The report summariz-
es major uses of modeling and simulation technology in both defense

and entertainment applications, outlines research areas in which the en-

tertainment and defense modeling and simulation communities share a

common interest, and identifies other issues that must be addressed to

facilitate cooperation and ensure the viability of the technology base for

modeling and simulation.  It does not explicitly consider the degree to

which DOD can adopt commercial off-the-shelf technologies for its own

purposes; rather, it examines opportunities for conducting research that

could benefit both military and entertainment applications.
As the report demonstrates, the potential exists for greater coopera-
tion between the entertainment industry and DOD, but collaboration may
not be easy to achieve.  The entertainment industry and DOD have vastly

different cultures that reflect different business models, capabilities, and

objectives.  It is unlikely that the cultures will converge, and bridging

them may be difficult.  Nevertheless, these differences can be a source of

strength.  DOD
Õs research efforts and those of the entertainment industry
are in many ways complementary rather than contradictory.  Whereas

DOD
Õs research and development efforts are well funded (by industry
standards), meticulously planned, and forward looking, the entertain-

ment industry
Õs efforts are diverse, fast paced, and market oriented.  If
cultural barriers can be overcome, the resulting cooperation could enable

the two communities to leverage each otherÕs strengths to develop astronger technology base that will allow both to more easily achieve their

individual objectives for modeling and simulation.
DEFENSE MODELING AND SIMULATION
DOD uses modeling and simulation for a variety of purposes, such
as to train individual soldiers, conduct joint training operations, develop

doctrine and tactics, formulate operational plans, assess war-fighting sit-

uations, evaluate new or upgraded systems, and analyze alternative force
structures (see Box 1.1).  The technology also supports the requirements

of other critical defense needs such as command, control, and communi-

cations; computing and software; electronics; manpower, personnel, and

training; and manufacturing technology.  As a result of this breadth, de-

fense models and simulations range in size and scope from components

of large weapons systems through system-level and engagement-level

simulations, to simulations of missions and battles, and theater-level cam-
paigns.  DOD
Õs Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) coordi-
nates military modeling and simulation programs on an interservice lev-

el and has played a key role in developing a standard architecture for

military simulations.  Each of the military services also has a designated
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION15BOX 1.1Defense Applications of Modeling and SimulationDODÕs efforts in modeling and simulation generally support three majorfunctions: training, analysis, and acquisition.  The vision for each of theseareas is outlined below.¥Training.  Warriors of every rank will use modeling and simulation tochallenge their skills at the tactical, operational, or strategic level through
the use of realistic synthetic environments for a full range of missions, in-
cluding peace keeping and the provision of humanitarian aide.  Huge exer-
cises, combining forces from all services in carefully planned combined
operations, will engage warriors in realistic training without risking injury,
environmental damage, or costly equipment damage.  Simulation will en-
able leaders to train at scales not possible in any arena short of full-scale
combat operations, using weapons that would be unsafe on conventional

live ranges.  Simulation will also be used to evaluate the readiness of armed
forces.  The active duty and reserve components of all forces will be able to
operate together in synthetic environments without costly and time-con-

suming travel to live training grounds.¥Analysis.  Modeling and simulation will provide DOD with a power-ful set of tools to systematically analyze alternative force structures.  Ana-
lysts and planners will design virtual joint forces, fight an imaginary foe,
reconfigure the mix of forces, and fight battles numerous times in order to
learn how best to shape future task forces.  Not only will simulation shape
future force structure, it will be used to evaluate and optimize the course of
action in response to events that occur worldwide.  Modeling and simula-
tion representations will enable planners to design the most effective logis-
tics pipelines to supply the warriors of the future, whether they are facing

conventional combat missions or operations other than war.¥Acquisition.  
Operating in the same virtual environments, virtual pro-
totypes will enable acquisition executives to determine the right mix of
system capability and affordability prior to entering production.  Fighting
synthetic battles repeatedly while inserting new systems or different com-

ponents will help determine the right investment and modernization strate-
gy for future armed forces.  Models and simulations will reduce the time,
resources, and risks of the acquisition process and will increase the quality

of the systems produced.   In addition, modeling and simulation will allow
testers to create realistic test and evaluation procedures without the ex-
pense and danger of live exercises.  ÒDry runsÓ of live operational tests will
minimize the risks to people, machines, and testing ranges.  Modeling and

simulation will enhance information sharing among designers, manufactur-
ers, logisticians, testers, and end users, shortening the system development
cycle and improving the integrated product team development process.SOURCE:    
Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, position paper pre-pared for this project; see Appendix D.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16MODELING AND SIMULATION
office to serve as its single point of contact on all modeling and simula-
tion matters.
3DOD
Õs interest in modeling and simulation is growing.  The 1997
Defense Technology Area Plan identifies modeling and simulation as one

of five key areas of information technology critical to U.S. defense needs

and projects growth in funding for enabling technologies from $169 mil-

lion in 1998 to $280 million in 2003.
4  Most of these initiatives will be
orchestrated by the DMSO, the Defense Advanced Research Projects

Agency (DARPA), the Defense Special Weapons Agency, and the U.S.

Army.  Several other projects are under way by the Army, Navy, Air

Force, and Marines to individually and jointly develop simulation sys-

tems.  Overall acquisition of training systems by military departments

exceeds $1.5 billion per year, including both trainers for specific systems

(such as the B-2 bomber) and simulators for the integrated performance

of a variety of weapons systems.  Development of individual simulation

systems can easily cost between $100 million and $1 billion (see Table

1.1).
5DOD
Õs growing interest in modeling and simulation derives from
several factors.  Changes in the geopolitical environment are requiring

the military to plan for actions not only in traditional regions of conflict,

such as the former Soviet Union and the Middle East, but elsewhere in

the world as well.  Thus, DOD needs to be able to rapidly model varied

locations and scenarios to assist in training troops.  In addition, DOD is

being asked to conduct a broader range of missions (such as drug inter-

diction and peacekeeping), to defend against new types of threats, and to

coordinate joint operations that cross service and national boundaries.

Each of these missions requires the development of new doctrine and

tactics as well as training.  At the same time, advances in information

technology have lowered the cost of computer-based models and simula-

tions, making modeling and simulation a cost-effective alternative to live

training.  Simulated training exercises do not require the space or trans-

portation needed for a live training exercise, nor do they have the envi-

ronmental impact of live training exercises.
6  Already, DOD
Õs modeling
and simulation activities, such as SIMNET, have helped the services get

away from major field exercises that required the agency to move large

numbers of people around.  In the future, DOD hopes to use modeling

and simulation to provide readily available, operationally valid environ-

ments for use by all DOD components.  It would like users to have daily

access to war-fighting scenarios from their offices, in the same places that

they normally work.
DOD has developed a Modeling and Simulation Master Plan as a
first step in directing, organizing, and concentrating its modeling and

simulation activities.  It is intended to be dynamic and flexible, evolving
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION17TABLE 1.1Large DOD Development Programs in Modeling and
SimulationProject NameClose CombatTactical TrainerBattle ForceTactical TrainingWarfighterÕsSimulation 2000
Joint TacticalCombat Training
SystemSynthetic Theaterof War (STOW)
Advanced
Concept
Technology
DemonstrationJoint SimulationSystem (core)
DistributedInteractive
SimulationTOTALDescriptionNetworked simulation system for training armymechanized infantry and armor units.  It is composed of

various simulators that replicate combat vehicles, tactical
vehicles, and weapons systems interacting in real time
with each other and semiautonomous opposing forces.Tactical training system for maintaining and assessingfleet combat proficiency in all warfare areas, including
joint operations.  It will train at both the single-platform
and battle group levels.Next-generation battle simulation for training Armycommanders and battle staffs at the battalion through

theater levels.  It has a computer-assisted exercise system
that links virtual, live, and constructed environments.Joint effort by the Navy and Air Force to create a virtualsimulation at the battle group level in which combat
participants will interact with live and simulated targets
that are detected and displayed by platform sensors.STOW is a program to construct synthetic environmentsfor numerous defense functions.  Its primary objective is

to integrate virtual simulation (troops in simulators
fighting on a synthetic battlefield), constructive simulation
(war games), and live maneuvers to provide a training
environment for various levels of exercise.  The
demonstration program will construct a prototype system
to allow the U.S. Atlantic Command to quickly create,
execute, and assess realistic joint training exercises.A set of common core representations to allow simulationof actions and interactions of platforms, weapons, sensors,

units, command, control, communications, computers, and
intelligence systems, etc., within a designated area of

operations, as influenced by environment, system
capability, and human and organizational behavior.
A virtual environment within which humans may interactthrough simulation at multiple sites that are networked
using compliant architecture, modeling, protocols,
standards, and databases.Estimated
Program Cost
($ millions)$ 846165172
270
442154500$2,549SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Inspector General.  1997.  
Requirements Planning for
Development, Test, Evaluation, and Impact on Readiness of Training Simulators and Devices,
 a draft proposed
audit report, Project No. 5AB-0070.00, January 10, Appendix D.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18MODELING AND SIMULATION
as the technology matures and consensus develops on policy and pro-
grammatic issues.
The first objective of the master plan is establishment of a common
technical framework to facilitate interoperability among simulations and

the reuse of simulation components.  The key to this effort is the develop-

ment of a standard architecture for defense simulations, the High-Level

Architecture, with which all defense models and simulations must com-

ply.  This architecture was designed to allow DOD to meet its vision of

constructing a rapidly configured mix of computer simulations, actual

war-fighting systems, and weapons systems simulators geographically

distributed and networked, involving tens of thousands of entities to sup-

port training, analysis, and acquisition.  Such simulations would be used

both to train individuals to perform particular tasks, to interpret data,

and to make decisions, and to help groups of individuals (tank crews,

fighter squadrons) work together as a team.
The second objective of the master plan is to provide timely and
authoritative representation of systems (aircraft, ground vehicles, ships,

communications systems, etc.), the natural environment (air, space, land,

sea, weather, and battle effects), and individual human behaviors.
Efforts are under way to create databases that would allow just-in-
time generation of integrated and consistent environmental data to sup-

port realistic mission rehearsals anywhere in the world, including loca-

tions that are difficult to access or that are operationally dangerous.  This

work is attempting to develop the capability to generate
Ñwith minimal
editing
Ñsynthetic representations of geographic surfaces that incorpo-
rate relevant surface features (trees, rocks, etc.) and to create model-based
software tools for feature extraction.  Achieving these goals will ensure,

for example, that weather fronts that bring rain or snow to an area will

affect the transit rate of vehicles and troops and that wind patterns will

move trees, create waves, and alter dispersal patterns of smoke and dust.

These effects will not only help increase the realism of DOD simulations

(and, hence, more realistic training and analysis) but will also allow sim-

ulation of different seasonal conditions.
Other objectives include the establishment of a robust infrastructure
to meet the needs of simulation developers and end users.  The infra-

structure will include resource repositoriesÑvirtual librariesÑand a helpdesk for users.  The goal is to provide common services and tools to

simulation developers to further reduce the cost and time required to

build high-fidelity representations of real-world systems and processes.

Such tools will enable the construction of realistic simulations that inter-

act with actual war-fighting systems to allow combatants to rehearse mis-
sions and train as they will fight.  It could also facilitate development of

virtual prototypes that could be evaluated and perfected with the help of
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19real war fighters before physical realizations are ever constructed.  Such
virtual prototypes could have applications outside defense, such as in

city planning, architecture, and design (see discussion of database gener-

ation and manipulation in the 
ÒTools for Creating Simulated Environ-
ments
Ó section of Chapter 2).
The final objective of the plan is to share the benefits of modeling and
simulation.  DOD must educate potential users about the benefits of mod-

eling and simulation.  To that end, an extensive study is under way to

quantify objective data on the cost-effectiveness and efficiency of model-

ing and simulation in training, analysis, and acquisition applications

throughout DOD.  Extensive anecdotal data exist, but no concerted effort

has been made to demonstrate the return on investment.
MODELING AND SIMULATION IN
THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY
The entertainment industry consists of a varied mix of companies
engaged in a broad range of activities, including film, television, radio,

recorded music, publishing, performing arts, home entertainment, and

video.  Companies in these industries are using digital electronic technol-

ogy for many applications:  (1) to deliver existing products, such as video

games and video on demand, and potentially to distribute products to

audiences that are not reached today; (2) to create electronic games and

other forms of digitized material (such as films that have been converted

into electronic games); (3) for direct response sales (i.e., home shopping);

(4) for new entertainment products that are still in the process of being

invented (such as musical books or interactive stories); (5) for location-

based entertainment, such as high-tech theme parks based on visual sim-

ulation and other offshoots of the aerospace and electronics industries;

and (6) for new methods that enhance the quality or lower the costs of

producing products (e.g., computer animation systems or virtual reality

systems for set design and lighting).
7Of these industries, filmmaking, television, video games (including
both computer games that run on standard personal computers and con-

sole games such as Nintendo, Sega, and Sony systems), and location-

based entertainment centers have been most active in adopting modeling

and simulation technology.  For the most part, these sectors have operat-

ed independently of one another, though some blurring of the bound-

aries is occurring as film studios attempt to develop games based on their

movies.  Other linkages also exist.  Filmmakers and television producers,

for instance, often share techniques, technologies, actors, and even con-

tent.  Companies that produce games are working hand in hand with

network service companies to provide networked video games.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20MODELING AND SIMULATION
These companies play an important role in the U.S. economy.  Sales of
video games and consoles, such as the Sony PlayStation, Nintendo 64, and
Sega Saturn, were expected to surpass $4.3 billion in 1996.
8  Game boxes
themselves accounted for nearly $3.6 billion.
9  Such devices are attractive to
many game players because they sell for roughly $200 compared with $2,000
for a typical personal computer (PC).  Nintendo expected to sell out its

production of 1 million Ultra 64 machines in 1996, and Sega sales also were

expected to reach nearly 1 million.  Game boxes themselves do not usually

generate significant profits, but they pave the way for sales of game car-

tridges.  Sales of game software for personal computers are also rising and

were expected to grow 20 percent in 1996 to $1.2 billion.  Part of the increase

is the rise in on-line game sites.  Though Internet-based games were expect-

ed to generate only $90 million in 1996, they are projected to generate $1.6

billion by 2000.
10
  The film industry generated another $22 billion in reve-
nues.  Box office receipts totaled almost $6 billion in 1996,
11
 with video tape
rentals at $16 billion.
12
  These figures do not include revenues from mer-
chandise related to films, such as toys, games, and clothing.  Such revenues

often exceed box office receipts.
In some areas, modeling and simulation technology has already en-
abled firms to regain their competitiveness internationally.  As Ed Catmull

of Pixar Animation Studios noted at the workshop, technology saved the

animation industry.  Most U.S. animation went overseas in the 1980s as

studios looked for ways to cut labor costs.  The advent of electronic anima-

tion technologies (such as those that made the computer-animated film 
Toy
Story
 possible), however, has allowed U.S. firms to win back animation;

foreign competition is seen as less of a threat to the U.S. industry.  In fact,

U.S. firms are now raiding other countries for talent.
Technology will continue to transform the entertainment industry in
myriad ways, many of which will be unpredictable over the long term.

Nevertheless, certain trends are already apparent.  Video games are mov-

ing onto the Internet, creating a new way to play games and driving

changes in the games themselves (see Box 1.2 and Choudhury et al.,
1997
13
).  A handful of companies are putting the infrastructure in place
for game companies like id Software, Spectrum HoloByte, Acclaim, and

others to move their games out of their constricted single-player mode

into a worldwide, networked, real-time, multiplayer domain.  The Total

Entertainment Network (TEN), for example, allows subscribers to play

on-line versions of 
Duke Nukem 3D, Quake, Command and Conquer, War-

craft, 
and
 Deadlock
.  More games are added regularly.  In its first three
months TEN garnered more than 14,000 subscribers who pay $14.95 a

month to access its Internet-based games.  MPath Interactive, another

entrant into the on-line games industry, offers an on-line version of Quake
and recently agreed with Hasbro Interactive to put versions of classic
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION21BOX 1.2Next-Generation Video GamesThe intent of on-line gaming is to create massively networked games inwhich hundreds, if not thousands, of players can play on the same virtualworld simultaneously.  Gilman Louie of Spectrum HoloByte Inc. predicts
that the next generation of computer games will be designed around a blockof server code that will enable off-the-shelf products to be played either in
single-player or multiplayer mode.  In multiplayer mode the player will
enter a persistent universe that will run 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.Players will be able to join a game whenever they want and in whateverrole they want (tank commander, fighter pilot, etc.).  They will be immersed

in an environment of teammates and adversaries controlled by other play-ers and by the computer, with the distinctions between the two becomingincreasingly hard to detect.  When players enter the game, they will replace

units being controlled by the computer.Behind the scenes, Louie says, will be a campaign engine that will moveall of the computer-generated forces, monitor other playersÕ moves, andserve up new tasks for the players.  Most video games currently use a pro-gression of linearly scripted missions to advance a player through the game.Each mission contains predetermined outcomes and paths.  Players con-

duct each mission over and over again until they successfully graduate to
the next level of play.  The campaign engine allows a different structure, inwhich story lines and missions are dynamic and outcomes are not predeter-mined.  Each play of the game influences the next.  If a player is first as-
signed a mission to destroy a bridge but fails, the next mission may be toprovide support to friendly tanks that are being engaged by an enemy thatjust crossed the bridge.  The campaign engine will aggregate and  disaggre-
gate units as players encounter them (e.g., converting an icon for a tank unitinto four separate tanks and vice versa).   Disaggregated units will be con-trolled by the computer until the player leaves the area and they are re-
aggregated.Game servers will also support multiple dissimilar products, like differ-ent aircraft types and ground-based vehicles, that users will buy at retail.

Users will be able to download upgrades to their vehicles, such as newavionics, weapons systems, and better automated individuals or units.  Ev-ery month new scenarios will be generated to enhance game play.  These
scenarios could include new terrain or specially scripted missions.  Thesystem will be designed so that the visual display system of the games will
be totally independent from the server, so that upgrades to the visual sys-
tems will be tied to each individual simulator rather than being an inherentpart of the networked architecture. The network will be totally object ori-ented to facilitate seamless upgrades and enhancements.SOURCE:  Gilman Louie, chairman, Spectrum HoloByte Inc., Alameda, Calif.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22MODELING AND SIMULATION
Parker Brothers board games, such as 
Monopoly
, 
Scrabble
, and 
Risk
, on
line.  MPath offers subscribers who have multimedia PCs the ability to
talk to other players during games.  Players speak into microphones at-

tached to their PCs, and the MPath software digitizes their voices and

transmits them over the Internet to other players.  Players without micro-

phones can communicate by typing messages.
A growing number of companies are entering the market for loca-
tion-based entertainment, using virtual reality (VR) technologies as the

centerpiece of their centers.  Location-based centers generally provide a

specific entertainment attraction, often accompanied by a cafe, bar, or

restaurant.  A recent compilation listed 153 VR entertainment centers

worldwide, ranging from restaurants or cafes with one or two VR units

to larger facilities and theme parks with up to 40.
14
  In some of these
centers, participants don a head-mounted display and enter a 3D world

through which they navigate with a joystick or ski down a simulated

mountain.  In others, groups of players sit in pod-like facsimiles of mili-

tary aircraft and fly through a simulated landscape, engaging enemy tar-

gets and communicating with a control tower.  Further advances in tech-

nology combined with reductions in price could enable simple VR

technologies to enter homes.  Already, companies such as Thrustmaster

Inc. are marketing mock-ups of aircraft cockpits for home use in conjunc-

tion with flight simulator games designed for PCs.
Industry analysts, such as John Latta of 4th Wave Inc., see CD-ROMs,
ÒInternetworking,
Ó and interactive television as the primary means of
delivering entertainment in the 1990s, although motion-based simula-

tors, VR experiences, and large-format films also will contend.  With the

expansion of infrastructure and content, home entertainment is becom-

ing more popular; spending for in-home entertainment far exceeds that

for out-of-home entertainment.  The emerging market for 3D PC applica-

tions may reinforce this trend.
As the price of 3D image generators continues to decline and perfor-
mance improves, 3D graphics will become a key feature of home PCs.

Latta predicts that by the end of 1998, most new PCs will include 3D

graphics accelerators. Some 30 to 40 companies are designing or produc-

ing 3D video chips for PCs.  The market for 3D accelerators is predicted

to grow from 5,200 chips in 1994 to 36 million in 1999.  Applications will

range from home video and PC games to 3D tools, such as animation and

modeling software, VR, multimedia 3D, and interactive television.  Ven-

ture capitalists have already pumped $200 million into 3D start-up firms,

and over 25 companies have invested at least $1 million apiece in multi-

player games, but the market must still be created, and developers have

little control over development of the infrastructure.
15
Film companies, too, are pursuing innovations in information tech-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION23nology.  Disney
Õs animated feature films have been all digital for several
years now and, as demonstrated by 
Toy Story
 (produced in association
with Pixar Animation Studios), are achieving realistic 3D images.  Agrowing number of nonanimated films, such as
 Terminator 2:  Judgment
Day, Jurassic Park, 
and
 Casper
, incorporate digital effects and characters.
Companies such as Boss Film Studios, Digital Domain, and Industrial

Light and Magic continue to improve the realism of these effects and are

developing ways to digitize real actors for use in stunts and other special

effects.
16
  In addition, virtually every major Hollywood studio has estab-
lished a subsidiary to create interactive products, typically computer ad-

venture games based on movies.  Record companies, too, seeing the mu-

sic production innovations being led by specialized multimedia

companies, are exploring interactive media.  The new Academy of Inter-

active Arts and Sciences was established to confer awards in the field; the

Houston International Film Festival has established new prizes for inter-

active multimedia products; and the American Film Institute
Õs computer-
based graphics, editing, and multimedia classes are overflowing.
17
CONNECTIONS BETWEEN DEFENSE AND ENTERTAINMENT
The idea of linking research efforts in DOD and the entertainment
industry is not as far fetched as it might first appear.  Connections be-

tween the two communities stretch back over the decades and have taken

many forms, from sharing products, to sharing technologies, to sharing

people.
18
  The entertainment industry now rests on a technological foun-
dation laid by large amounts of government-funded research and infra-

structure, including advanced computing systems, computer graphics,

and the Internet.  In the area of computer graphics, for example, early

DOD funding resulted in development of the geometry engine, about

1979 (see Box 1.3).  This technology has since been incorporated into a

number of game devices, such as the new Nintendo 64 machine.  Similar-

ly, early advances in networking in the late 1950s and 1960s laid the

groundwork for the ARPANET, which grew into today
Õs Internet and
has become the foundation of today
Õs growing networked games indus-
try.  As these examples demonstrate, 20 years or more often pass before

DOD-sponsored research generates new technology that is incorporated

into a new product.
19
Technology has also flowed back to DOD.  The agency has benefited
from the entertainment industry
Õs constant attempts to lower the price/
performance ratios for image generation, networking technologies, and

content development tools, to name a few areas.  It has also benefited

from new ideas pioneered by the entertainment industry.  The first air-

craft simulator created by Edwin Link
Ñwhich became the basis for the
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24MODELING AND SIMULATION
BOX 1.3Defense Funding and the Roots of Computer GraphicsDefense funding, channeled primarily through the Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (DARPA) and the Office of Naval Research(ONR), played a key role in creating computer graphics technologies that
now lie at the heart of many entertainment and business applications.  Pro-
grams sponsored by DARPA and the National Science Foundation support-

ed research activities at the University of Utah, North Carolina State Uni-
versity, Ohio State University, California Institute of Technology, and
Cornell University.  In the early 1970s, researchers at the University of Utah
developed techniques for creating three-dimensional (3D) images that were
more realistic than wire frame images drawn with lines.  Work by G.S.

Watkins and others resulted in a faster way of determining which parts of

objects were hidden and drawing only those visible from the viewer
Õs van-
tage point.  Work by Henri Gouraud, Bui-Tuong Phong, and others resulted
in techniques for smoothly shading curved surfaces.  Additional work at the
New York Institute of Technology created the basis for software used to
render graphics images.  Industry still uses the basic algorithms developed
at the University of Utah for simple light calculations, in both software and
commodity graphics hardware.  More sophisticated rendering packages that

exploit algorithms developed at universities are used in the film and anima-
tion industries, as well as in flight simulators and computer-aided design.
These include the Renderman system used by Pixar Animation Studios for
such animated films as 
Toy Story
.military
Õs flight simulator program
Ñwas originally sold to amusement
parks as an entertainment device (see position paper by Jacquelyn Ford
Morie in Appendix D).  Game machines are now being considered for

military training.
20
  Discussed below are several projects currently under
way or under consideration to modify commercial hardware and soft-

ware for military training applications:
¥Peter Bonanni, of the Virginia Air National Guard, for example,
has been working with Spectrum HoloByte Inc. to modify the 
Falcon 4.0
flight simulator game for military training.  Budgetary pressures and

worldwide deployments have caused some segments of the armed forces

to face true training shortfalls for the first time in decades.  U.S. Air Force

active duty and reserve squadrons, for example, have experienced a re-

duction in training sorties of up to 25 percent as a direct result of deploy-

ments in support of contingency operations over Iraq and Bosnia (see

position paper by Peter Bonanni in Appendix D).  Since conducting real-

istic training is impossible on most of these missions, simulators provide
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION25the only realistic training alternative.  Unfortunately, most of the simula-
tors in use today are very expensive, are limited to single-crew training,

and are not deployable.  As a result, pilots have few opportunities for

training while on deployment, and proficiency declines as the deploy-

ment wears on.  The problem also is occurring in other military services

as the trend to use U.S. forces in peace-keeping roles accelerates.  Low-

cost commercial simulators may be a near-term solution to this military

training problem.  Though lacking the fidelity to allow fighter pilots to

practice certain skills, such as properly timing the release of a weapon to

ensure the greatest probability of intercept, low-cost simulators may al-

low pilots to maintain familiarity with the layout of cockpit and throttle

controls and to 
Òkeep their heads in the game.
Ó  According to Peter Bo-
nanni, games such as 
Falcon 4.0
 realistically mimic the look and feel of
real military aircraft and allow users to play against computer-generated

forces or, in a networked fashion, against other pilots, which facilitates

team training opportunities.
The first implementations of virtual reality in 1968 also derived fromgovernment funding from ONR, the Air Force, and the Central IntelligenceAgency, with contributions from Bell Labs.  With such support, Ivan Suther-
land, then at Harvard University, developed the head-mounted display as
well as stereo and see-through displays, head tracking, and a handheld 3D
cursor.  Such devices are now used in video games and in rapid prototyping
systems for design, architecture, and scientific visualization.The hardware used in computer graphics also traces its roots to federalfunding.  While a graduate student at Utah, Jim Clark and his adviser, Ivan
Sutherland, pursued research in 3D graphics hardware with government
funding.  After joining the faculty at Stanford University, Clark received
support from DARPAÕs Very Large Scale Integrated Circuit Program for the
Geometry Engine Project, which developed techniques for producing cus-
tom integrated circuits for cost-effective high-performance graphics sys-

tems.  The resulting technology formed the basis of Silicon Graphics Inc.,
which has become a leading supplier of graphics computers to the defense
and entertainment industries.SOURCE:  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research

Council.  1995.  Evolving the High-Performance Computing and CommunicationsInitiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C., pp. 20-21; McCracken, Edward R.  1997.  ÒComputerGraphics:  Ideas and People from AmericaÕs Universities Fuel a Multibillion-DollarIndustry,Ó in Computing Research:  A National Investment for Leadership in the21st Century.  Computing Research Associates, Washington, D.C., pp. 11-15.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26MODELING AND SIMULATION
¥The U.S. Marine Corps has initiated a program to evaluate com-
mercial war games software for use in training.  The Marine Corps sees
such games as a low-cost way of engaging soldiers in daily decision-

making exercises to help improve their tactical decision-making capabili-

ties.  The Corps
Õ Combat and Development Command in Quantico, Vir-
ginia, evaluated close to 30 games in 1995 for their potential teaching

value, examining their cost as well as technical issues such as memory

and processor requirements, data accuracy, and ease of use; multiplayer

capabilities, level of game play (strategic, operational, or tactical); rele-

vance to the Marine Corps Task Map; and compatibility with Marine

Corps doctrine and tactics.  In future tests an education specialist will

evaluate the educational merits of each game and determine whether it

produces negative training.  The evaluations to date have found that

while no war game was capable of producing a 
Òrobust simulated com-
bat environment,
Ó several offered potential for training:  Harpoon2, Tigerson the Prowl, Operation Crusader, Patriot, and DOOM.21
  The Computer
War Game Assessment Group recommended the use of these games,

and the Marine Corps commandant has authorized commanders to

permit these games to be loaded onto government computers and to

allow Marines to play them during duty hours.
22
  The Marine Corps
has already begun using 
DOOM
 for training four-person fire teams.
Users play in a networked environment that allows them to cooper-

ate, listen, and make decisions quickly.
23
  The game has been modi-
fied from its original version to include fighting holes, bunkers, tacti-

cal wire, 
Òthe fog of war,
Ó and friendly fire, as well as Marine Corps
weapons, such as the M16(a1) rifle, M-249 squad automatic weapon,

and M-67 fragmentation grenades.  Such activities are not viewed as

a replacement for field training but are used in the hope of making

field training more efficient.
¥The Army Battle Command Battle Laboratory is discussing the
possibility of adapting the Nintendo 64 game machine as a low-cost indi-

vidual training device.  The system, which would be developed by Sili-

con Graphics Inc. and Paradigm Simulation Inc., would represent an al-

ternative to PCs and CD-ROMs.  Initial analyses indicate that the

Nintendo 64 is less expensive than alternative trainers and offers more

interactivity and visual realism.  Unit commanders would be able to pur-

chase them in larger quantities than other systems, allowing more sol-

diers access.
24
¥The Marine Corps has awarded a contract to M
−K Technologies to
design a video game that can be used for military training as well as

home entertainment.  The company will use the same game engine in

both the military and civilian versions.  The military version will add

more accurate details about tactics and weapons, while the civilian game
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION27will be less demanding.  Both versions will allow multiple players to
compete against each other over a local-area network or the Internet.
25
Additional opportunities may exist for DOD and the entertainment
industry to share the data and resources used to create simulations.  For

example, DOD has created a simulation of one of the major tank battles

of the Persian Gulf War, 
73 Easting.
  Part of the effort in creating the
simulation was collecting geographic data and information regarding the

position of military units and terrain features.  There are enough similar

data readily available to produce comparable studies of Austerlitz, Wa-

terloo, Gettysburg, Antietam, and other battles.  Available in formats that

permit the viewer to traverse these battlefields in time as well as space,

these databases could become staples of history courses, officer training

programs, and the countless clubs and societies that cherish military his-

tory or stage reenactments.  By allowing participants to alter the course

of the battles, such simulations could be even more attractive to DOD

and the public at large.
To date, the flows of technology between the defense and entertain-
ment industries have been largely uncoordinated.  Many derive from

large investments the government made in fundamental research and

infrastructure for its own purposes but that then became the foundations

on which entrepreneurs have created whole new industries.  The ques-

tion that must now be asked is whether there is a way to take advantage

of future overlap in interest in a more proactive way to encourage the

types of interplay that have occurred in the past.
Military and entertainment simulations have markedly different ob-
jectives.  In entertainment the driving factor is excitement and fun.  Users

must want to spend their money to use it again and again (either at home

or at an entertainment center) and hopefully are willing to tell others

about it.  Unrealistically dangerous situations, exaggerated hazardous

environments, and multiple lives and heroics are acceptable, even desir-

able, to increase excitement.  Defense simulations, on the other hand,

overwhelmingly stress realistic environments and engagement situations.
The interactions are serious in nature, can crucially depend on terrain

features or other environmental phenomena, and generally rely on the

user
Õs ability to coordinate actions with other players.
Nevertheless, many of the future challenges that face the movie indus-
try, games industry, and DOD are similar.  A striking example of this is

multiplayer simulations using real-time 3D graphics.  The DOD is interest-

ed in this capability for large-scale training exercises; the games industry is

interested in networked games that would allow hundreds or thousands of

players to participate.  The underlying technologies to support these objec-

tives address similar requirements:  networking, low-cost graphics hard-

ware, human modeling, and computer-generated characters.  Given future
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28MODELING AND SIMULATION
trends in defense modeling and simulation and in the entertainment indus-
try, such overlap is likely to occur more frequently in the future.
These similarities suggest that potential exists for DOD and the en-
tertainment industry to leverage each other
Õs modeling and simulation
efforts, provided they understanding the fundamental differences and

objectives.  Simulation, VR, video games, and film share the common

objective of creating a believable artificial world for participants.  In this

context, believability is less a factor of specific content of the environ-

ment than of the perception that a world exists into which participants

can port themselves and undertake some actions.  In film this process is

vicarious; in simulation, VR, and gaming it tends to be active, even al-

lowing participants to choose the form for porting themselves into the

environment, whether as occupants of a vehicle moving through the en-

vironment, as a separate controllable entity, or as a fully immersed hu-

man.  Their representation can assume whatever form is appropriate for

the environment.
Designing and building such worlds require a common set of en-
abling technologies, regardless of the application (defense or entertain-

ment) to which the worlds will be put.  Because they are fundamental to

virtually all simulations, these technologies may represent areas in which

DOD and the entertainment industry could collaborate on research and

early stages of development:
¥Tools for fabricating synthetic environments.
  Computer-based tools
are needed to efficiently create 3D virtual worlds that can be sensed in

multiple ways (visual, auditory, tactile, motion, infrared, radar, etc.).  Cost
rises as the size space, resolution, detail, and dynamic features (objects

that can interact with participants, like doors that can open or buildings

that can be razed) of the simulated environment increase.  Tools for effi-

ciently constructing large complex environments are generally lacking;

existing toolsets are quirky and primitive, require substantial training to

master, and often prohibit the environment architect from including all

of the attributes desired.
¥Interfaces.  Interfaces provide the portal through which participantsinteract with a system.  They include displays, entry devices such as

keyboards or touch-sensitive screens, VR systems, and a host of other

input/output devices that link the participant to the simulator.  The in-

crease in the richness of the participant
Õs ability to interact with the syn-
thetic environment and other people and agents similarly ported there is

especially important as large-scale simulations are constructed.
¥Networking technologies.
  Networking technologies enable large
numbers of participants to join in a simulation regardless of their physi-

cal locations.  The network must be able to accommodate the volume of
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION29messages between and among participants in a timely fashion with a
minimum amount of delay or latency
.  
These factors are influenced by
both the architecture of the network and the protocols for transmitting

information.  Protocols are needed to minimize message traffic across the

network, and service providers need to figure out how they can provide

guaranteed levels of service that distinguish between time-critical inter-

actions and lower-priority messages that are less sensitive to time delays.
¥Computer-generated forces and autonomous agents.
  Computer-gener-
ated forces and autonomous agents control the actions of elements not

directly under the control of a human participant in a simulation.  They

can be adversaries (as in a computer chess game) or companions (con-

trolling a wingman in a flight simulator) and can represent individual

players or aggregated forces (such as an enemy infantry division).  Com-

puter-generated forces are critical in any simulation intended to be used

by an individual participant or in large networked simulations in which

it may not always be possible to ensure enough players to control all the

necessary entities.
26
  Such forces typically strive to display behaviors char-
acteristic of intelligent human participants.
Both DOD and the entertainment industry could benefit from greater
collaboration in the above technical areas. The primary benefit of such

collaboration would be the development of a technology base that could

support modeling and simulation efforts in either defense or entertain-

ment, eliminating redundancies and sharing technical advances.  Collab-

oration could improve the competitive advantage of entertainment com-

panies and the ability of DOD to meet its national security objectives

more efficiently than if the two communities continued to operate inde-

pendently.  As Ed Catmull, of Pixar Animation Studios, and Eric Hasel-

tine, of Walt Disney Imagineering, noted, funding from defense agencies

such as DARPA had a significant effect on the development of funda-

mental technologies critical to defense and entertainment; moreover, it

helped develop the human resources required to research, develop, and

advance those technologies.  More formal collaboration may give DOD

and the entertainment industry more opportunities to gain greater lever-

age from each other
Õs research investments to further their own objec-
tives.  Such collaboration will become especially important given contin-

ued constraints on defense research and development (R&D) spending.

Between 1987 and 1996, real DOD expenditures for R&D declined 27

percent, though the largest cuts were allocated to the development por-

tion of the budget; expenditures on basic and applied research remained

almost level.  Given current attempts to balance the federal budget and

realign federal expenditures on defense R&D to reflect a new set of na-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30MODELING AND SIMULATION
tional priorities, it is unlikely that defense R&D budgets will rise signifi-
cantly in the near future.
Achieving these benefits will require efforts in two areas.  First, DOD
and the entertainment industry must identify research areas in which they

have a common interest.  This is something of an exercise in which the two

communities plot their research agendas, identify areas of commonality,

and determine ways in which the capabilities of each community can best

be leveraged to move the field forward.  Second, they must find ways to

facilitate collaboration between the two research communities.  Differences

in culture and business practices must be overcome, and mechanisms must

be put in place to facilitate information sharing and, perhaps, collaborative

research projects.  Unless these types of obstacles are overcome, even the

best intentions will not produce fruitful results.
NOTES1.DOD defines a 
model
 as a physical, mathematical, or otherwise logical representation
of a system, entity, phenomenon, or process.  It defines 
simulation
 as a method for imple-
menting a model over time.  See U.S. Department of Defense.  1994.  
ÒDOD Modeling and
Simulation (M&S) Management,
Ó Directive Number 5000.59, January 4.
2.Other communities, such as manufacturing, medicine, and education, also might
benefit from greater collaboration with the defense and entertainment industries in advanc-
ing modeling and simulation technology.  This report addresses the possibility of greater
cooperation between the entertainment industry and the defense modeling and simulation
community only.
3.U.S. Department of Defense, Directive 5000.59, note 1 above.

4.U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Director of Defense Research and Engi-
neering.  1997.  
Defense Technology Area Plan.
  DOD, Washington, D.C., May.
5.U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Inspector General.  1997.  
ÒRequirements
Planning for Development, Test, Evaluation, and Impact on Readiness of Training Simula-

tors and Devices,
Ó a draft proposed audit report.  Project No. 5AB-0070.00, DOD, January
10.6.Concerns over the environmental impact of the annual Return of Forces to Germany
(REFORGER) exercise is one of the considerations that has led to a greater reliance onsimulation for that program.7.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive:  Convergence of Comput-

ing, Communications, and Entertainment.
  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 30.
8.Miao, Walter, Access Media International, as cited in Eng, Paul M.  1996.  
ÒI Can
ÕtWait to Go On-line and Blow Something Up,
Ó Business Week
, December 23, pp. 70-71.
9.NPD Group, Port Washington, N.Y., as cited in 
Business Week,
 note 8 above.
10.Jupiter communications, as cited in 
Business Week,
 note 8 above.
11.Motion Picture Association of America.  1996.  
U.S. Economic Review.
  Motion Picture
Association of America, Washington, D.C.; available on-line at http://www.mpaa.org/
htm#_Hlk388150685.
12.Video Software Dealers Association.  1996.  
VSDA White PaperÑA Special Report on
the Home Video Industry.
  VSDA, Encino, Calif.; available on-line at http://206.71.226.123/
whitepaper/whitpapr.htm.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION3113.Choudhury, Seema, et al.  1997.  
Entertainment & Technology Strategies.
  Forrester
Research, Cambridge, Mass., April 1.
14.Atlantis Cyberspace, 
VR Entertainment Centers
, downloaded February 17, 1996, from
www.vr-atlantis.com/lbe_guide/lbe_list2.html.
15.Latta, John.  1996.  
DOD & Entertainment:  Where Is the Social Experience?
  4th Wave
Inc., Alexandria, Va.
16.Parisi, Paula.  1995.  
ÒThe New Hollywood:  Silicon Stars,
Ó Wired
, December, p. 142.
17.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 
Keeping the U.S. Computer and
Communications Industry Competitive,
 p. 31, note 7 above.
18.The two communities also have common physical space.  Not only are Southern
California and Central Florida focal points for both DOD and entertainment industry ef-
forts in modeling and simulation, but the Walt Disney company also announced in August

1996 that one of its divisions would take occupancy of a 200,000-square-foot facility former-
ly occupied by the Skunk Works division of Lockheed Martin Corp., a high-security divi-
sion that designed and engineered some of the nation
Õs most guarded defense projects,
including the U-2 spy plane.  See Newman, Morris.  1996.  ÒA Unit of Disney Finds an Ideal
Space Among the Remnants of the Military-Industrial Complex,
Ó New York Times,
 August
28, p. D17.
19.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Infrastructure to Support the

Nation
Õs Information Infrastructure.
  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
20.Geddes, John, Silicon Valley Science and Technology Office, U.S. Army Research
Laboratory, personal communication, November 20, 1996.
21.Marine Corps Modeling and Simulation Management Office, 
ÒComputer Based War-games Catalog,
Ó available on-line at http://138.156.4.23/catalog.
22.Marine Corps Modeling and Simulation Management Office, 
ÒComputer Based War-games Catalog,
Ó p. 3, note 21 above.
23.Sikorovsky, Elizabeth.  1996.  
ÒTraining Spells Doom for Marines,
Ó Federal Computer
Week,
 July 15; available on-line at http://www.fcw.com/pubs/fcw/0715/guide.htm.  See
also Ackerman, Robert.  1996.  
ÒCommercial War Game Sets Spell Doom for Adversaries,
ÓSignal,
 July; available on-line at http://www.us.net/signal/archive/July96/commercial-

july.html.
24.Geddes, John, Silicon Valley Science and Technology Office, U.S. Army Research
Laboratory, personal communication, November 20, 1996.
25.Bray, Hiawatha.  1997.  
ÒBattle for Military Video Game Niche On,
Ó Boston Globe
,April 16, p. 1.
26.DOD
Õs experimentation with distributed interactive simulations during the late 1980sresulted in constant pressure to increase the number of participants in simulated exercises.

Because there were not enough simulators or participants to populate a typical battlefield
scenario (nor did the technical capability exist to efficiently network together large numbers
of participants), DOD began to rely on the use of computer-generated forces.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322Setting a Common Research Agenda
The entertainment industry and the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD) are both interested in a number of research areas relevant to mod-
eling and simulation technology.  Technologies such as those for immer-

sive simulated environments, networked simulation, standards for in-

teroperability, computer-generated characters, and tools for creating

simulated environments are used in both entertainment and defense ap-

plications.  Each of these areas presents a number of research challenges

that members of the entertainment and defense research communities

will need to address over the next several years.  Some of these areas may

be amenable to collaborative or complementary efforts.
This chapter discusses some of the broad technical areas that the de-
fense and entertainment research communities might begin to explore

more fully to improve the scientific and technological base for modeling

and simulation.  Its purpose is not to provide answers to the research

questions posed in these areas but to help elucidate the types of problems

the entertainment industry and DOD will address in the coming years.
TECHNOLOGIES FOR IMMERSIVE
SIMULATED ENVIRONMENTS
1Immersive simulated environments are central to the goals and needsof both the DOD and the entertainment industry.  Such environments use

a variety of virtual reality (VR) technologies to enable users to directly

interact with modeling and simulation systems in an experiential fash-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA33ion, sensing a range of visual, auditory, and tactile cues and manipulat-
ing objects directly with their hands or voice.  Such experiential comput-

ing systems are best described as a process of using a computer or inter-

acting with a network of computers through a user interface that is

experiential rather than cognitive.  If a user has to think about the user

interface, it is already in the way.  Traditional military training systems

are experiential computing systems applied to a training problem.
VR technologies can allow people to directly perform tasks and ex-
periments much as they would in the real world.  As Jack Thorpe of SAIC

pointed out at the workshop, people often learn more by doing and un-

derstand more by experiencing than by simple nonparticipatory viewing

or hearing information.  This is why VR is so appealing to user interface

researchers:  it provides experience without forcing users to travel

through time or space, face physical risks, or violate the laws of physics

or rules of engagement.  Unfortunately, creating effective experiences

with virtual environments is difficult and often expensive.  It requires

advanced image generators and displays, trackers, input devices, and

software.
Experiential Computing in DOD
The most prominent use of experiential computing technology inDOD is in the area of personnel training systems for aircraft and ground

vehicles.  DOD also has a series of initiatives under way to develop ad-

vanced training systems for dismounted infantry that rely on experien-

tial computing.  Such programs are gaining increased attention in DOD

and will become a primary driver behind the militaryÕs efforts to develop

and deploy technologies for immersion in synthetic environments.  They

are being undertaken in coordination with attempts to develop comput-

ing, communications, and sensor systems to provide individual soldiers

with relevant intelligence information.
2  Experiential computing, as ap-
plied to flight and tank simulation, is a mature science at DOD.  There are

a number of organizations that have extensive historical reference infor-

mation they can draw on in specifying the requirements for new immer-

sive training systems.  These organizations include the U.S. ArmyÕs Sim-

ulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) and the

Naval Air Warfare CenterÕs Training Systems Division.  Experiential com-
puting is something that has been essential to military training organiza-

tions for decades.
For traditional training and mission rehearsal functions, the current
need is to reduce the cost of immersive systems.  Existing mission re-

hearsal systems based on image generators like the Evans and Suther-

land ESIG-4000 serve the ArmyÕs Special Operations Forces well, allow-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34MODELING AND SIMULATION
ing them to fly at low altitudes above high-resolution geo-specific terrain
for hundreds of miles and enabling them to identify specific landmarks

along their planned flight path to guide them on their actual mission.

Unfortunately, these dome-oriented trainers used to cost upward of $30

million, making it impractical to either procure many simulators or to

train many pilots.  Cost reductions would allow more widespread de-

ployment of such systems.
Experiential computing technologies are being used by the U.S. Navyin both training and enhanced visualization.  For battleships an advanced

battle damage reporting system allows a seaman in the battle bridge to

navigate a three-dimensional (3D) model of his ship to identify where

damage has occurred and both where the best escape routes would be for

trapped seamen and which routes the rescue and repair crews should

take.  In another Navy application developed at the Naval Command

Control and Ocean Surveillance Center
Õs (NCCOSC
Õs) Research, Devel-
opment, Test, and Evaluation Division (which is referred to as NRaD),

submarines are fitted with an immersive system that generates a view of

the outside world for the commander when they are submerged.  Since

submarine crews cannot normally look outside the boat except when it is

on the surface, a virtual window outside provides not only a view of the

seafloor (created through the use of digital bathymetric data) but of the

tactical environment as well, with other ships, submarines, sonobuoys,

and sea life represented clearly and spatially for the commander to gain a

better understanding of the tactical and navigational situation.
In the nonimmersive domain, experiential computing technology is
being leveraged by both the Naval Research Lab (NRL) and the Army

Research Lab (ARL) in the form of a stereoscopic table-based display.

This display is known at NRL as the Responsive Workbench and at ARL

as the Virtual Sandtable.  The Responsive Workbench was invented in

1992 at the German National Computer Science and Mathematics Insti-

tute outside Bonn. NRL duplicated the bench and started exploring how

it could be used in a variety of applications.  The concept of the work-

bench is simple.  The bench itself is a table 6 feet long, 4 feet wide, and

standing 4 feet off the floor.  The tabletop is translucent, and a mirror sits

underneath at a 45 degree angle.  A projector behind the table shines on

the mirror and up onto the table surface from below, creating a stereo-

scopic image on the tabletop.  Users wear stereoscopic glasses and a head

tracker.  As they move their heads, the image changes to reflect that

motion and objects appear to be sitting, like a physical model, on the

table.An Army application of this technology is a re-creation of the tradi-
tional sand table in which forces are laid out and move around to plan

strategies and tactics or to review a training exercise. Coryphaeus Soft-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA35ware of Los Gatos, California, is commercializing a similar product, the
Advanced Tactical Visualization System, which operates with the com-

mercial version of the Responsive Workbench, the Immersive Workbench
by Fakespace Inc.  Since commanders are used to working with scale

models of battlefields and maps, they can easily accommodate this type

of display.
Experiential Computing in the Entertainment Industry
The problem with creating effective experiential computing systems
is that they demand real-time graphics.  In the entertainment industry,

return on investment must be considered.  The high cost of immersive

technologies has slowed their expansion into entertainment settings.

Nevertheless, an increasing number of location-based entertainment at-

tractions and home systems are emerging.  The majority of the systems in

operation fall into one of three categories:  (1) arcade systems, (2) loca-

tion-based entertainment centers, and (3) VR attractions at theme parks.

Location-based entertainment centers and arcades boast both stand-alone
systems that allow participants to drive down a race course, ski down a

mountain, or play virtual golf.  Others have networked together flight

simulators that allow players to interactively fly through a virtual envi-

ronment and engage targets (including each other).  Disney has devel-

oped a VR attraction based on its film 
Aladdin
, and Universal Studios has
developed a ride based on 
Back to the Future
.Now that the costs of real-time graphics systems are dropping, it is
likely that the list of VR experiences for entertainment will expand and

that home applications will become more prevalent.  Three-dimensional

graphics are becoming more widely available on home computers, and

the number and variety of peripheral devices, such as throttle-like joy-

sticks and mock-ups of fighter cockpits, are expanding.  Continued re-

ductions in cost coupled with increases in capability will likely stimulate

further expansion of the home market.
Research Challenges
Several areas of experiential computing would benefit from addi-
tional research.  Much of this work would be applicable to both defense

and entertainment applications of experiential computing technology.
Technologies for image generation, tracking, perambulation, and virtual

presence are of interest to both communities, but research priorities tend

to be very different.  As an example, the factors guiding development of

the microprocessors that form the heart of the new Nintendo 64 game

machine are very different from those that DOD would have set were it
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36MODELING AND SIMULATION
specifying a deployable, low-cost, real-time simulation and training de-
vice.  For example, the Nintendo system was designed for operation in

conjunction with a television and uses an interlaced scanning technique

and low-resolution graphics.  Most training systems would require high-

er resolution to enable participants to identify more easily specific fea-

tures of the environment and to avoid eye strain during periods of ex-

tended use and would likely use a progressive scan system similar to

most computer monitors.  Thus, for military purposes it might be possi-

ble to leverage a variant of the Nintendo 64 processor, but the actual

processor would probably not do the job.
Image Generation
Visual simulations in defense and entertainment applications share a
common need for image generators with a range of capabilities and costs.
On the entertainment side, low-cost platforms such as personal comput-

ers (PCs) and game boxes, such as those manufactured by Sega or Nin-

tendo, underlie the video games industry.  PCs also serve as the primary

point of entry to the Internet and therefore are critical to companies pro-

viding on-line entertainment, whether through so-called chat rooms or

multiplayer games.  Larger location-based entertainment centers, such as

the flight simulator centers operated by Virtual World Entertainment and
the Magic Edge, also are interested in moving away from workstation-

based simulators to PC-based simulators as a means of reducing operat-

ing costs.
Image generation has long benefited from close linkages between the
commercial and defense industries.  From its early roots at Evans and

Sutherland (E&S) and GE Aerospace, the image generator industry re-

sponded largely to defense needs because volumes were low and prices

high, typically in the millions of dollars.  The high cost limited the use of

such simulators outside DOD.  Nevertheless, the E&S CT5 (circa 1983)

and the GE Compuscene 4 Computer Image generators were benchmarks
by which all interactive computer graphics systems were measured for

years.
At about the same time, interactive 3D graphics began to migrate
into commercial applications.  Stanford University Professor James Clark

and seven of his graduate students founded Silicon Graphics Inc. to bring

real-time graphics to a broad range of applications.  Other companies

soon followed, creating the now-pervasive commercial market for real-

time 3D graphics.  As a result, image generation capabilities that cost

over $1 million in 1990 are now available on the desktop for one-one

thousandth (1/1,000) that price
Ña drop of over three orders of magni-
tude in less than a decade.  This improvement in price/performance ra-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA37tios results from both technological advances and a related growth in
demand for 3D graphics.  By driving up production volumes, increased

demand has lowered costs significantly, and the entrance of new compet-

itors into the market has accelerated the pace of innovation and resulted

in further declines in cost.  As real-time 3D becomes a commodity, the

true cost of image generation is switching to software
Ñthe time and re-
sources required to model virtual worlds.
As commercial systems become more capable, more opportunities
will exist for DOD and the entertainment industry to work together on

image generation capabilities, coupling fidelity with the lower costs that

stem from producing larger volumes.  A number of existing and emerg-

ing technologies could potentially be used for DOD training applications.

Low-cost 3D image generators exist that can support robust dynamic 3D

environments.  These range from game machines such as Nintendo 64 to

low-cost graphics boards for PCs manufactured by companies such as

3Dfx and Lockheed Martin.
Improvements in low-cost image generators depend on advances in
six underlying technologies:  processors, 3D graphics boards, communi-

cations bandwidth, storage, operating systems, and graphics software.

The commercial computer industry will play the leading role in bringing

such technologies to the market but will continue to draw from a larger

national technology base created by both public and private research pro-
grams.  Advances in high-end DOD systems may be able to create capa-

bilities that can be used in less expensive systems.  Processing power

continues to increase with each new generation of microprocessors.  Cur-

rent microprocessors operate at speeds of 200 megahertz or more, and

many include multiprocessor logic that can allow several (typically four

to eight) processors to work together on a common problem.  In the area

of 3D graphics boards, some 30 to 40 companies currently offer boards

for PCs.  As a result, David Clark of Intel Corporation predicts that the

performance of graphics chips (the number of polygons generated per

second) may double in performance every nine months
Ñtwice as fast as
processors are improving.  Inexpensive chips will soon be able to gener-

ate upward of 50 million pixels per second with textures.  New commu-

nications architectures for PC graphics, such as Intel
Õs accelerated graph-
ics port architecture, will enable over 500 megabytes per second of

sustained bandwidth, enabling designers to rapidly transfer texture maps
from main memory, thus keeping the cost of 3D graphics low. Because of

such advances, producers of PC hardware and software see 3D graphics

as a growing application area and are moving quickly to commercialize

3D graphics technology.  Both Windows NT and UNIX operating sys-

tems support PC-based graphics, and a number of software vendors are

porting their applications from the workstation to the PC environment.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38MODELING AND SIMULATION
Multigen Inc. has announced that it is making products available for
Windows NT systems; Gemini Corporation has ported the Gemini Visu-

alization System.  Microsoft Corporation
Õs purchase of Softimage, manu-
facturer of high-end graphics creation software used by both DOD and

the entertainment industry, promises to accelerate the graphics capabili-

ties of PCs.
Tracking
One of the areas that has seen insufficient innovation in the past
decade, position and orientation tracking, continues to hamper advanced
development in experiential computing.  Today
Õs tracking systems in-
clude optical, magnetic, and acoustic systems.  The most popular trackers

are AC or DC magnetic systems from, respectively, Polhemus Corpora-

tion and Ascension Technologies.  These systems have fairly high laten-

cy, marginal accuracy, moderate noise levels, and limited range.  New

untethered tracking systems from Ascension help with the intrusive na-

ture of being wired up but still require the user to wear a large magnet.
Tracking remains a barrier to free-roaming experiences in virtual en-
vironments.  To meet the goals of the U.S. Army
Õs STRICOM for training
dismounted infantry, long tracker range, resistance to environmental ef-

fects from light and sound, and minimal intrusion are key to assuring

that the tracking does not get in the way of effective training (see position

paper by Traci Jones in Appendix D).  Similar requirements were ex-

pressed at the workshop by Scott Watson of Walt Disney Imagineering.

Magnetic tracking is currently used for detecting head position and ori-

entation in Disney
Õs 
Aladdin
 experience and other attractions, despite the
fact that the latency of such systems is roughly 100 milliseconds
Ñlong
enough to contribute to symptoms of simulator sickness.
3As the performance of graphics engines rendering virtual environ-
ments increases, the proportional effect of tracker lag is increased.  Some

optical-based trackers are currently yielding good results but have some

problems with excessive weight and directional and environmental sen-

sitivity.  Experiments with novel tracking technologies based on tiny la-

sers are showing promise, but much more work needs to be done before

untethered long-range trackers with six degrees of freedom are broadly

available in the commercial domain.
While untethering the tracker is a current next-step goal, the ideal
tracker would not only be untethered but also unobtrusive.  Any device

that must be worn or held is intrusive, as it intrudes on the personal

space of the individual.  All current tracking systems suffer from this

problem except for some limited-functionality video tracking systems.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA39Video recognition systems are typical examples of unobtrusive trackers,
allowing users to be tracked without requiring them to wear anything

(except for the University of North Carolina video tracker, which actual-

ly had users wear cameras!).  While this is an ideal, it is difficult to effec-

tively implement and thus has seen only limited application.  Some ex-

amples include Myron Krueger
Õs VideoPlace and Vincent John Vincent
ÕsMandala system.
Perambulation
Improved technologies are also necessary for supporting perambula-
tion in virtual environments. The U.S. Army
Õs STRICOM has funded the
development of an omni-directional treadmill to explore issues associat-
ed with implementing perambulation in virtual environments, a topic

that is applicable to entertainment applications of VR as well.  Allowing

participants in a virtual environment to wander around, explore, and

become part of a story would greatly enhance the entertainment value of

the attraction.  It would also enable residents of a particular neighbor-

hood to wander around synthetic re-creations of their neighborhoods to

see how a proposed development nearby would affect their area, from a

natural perspective and with a natural user interface.  Research is needed

to improve current designs and to create perambulatory interfaces that

allow users to fully explore a virtual environment with floors of different

textures, lumps, hills, obstructions, and other elements that cannot easily

be simulated using a treadmill.
Technologies for Virtual Presence
4Virtual presence is the subjective sense of being physically present in
one environment when actually present in another environment.
5  Re-
searchers in VR have hypothesized the importance of inducing a feeling
of presence in individuals experiencing virtual environments if they are

to perform their intended tasks effectively.  Creating this sense of pres-

ence is not well understood at this time, but among its potential benefits

may be (1) providing the specific cues required for task performance, (2)

motivating participants to perform to the best of their abilities, and (3)

providing an overall experience similar enough to the real world that it

elicits the conditioned or desired response while in the real world.  Sever-

al technologies may contribute to virtual presence.
¥Visual stimulus.
  This is the primary means to foster presence in
most of today
Õs simulators.  However, because of insufficient consid-
eration of the impact of granularity, texture, and style in graphics
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40MODELING AND SIMULATION
rendering, the inherent capability of the available hardware is not
utilized to the greatest effect.  One potential area of collaboration

could be to investigate the concepts of visual stimulus requirements

and the various design approaches to improve graphics-rendering

devices to satisfy these requirements.
¥Hearing and 3D sound.
  DOD has initiated numerous efforts to im-
prove the production of 3D sound techniques, but it has not yet been

effectively used in military simulations. Providing more realistic sound

in a synthetic environment can improve the fidelity of the sensory cues

perceived by participants in a simulation and help them forget they are

in a virtual simulated environment.
¥Olfactory stimulus.
  Smell can contribute to task performance in
certain situations and can contribute to a full sense of presence in a syn-

thetic environment.  There are certain distinctive smells that serve as cues

for task initiation.  A smoldering electrical fire can be used to trigger

certain concerns by individuals participating in a training simulator.  In

addition, smells such as that of hydraulic fluid can enhance a synthetic

environment to the extent that it creates a sense of danger.
¥Vibrotactile and electrotactile displays.
  Another sense that can be
involved to create an enhanced synthetic environment is touch and feel.

Current simulator design has concentrated on moving the entire training

platform while often ignoring the importance of surface temperature and

vibration in creating a realistic environment.
¥Coherent stimuli.
  One area that has not received much research is
the required coherent application of the above-listed stimulations to cre-

ate an enhanced synthetic environment.  Although each stimulation may

be valid in isolation, the real challenge is the correct level and intensity of

combined stimulations.
Electronic Storytelling
Part of making a simulated experience engaging and realistic has
nothing to do with the fidelity of the simulation or the technological feats
involved in producing high-resolution graphics and science-based mod-

eling of objects and their interactions.  These qualities are certainly im-

portant, but they must be accompanied by skilled storytelling techniques

that help participants in a virtual environment sense that they are in a

real environment and behave accordingly.  
ÒThe problem we are trying
to solve here  is not exactly a problem of simulation,
Ó stated Danny Hillis
at the workshop.  
ÒIt is a problem of stimulation.
Ó  The problem is to use
the simulation experience to help participants learn to make the right

decisions and take the right actions.
The entertainment industry has considerable experience in creating
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA41simulated experiences
Ñsuch as films and games
Ñthat engage partici-
pants and enable them to suspend their disbelief about the reality of the
scenario.  These techniques involve methods of storytelling, of develop-

ing an engaging story and using technical and nontechnical mechanisms

to enforce the emotional aspects.  As Danny Hillis observed:
If you want to make somebody frightened, it is not sufficient to show
them a frightening picture.  You have to spend a lot of time setting them
up with the right music, with cues, with camera angles, things like that,

so that you are emotionally preparing them, cueing them, getting them
ready to be frightened so that when you put that frightening picture up,
they are startled.
Understanding such techniques will become increasingly important in
applications of modeling and simulation in both DOD and the entertain-

ment industry.  Alex Seiden of Industrial Light and Magic observed at

the workshop that 
Òany art, particularly film, succeeds when the audi-
ence forgets itself and is transported into another world.
Ó  The technolo-
gy used to create the simulation (such as special effects for films) must

serve the story and be driven by it.
DOD recognizes the importance of storytelling in its large-scale sim-
ulations.  Judith Dahmann of DMSO noted that DOD prepares partici-

pants for simulations by laying out the scenario in terms of the starting

conditions:  Who is the enemy?  What is the situation?  What resources

are available?  However, DOD may be able to learn additional lessons

from the entertainment industry regarding the types of sensory cues that

can help engender the desired emotional response.
Selective Fidelity
One of the primary issues that must be considered in both entertain-
ment and defense applications of modeling and simulation technology is
achieving the desired level of fidelity.  How closely must simulators mim-
ic the behavior of real systems in order to make them useful training

devices?  Designing systems that provide high levels of fidelity can be

prohibitively costly, and, as discussed above, the additional levels of fi-

delity may not greatly improve the simulated experience.  As a result,

simulation designers often employ a technique called 
selective fidelity 
in
which they concentrate resources on improving the fidelity of those parts

of a simulation that will have the greatest effect on a participant
Õs experi-
ence and accept lower levels of fidelity in other parts of the simulation.
Developers of DODÕs Simulator Networking (SIMNET) system, a dis-tributed system for real-time simulation of battle engagements and war

games, recognized that they could not fool trainees into actually believ-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42MODELING AND SIMULATION
ing they were in tanks in battle and put their resources where they
thought they would do the most good.
6 They adopted an approach of
selective fidelity in which only the details that proved to be important in

shaping behavior would be replicated.  Success was measured as the

degree to which trainees
Õ behavior resembled that of actual tank crews.
As a result, the inside of the SIMNET simulator has only a minimal num-

ber of dials and gauges; emphasis was placed on providing sound and

the low-frequency rumble of the tank, delivered directly to the driver
Õsseat to create the sense of driving over uneven terrain.  Though users

initially reported dismay at the apparent lack of fidelity, they accepted

the simulator and found it highly realistic after interacting with it.
7The entertainment industry has considerable experience in develop-
ing systems that use selective fidelity to create believable experiences

that minimize costs.  Game developers constantly strive to produce real-

istic games at prices appropriate for the consumer market.  They do so by

concentrating resources on those parts of their games most important to

the simulation.  After realizing that game players spent little time looking

at the controls in a flight simulator, for example, Spectrum HoloByte

shifted resources to improving the fidelity of the view out the window.
8Experiments have shown that even in higher-fidelity systems the experi-

ence can be improved by telling a preimmersion background story and

by giving participants concrete goals to perform in virtual environments.9Selective fidelity is important in both defense and entertainment sim-
ulations, though it can be applied somewhat differently in each domain

to reflect the importance given to different elements of the simulation.

For DOD, selective fidelity is typically used to ensure realistic interac-

tions between and performance of simulated entities, sometimes at the

expense of visual fidelity.  Hence a DOD simulation might have a radar

system with performance that degrades in clouds and rain or an antitank

round that inflicts damage consistent with the kind of armor on the tar-

get, but it might use relatively primitive images of tanks and airplanes if

they are not central to the simulation.  The entertainment industry tends

to place greater emphasis on visual realism, attempting to make simulat-

ed objects look real, while relaxing the fidelity of motions and interac-

tions.  An entertainment simulation is more likely to use tanks that look

real, but that do not behave exactly like real tanks:  their motion may not

slow when they travel through mud, or their armor may not be thinner in

certain places than in others.
Such differences limit the ability of defense and entertainment sys-
tems to be used in both communities.  For example, while many modern

video games create seemingly realistic simulations, they do not necessar-

ily model the real world accurately enough to meet defense requirements.
Granted, there is a genre of video games that strive to be as realistic as
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA43possible.  Games like 
Back to Baghdad
 and 
EF2000
 are popular in large
part because they strive for high degrees of accuracy.  In addition, be-
cause of the long lifetimes of some trainers at DOD, several modern vid-

eo games far exceed the accuracy of some older operational simulators.

But game designers must often break with reality in order to meet bud-

getary and technological constraints.  As Scott Randolph of Spectrum

HoloByte noted at the workshop,
There is always the tendency to do things like take an [infrared] sensor
that is good for 10 miles and works best at night.  But because you don
Õtwant to keep track of [the] time of day, you make it so it always works

the same.  It can
Õt really see through a cloud or dust, but since there
aren
Õt very many clouds in the game and you don
Õt want to keep track
of dust, you very quickly end up with a sensor model that doesn
Õt mod-
el the real sensor.
While the software in these applications may have the technical under-
pinnings to produce training devices, their primary goal is entertainment,
not accuracy.  Given the verification, validation, and accreditation re-

quirements that must be met for DOD training applications and the prof-

it expectations of the entertainment industry, it appears unlikely that a

common software application could be written to meet the needs of both

communities.  This observation does not suggest that DOD and the enter-

tainment industry cannot develop a common architecture or framework

(such as network protocols and database formats) for simulation that

both communities could use, as is described in the 
ÒStandards for In-
teroperability
Ó section of this chapter.
DOD and the entertainment industry may be able to benefit from
their complementary approaches to selective fidelity.  The entertainment

industry, with support from other industries, will continue to pursue

techniques for enhancing visual fidelity.  Much of the basic research to

support such efforts is being conducted in universities.  The National

Science Foundation, for example, is funding a Science and Technology

Center for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization that includes

participants from the computer graphics programs at Brown University,

the California Institute of Technology, Cornell University, the University

of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and the University of Utah.  The center

has a long-term research mission (11 years) to help improve the scientific

bases for the next generation of computer graphics environments (both

hardware and software). Its research focuses on modeling, rendering,

interaction, and performance.  In contrast, DOD may have a greater in-

centive to explore ways of incorporating scientific and engineering prin-

ciples into its simulations to enable entities to behave and interact more

realistically.  Once developed, techniques for fidelity may be able to be
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44MODELING AND SIMULATION
shared between the two communities.  One committee member stated
that many game developers visit his lab seeking physics-based models

for vehicles in a simulated environment.
NETWORKED SIMULATION
ApplicationsNetworked simulation, which allows multiple participants connect-
ed to a common network (whether a local-area network or the Internet)

to interact simultaneously with one another, is becoming increasingly

important to both DOD and the entertainment industry.  Both share a

common need for adequate network infrastructure to support growing

numbers of participants.  DOD
Õs goal is to develop a networked training
environment in which military operations can be rehearsed with large

numbers of participants while avoiding expenditures on fuel, machines,

and travel.  Participants can range into the thousands or tens of thou-

sands and include soldiers at workstations with weapons-system-specific

interfaces, soldiers at keyboards, or computer-generated forces that mim-

ic human interaction.  Such large-scale networked simulations are care-

fully planned and set up, just like actual military maneuvers with real

equipment; they are coordinated with radios and include the full range

of participants needed to support military operations.
For the games industry the goal of networked games is to provide a
shared compelling entertainment experience for participants.  Players in

such networked systems are most often at the consoles of home comput-

ers or at location-based entertainment centers and are connected via lo-

cal-area networks or the Internet.  Internet-based games are an area of

strong growth.  Currently, Internet gaming supports multiplayer ver-

sions of existing computer games that have been modified to allow 
ÒIn-
ternetworking.
Ó  Most use proprietary protocols to exchange information
and can support interoperability among players using the same game.

Though they are still at a simple stage, connecting only tens of players,

such games are moving toward larger-scale connectivity.  If the number

of participants in networked games grows as large as DOD simulations

(the targeted size of military simulations has increased by nearly two

orders of magnitude over the past decade), new architectures may be

required to keep the games from running so slowly that delays (or laten-

cy) become perceptible to players.
Research Challenges
Both DOD and the entertainment industry anticipate large growth in
the number of participants who engage simultaneously in networkedModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA45simulations.  DOD has already demonstrated systems linking thousands
of players and would like to link hundreds of thousands.  Most net-

worked games currently allow 8 to 32 players, but as the offerings ex-

pand, games could see hundreds or even thousands of networked partic-

ipants.
10
  Such increases in scale pose a number of challenges that will
need to be resolved.  More participants implies an increase in the size

and complexity of virtual worlds.  Such requirements, combined with the

increased amount of information that must be exchanged among partici-

pants, place additional demands on available bandwidth.  Greater net-

work traffic implies greater delays in delivering messages along the net-

work unless improved means can be found of designing the network or

distributing processing.
Overcoming Bandwidth Limitations
The growth in the number of participants in networked simulations
and the desire to share greater amounts of information place increasing
demands on bandwidth and computational power of simulation and

game systems.  Attempts to overcome bandwidth limitations have tend-

ed to concentrate on one of two areas:  (1) increasing the bandwidth

available for networked simulations and (2) minimizing the demand for

bandwidth made by networked simulations.  Workshop participants

agreed that there would be some value in bringing these two communi-

ties together to exchange implementation ideas and techniques.
Expanding Available Bandwidth.
  To overcome bandwidth limitations, both
the defense modeling and simulation community and providers of Inter-
net-based games have attempted to develop or acquire greater bandwidth
for their systems.  DOD has constructed its own network, the Defense

Simulation Internet (DSI), to allow simulation systems at distant sites to

engage each other.  The system in effect provides DOD users with a

dedicated wide-area network that is logically separated from the Internet

and keeps DOD messages free from other traffic on the Internet.  Local-

area networks tied to DSI are connected via a T-1 line, which allows high-

speed transfers of data.  As such, DSI makes each participating site into a

big local-area network.
Networked game companies have also attempted to separate their
message traffic from that of the Internet to improve reliability and ex-

pand available bandwidth.  Such companies have typically negotiated

with Internet service providers to pay for premium service with certain

guarantees of available bandwidth in order to reduce network latency.
Continued improvements in the bandwidth available for networked
simulation will continue to derive from advances outside the defense mod-eling and simulation community or the entertainment industry.  Tele-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46MODELING AND SIMULATION
communications companies and Internet service providers continue to
upgrade the capacity of their networks and network connections to pro-

vide higher-speed access and greater bandwidth.  DOD will continue to

expand the capacity of its networks for command, control, communica-

tions, computing, and intelligence (C
4I) and the Defense Simulation In-
ternet.  To the extent that DOD
Õs C
4I community becomes more closely
linked with the commercial communications industry, some of the exist-

ing constraints on bandwidth may be relaxed.
11
Reducing Bandwidth Requirements.
  Other attempts at overcoming band-
width limitations have focused on using existing bandwidth more effi-

ciently and reducing the amount of bandwidth demanded by networked

simulations.  Networked game companies, cognizant that most players

access the Internet via 14.4- or 28.8-kilobits-per-second modem connec-

tions, are striving to customize their network data to reduce data trans-

mission requirements while maintaining the entertainment value of their

applications. Military simulation designers have paid relatively little at-

tention to determining which data transmissions can be dispensed with

while retaining acceptable reality at the application level.  The military

could leverage game developers
Õ expertise in determining what data re-
duction might be achievable through techniques developed by the enter-

tainment industry.  DOD and the entertainment industry could also be-

come more involved in work that is under way internationally in the

computer and consumer electronics industries to develop image com-

pression technologies and standards.  To date, neither DOD nor the en-

tertainment community has been heavily involved in MPEG-4.
DOD and the Internet community have pursued another possible solu-
tion to the bandwidth problem:  multicast routing systems that incorporate

software-based area-of-interest managers (AOIMs) to direct packets of in-

formation across a network to particular groups of listeners.
12
  Such sys-
tems allow any member of a group to transmit messages (containing text,

voice, video, and imagery) to all other members of the group via a single

transmission.
13
  This approach prevents the sender from having to transmit
individual copies of the message to all intended recipients, freeing resourc-

es for other purposes.  Machines that are not part of the group ignore the

packet at the network interface, eliminating any need for the central pro-

cessing unit to read the packet.  Proposed partitioning schemes are based

on spatial (geographic groupings based on locality), temporal (e.g., real-

time versus nonreal-time), and functional (e.g., voice communications, air-

craft) characteristics.  AOIMs distribute partitioning algorithms among hosts

rather than rely on a central AOIM server.  Used in conjunction with multi-

cast routing, they can help minimize the amount of bandwidth needed to

support networked simulations.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA47Work on multicast routing and AOIMs has been ongoing for several
years.  The Naval Postgraduate School has incorporated multicast into its
NPSNET for experiments across the Internet.  DMSO has also invested in

the development of AOIM filters as part of its High-level Architecture

(HLA), and the HLA
Õs Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) will soon support a
comprehensive AOIM capability.
14
  The Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) has also initiated an effort to implement multicast mechanisms to

support distributed simulation.  Its Large Scale Multicast Applications

working group has developed documentation to describe how IETF mul-

ticast protocols, conference management protocols, transport protocols,

and multicast routing protocols can support large-scale distributed simu-

lations, such as DOD simulations containing 10,000 simultaneous groups

and upward of 100,000 virtual entities.
15
Nevertheless, additional research is needed to expand the capabili-
ties of AOIMs beyond those of simple filters and to make them generaliz-

able across problem domains.  The IETF, for example, has identified sev-

en areas in which existing Internet protocols are insufficient to support

large-scale distributed simulation networks (see Table 2.1).  Among these

is the need to develop multicast protocols that can provide the quality of

service needed for distributed simulation:  different types of messages

must be transmitted with different degrees of reliability and latency.  In

addition, research is needed to (1) help define a network software archi-

tecture that properly uses AOIMs; (2) determine how best to program

AOIMs and how to generalize the concept of AOIMs so that as applica-

tions change new AOIMs can be downloaded to match the application;

and (3) implement and test AOIMs on a wide-area network basis.
Network Latency
16
Latency is a major barrier to fast-action Internet games and to large-
scale simulations generally.  To make participants feel as though the sys-
tem is responding in real time, designers of fast-action games typically

try to keep the delay time between the moment players instruct their

simulators to take certain actions (e.g., fire a gun, change direction) and

the time the system generates the appropriate response to 33 millisec-

onds or less.  Maintaining such latencies across large distributed net-

works, such as the Internet, is difficult.  Electrical and optical signals

transmitted across such networks can experience several types of delays.

The fundamental limitation is the speed of light:  signals cannot travel

roundtrip in fiber optic cable between New York and San Francisco, for

example, in less than about 54 milliseconds.  But signals encounter addi-

tional delays as they travel through large networks:  modems must for-

mat messages for transmission over the network; routers must determine
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48MODELING AND SIMULATION
TABLE 2.1Additional Capabilities Identified by the Internet
Engineering Task Force That Are Needed to Support Multicast in
Distributed Interactive Simulations
SOURCE:  Pullen, J.M., M. Myjak, and C. Bouwens.  1997.  ÒLimitations of Internet Protocol
Suite for Distributed Simulation in the Large Multicast Environment,
Ó a draft report of the
Internet Engineering Task Force dated March 24; available on-line at ftp.ietf.org/internet-
drafts/draft-ietf-lsma-limitations-01.txt.
DescriptionThe capability to reserve a specified amount of networkbandwidth for a given simulation to help ensure thatcertain messages can be transmitted with higher levels
of service.  The proposed Resource Reservation Protocolis one candidate for this need.Routing protocol that determines the paths of packetsthrough the network based on the relative congestion ofdifferent pathways and the quality-of-service demands
of different message types.Multicast capabilities need to be extended to differenttypes of wide-area networks, such as those that use
asynchronous transfer mode communications.
A set of transmission protocols that can provide therange of quality-of-service and latency requirements of
distributed interactive simulations, such as best-effortmulticast of most data, reliable multicast of criticalreference data, and low-latency reliable unicast of dataamong arbitrary members of a multicast group.A protocol for managing network resources, such as theSimple Network Management Protocol used on theInternet.Procedures and protocols that facilitate coordinatedstarting, stopping, and pausing of large distributed
exercises.Mechanisms to ensure the integrity, authenticity, andconfidentiality of communications across the network.
NeedResource reservation inproduction systemsResource-sensitivemulticast routingMulticast capabilities thattake advantage of all
multicast-capable data
link protocols
Hybrid transmissionprotocolsNetwork management fordistributed systemsSession protocols to start,
pause, and stop
distributed simulationsIntegrated securityarchitectureModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA49how to send the messages through the network.  Queuing delays that are
due to congestion on large networks and packet losses (which require

messages to be re-sent) can add significantly to the latency of distributed

networks, especially public networks like the Internet that handle large

volumes of traffic.
As a result, even premium services over the Internet cannot general-
ly meet the latency requirements for fast-action simulations conducted

across a widely distributed network.  According to Will Harvey of Sand-

castle Inc., network latency for roundtrip coast-to-coast transmissions
across the Internet will not drop below 100 to 130 milliseconds by the

year 2000 (Figure 2.1).
17
  Fast-action simulations do not operate realisti-
cally with such latencies.  Participants trying to dodge bullets may be-

come frustrated because the response time is too slow for them to dodge,

or they may feel cheated because the program displays their character

such that it appears they have dodged it when they have not.
Latencies are highly dependent on the architecture of distributed net-
works.  In a lockstep architecture (Figure 2.2) each individual machine

controls all objects locally and broadcasts changes to the other machines

via a central server.  If a player pushes a button to make his or her charac-

ter jump, for example, the player
Õs own machine will update the position
of the character and send a message to the server indicating that the jump

button was pressed.  The server will broadcast a message to other play-

ers
Õ machines that the first player pressed the jump button, and those
player
Õs machines will update the first player
Õs position accordingly.  The
simulation advances one cycle when each machine has received a com-

plete set of user input from all participating machines.  Since advancing a

cycle requires complete exchange of user input, the responsiveness of the

system is limited by the latency of the slowest communication link and is

contingent on the reliability of all nodes.
FIGURE 2.1  
Estimated latency for round-trip coast-to-coast Internet transmis-
sions.  SOURCE:  Position paper prepared for this project by Will Harvey; see
Appendix D.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50MODELING AND SIMULATION
FIGURE 2.2  
Alternative architectures for distributed simulations.  NOTE: In
these pictures the large circle is a server or multicast router in a building.  The
small circles are machines in people
Õs homes.  X, Y, and Z represent objects con-
trolled by users from their own homes.  Proxies not shown in these figures dis-
play the objects on every machine. The X, Y, and Z letters represent the point of
control of each object.  SOURCE:  Position paper prepared for this project by Will
Harvey; see Appendix D.
In a client/server architecture each machine independently sends its
user input or action request to a central server, which then relays the
information to each player
Õs client machine.  For example, if a player
pushes the jump button, the client machine will send a message to the

server indicating that the button has been pushed.  The server will then

update the position of the player
Õs icon and send the updated position to
all client machines participating in the game.  Controlling an object from

a client machine still entails a roundtrip delay (from client to server and

back), but the responsiveness of any individual client machine is not af-

fected by the communication speed
Ñor reliability problems
Ñof the oth-
er machines.
In a fully distributed architecture, machines control objects locally
and broadcast the results of actions to other machines, which receive the

information with some time delay.  If a player presses the jump button,

his or her machine will update the position of his or her character and

send the updated information, via the central server, to each of the other

players engaged in the game.  Each machine has immediate responsive-

ness controlling its own objects but must synchronize interactions be-

tween its own objects and other objects controlled by remote machines.
In the lockstep and client/server architectures, responsiveness is lim-
ited by the roundtrip communication latency to the server.  In the distrib-

uted architecture, responsiveness is not limited by latencies because ob-

jects are controlled locally and the players
Õ own objects respond to
commands with little delay; however, this architecture creates problems
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA51of synchronization.  Players
Õ own objects are displayed in near real time,
but other players
Õ objects are displayed with a delay equal to the latency
of the system.  While such synchronization problems are not of concern if
interactions between objects are minimal, they can create problems with

shared objects.
Attempts to resolve latency and synchronization problems can take
several approaches.  The first is to improve the speed of the underlying

network.  Work is under way to develop and deploy a new algorithm for

queue management called Random Early Detection that will help mini-

mize queuing delays across the Internet and other networks.
18
  Other
research is investigating ways to speed the delivery of time-sensitive
packets across the Internet by establishing different levels of service qual-

ity.
19
  For a price premium, users will be able to designate that their
packets need to be delivered with minimal delay.  Similar performance is

available today through the use of dedicated networks that some Internet

gaming companies and the DOD have built to support distributed simu-

lations.  Such networks avoid delays caused by congestion in public net-

works.  Nevertheless, all such efforts in this area cannot reduce latencies

below those imposed by the speed of light itself.
Other attempts at improving responsiveness recognize the laten-
cies inherent in distributed systems and attempt to compensate for

them by predicting the future location of objects, a technique called

dead reckoning.
  This technique accommodates the delay with which
information is received from other participants by predicting their

actions using information such as position, velocity, and acceleration

and by bringing all objects displayed on each simulator into the same

time frame.  Such techniques are effective only insofar as the motions

or actions of objects are predictable and continuous; they cannot yet

anticipate future changes in the course of objects (although future

research may allow the development of more sophisticated algo-

rithms that can anticipate deviations from continuous motions, per-

haps by incorporating information about terrain features or past flight
trajectories).  Participants in simulated tank engagements have found

ways to outsmart such dead-reckoning techniques:  before passing in

front of an enemy tank, they will accelerate quickly and then stop

abruptly so that the enemy tank will incorrectly predict and display

their position.
Alternatively, some researchers are developing techniques for syn-
chronizing events across distributed simulations.
20
  Such approaches as-
sume that information from remote simulators will always be received

with a time delay and that many actions cannot be predicted accurately.

Thus, they show objects from remote machines with an inherent time

delay.  If users have no interactions with remote objects, the time delay
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52MODELING AND SIMULATION
does not interfere with the simulation and the system need not compen-
sate for the time differential.  But if objects from local and remote ma-

chines do interact, synchronization technologies compensate for the time

difference.  These technologies give users the impression that the net-

work has zero latency, or immediate responsiveness, but they do so by

sacrificing some degree of fidelity.  For example, a 100-meter car race

may actually be a 90-meter race with 10 meters of compensation interject-

ed at the appropriate places to synchronize the outcome; similarly, a ball

thrown from one player to another may travel faster when moving away

from than toward the local player (Box 2.1).  While having demonstrated

some efficacy in game applications, additional analysis will be needed to

determine the suitability of such techniques for defense simulations that

require high levels of fidelity.
STANDARDS FOR INTEROPERABILITY
A related area of interest to DOD and the Internet games community
is standards for interoperability.  Interoperability is the ability of various

simulation systems to work with each other in a meaningful and coher-

ent fashion.
21
  It is often defined as a matter of degree:  a simulation is
considered 
compliant
 if it can send and receive messages to and from
other simulators in accordance with an agreed-upon specification.  Two

or more simulators are considered 
compatible
 if they are compliant and
their models and data transmissions support the realization of a common

operational environment.  They are interoperable if their performance char-acteristics support the fidelity required for the exercise and allow a fair

contest between participants in which differences between individual
simulators are overwhelmed by user actions.  For example, a flight simu-

lator with no damage assessment capability would not be interoperable

with other simulators having this capability
Ñeven if they can communi-
cate data effectively
Ñbecause it could not detect that it had been hit by
an enemy missile and destroyed.
Achieving interoperability between simulation systems requires (1) a
common network software architecture with standard protocols that gov-
ern the exchange of information about the state of each of the partici-

pants in the simulation; (2) a common underlying architecture for main-

taining information about the state of the environment related to a

particular simulator; and (3) a common representation of the virtual en-

vironment.
22
  As the size and scale of defense simulations grow, partici-
pants will need a consistent view of the battlefield so that they can agree

on the location of objects there and on the timing of events.  Given that

different players will have different ways of gathering information (e.g.,

radars and other sensors as well as information relayed from command
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA53and communications centers), they do not need to have the 
same
 informa-
tion, but the simulation itself should not alter the information they re-
ceive. Meeting these requirements allows tank simulators, for example,

to be designed and interconnected so that their operators can share infor-

mation and train jointly in a common virtual battlefield.
Related to this capability is 
composability
, the ability to build simula-
tions using components designed for other simulations.  Composability

is a significant concern for DOD, which cannot construct a single inte-
BOX 2.1An Example of Event SynchronizationConsider a football game played by multiple players in a distributednetwork.  It is important that the football be controlled locally on themachine of the player currently holding the ball so that latencies are
minimized; otherwise, the ball will not move at the same time as theplayerÕs hand, and a lag may be apparent.  If the football is passed toanother player, it must then be controlled by the other playerÕs ma-
chine, but passing the football is complicated by the fact that the posi-tions of the players on the two computers may not be synchronizedbecause of latencies in the network.The solution to this problem rests on two observations.  First, bymigrating the football from one machine to another, the latency prob-lem can be corrected.  Second, two players do not need to see exactly
the same thing on their two screens, as long as they agree on the out-come and no one feels cheated.  So if one player throws another afootball, the football can travel slightly slower from the first to the sec-
ond player on one screen than on the other, giving control of the foot-ball a chance to migrate from one computer to the other midwaythrough the path.  Neither player can tell the difference.To demonstrate the viability of this approach, Sandcastle Inc. developedan experimental Internet ping pong game in which two players hit a ballback and forth to each other, controlling individual paddles.  Each playersees his or her own paddle in real time and the opponentÕs paddle withsome time delay.  Each player sees the ball travel away from his or herpaddle at a slower speed than the ball travels toward his or her paddle, sothat at the point at which the ball reaches the opponentÕs paddle, the playersees the ball and the opponentÕs paddle at a point in the past equal to the
latency of the system.  In experiments, participants could not detect a delayin the system, even with network latencies of two-thirds of a second (670
milliseconds).SOURCE:  Will Harvey, Sandcastle Inc.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54MODELING AND SIMULATION
grated simulation that serves all possible purposes and would like to
minimize the development costs of new simulations.  Using composable

simulations, for example, a simulation designed to train aircrews and

ground forces in conducting close air support operations could be built

using simulated aircraft and simulated soldiers that were designed for

other simulations.  Ensuring this type of interoperability requires a com-

mon architecture for the design of simulations and a common under-

standing of the types of tasks conducted by the individual simulators

and those conducted by the integrating system.  While most existing sim-

ulations were designed for a particular purpose and may not be able to

be combined into larger simulations, future systems may be able to be

designed in ways that will allow greater interoperability and compos-

ability.DOD Efforts in Interoperability
Over the past several years DOD has attempted to develop standards
to promote interoperability among its simulation systems.  Such efforts

have needed to accommodate the heterogeneity and scale of entities mod-
eled in the virtual battlefield
Ñcombat aircraft, tanks, and ships, and re-
fueling vehicles
Ñand support the full generality of participant interac-
tions.  To this end the defense simulation community developed

standards, such as Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) standards,

that aim primarily at achieving 
Òplug-and-play
Ó interoperability among
simulators developed by independent manufacturers.
DIS is a group of standards developed by members of the defense mod-
eling and simulation community (both industry and university researchers)

to facilitate distributed interactive simulations. They can be used for hosting

peer-to-peer multiuser simulations in which objects (typically vehicles)

move independently, shoot weapons at each other, and perform standard

logistics operations such as resupply and refueling.  The DIS protocols in-

clude a variety of industry and military standards for computer equipment

and software, as well as the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Proto-

col (TCP/IP) networking protocols used over the Internet.  Specific proto-

cols have had to be devised to define the communications architecture for

distributed simulations as well as the format and content of information

exchanges, the types of information relevant to entities (such as tanks, air-

craft, and command posts) and the types of interactions possible between

them, simulation management, performance measures, radio communica-

tions, emissions, field instrumentation, security, database formats, fidelity,

exercise control, and feedback.
23
  DIS has a well-developed simulation man-
agement subprotocol for setting up and controlling individual players in an

exercise.  Consequently, DIS can achieve certain levels of data interchange
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA55for one-on-one and unit-level interactions but cannot support aggregation
and disaggregation of units.
The DIS standard is derived from protocols developed for DOD
ÕsSimulation Network (SIMNET) system, adopting its general principles,

terminology, and protocol data unit (PDU) formats for transmitting in-

formation between simulators.
24
  The initial set of protocols (DIS 1.0) was
accepted by the standards board of the Institute of Electrical and Elec-

tronics Engineers (IEEE) in 1993 and is now codified under IEEE stan-

dard 1278-1993.  These protocols were subsequently recognized by the

American National Standards Institute.
In addition, DOD has been pursuing development of the High-level
Architecture (HLA) to facilitate both interoperability and composability.

HLA is a software architecture that defines the division of labor between

simulators and a layer of support software, called the Run-time Infrastruc-

ture (RTI), that facilitates interoperability.  It consists of specifications, inter-

faces, and standards for a broad range of simulations, from combat simula-

tions to engineering analyses.  Groups of people wanting to establish

interoperability among their simulators via the RTI do so by creating a

federation
.  Federation members make their own decisions about the types of

entities that will be included in simulations and the types of information

they will exchange.  Individual simulators post state-change information to

the RTI and receive state-change information from other simulators via the

RTI.  The RTI makes sure all parties to a federation receive state-change

data and ensures that the federation
Õs data are time synchronized and rout-
ed efficiently to the other simulations in the federation.
Development of the HLA is being managed by the Architecture Man-
agement Group, which is chaired by DMSO and has representatives from

all military services and DOD agencies developing advanced modeling

and simulation systems.  Members represent a wide range of military

applications, from training and military operations to analysis, test and

evaluation, and engineering-level models for system acquisition and pro-

duction.  Development of the HLA was initiated in 1994, when DARPA

awarded three contracts for the definition of a high-level architecture for

advanced distributed simulations.  Contractors analyzed the needs of

prototype federations in four areas:  (1) platform simulators (such as an

M-1 tank simulator and Close Combat Tactical Trainer; (2) joint training

(simulation-like war games that occur in accelerated time); (3) analytical

simulations of systems to support joint theater-level war-fighting and

support activities; and (4) engineering federations to design, test, and

evaluate new military systems.  The final briefings from these contractor

teams were received in January 1995, and a core team of individuals

synthesized the inputs, with additional insight from other ongoing DOD

modeling and simulation programs to arrive at the initial definition of
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56MODELING AND SIMULATION
the HLA.
25
  Testing of prototype federations was completed in July 1996
to determine if the RTI was broadly enough defined to be useful across a
wide range of federations.  Test results informed development of the

HLA Baseline Definition, which was completed in August 1996 and ap-

proved by the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technolo-

gy as the standard technical architecture for all DOD simulations in Sep-

tember 1996.  All simulations developed after October 1, 1999, must

comply with HLA; no existing simulations that are not compliant with

HLA may be used after October 1, 2001, unless they are converted to the

standard.26BOX 2.2The Processes Used to Create StandardsThe development of a standard for distributing 3D computer graphicsand simulations over the Internet has taken the quick path from idea toreality.  In 1994 Mark Pesce, Tony Parisi, and Gavin Bell combined theirefforts to start the VRML effort. Their intention was to create a standard thatwould enable artists and designers to deliver a new kind of content to the
browsable Internet.In mid-1995 VRML version 1.0 emerged as the first attempt at this stan-dard. After an open Internet vote, VRML 1.0 was to be based on Silicon
Graphics Inc.Õs (SGI) popular Open Inventor technology.  VRML was wide-
ly evaluated as unique and progressive but still not useable.  At this point,broad industry support for VRML was coalescing in an effort to kick-start anew industry.  Complementary efforts were also under way to deliver both
audio and video over the Internet. The general feeling was that soon thebroad acceptance of distributed multimedia on the Internet was a real pos-sibility and that VRML would emerge as the 3D standard.After completion of the VRML 1.0 standard, the VRML ArchitectureGroup (VAG) was established at the Association for Computing Machin-
eryÕs Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH) annual
conference in 1995.  It consisted of eight Internet and 3D simulation ex-perts.  In early 1996 VAG issued a request for proposals on the secondround of VRML development.  The call was answered by six industry lead-
ers.  The selection of the VRML 2.0 standard was made via open voting andoccurred in a short time frame of about two weeks.  SGI emerged as thewinner with its 
ÒMoving Worlds
Ó  proposal.  By this time over 100 compa-

nies had publicly endorsed VRML, and many of them were working oncore technologies, browsers, authoring tools, and content.  At SIGGRAPHÕ96, VAG issued the final VRML 2.0 specification and made a number of
other significant announcements.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA57To help maintain VRML as a standard, VAG made several concretemoves.  First, it started the process of creating the VRML Consortium, a not-for-profit organization devoted to VRML standard development, conform-
ance, and education. Second, VAG announced that the International Orga-nization for Standardization would adopt VRML and the consensus-basedstandardization process as its starting place for an international 3D meta-
file format.Like VRML, DIS standards were generated in an open process via thebiannual Workshop on Standards for the Interoperability of Distributed Sim-
ulations.  Though the first version of DIS derived largely from standardsdeveloped by BBN Corporation for the SIMNET program, participation in arevision of the standards was greatly expanded.  The first workshop was
held in Orlando, Florida, in September 1989 and defined the shape of theDIS standards as they progressed from protocols for DODÕs SimulationNetworking (SIMNET) program to the version 2.1.4 standards that exist to-day.  Attendance at the workshop grew from 150 people in 1989 to morethan 1,500 in September 1996.In contrast, the HLA design and prototype implementations were devel-oped by a small group of DOD officials and contractors in a more closed
fashion that did not solicit input from the modeling and simulation commu-nity at largeÑdespite an interest in promulgating the standard broadly.Doing so speeded development of the standard, but significant concernswere expressed that requirements of the broader community were being leftout in the rush to completion. Few members of the Communications Archi-
tecture Group of the DIS workshop participated in HLAÕs development, nordid representatives from industries outside defense.SOURCES:  Position paper prepared for this project by Brian Blau; see Appen-dix D.  Also, Lantham, Roy.  1996.  ÒDIS Workshop in Transition to . . .What?Ó, Real Time Graphics 5(4):4-5.DOD hopes that the HLA will be adopted outside the defense model-
ing and simulation community.  To facilitate this process, RTI software
will be made freely available as a starter kit.
27
  The software will be in the
public domain; initial release will be for Sun workstations, with later

releases for Silicon Graphics, Hewlett-Packard, and the Windows NT
platforms.  Adoption of HLA beyond DOD is questionable, however;

members of the entertainment industry noted at the workshop that HLAÕsdevelopment took place largely without their inputÑor that of other non-defense communities.  As a result, many representatives of the games

community believe that HLA will not meet their needs; at the workshop
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58MODELING AND SIMULATION
many indicated that they were not even aware that the standard was
being developed.
28
  Further, the process used to develop HLA may have
offended those who were not involved in the development process.
29
HLA was not developed in as open a manner as DIS standards and stan-

dards for the Internet community, such as the Virtual Reality Modeling

Language (VRML) (Box 2.2).
Interoperability in the Entertainment Industry
The entertainment industry, to date, has expressed different interests
regarding interoperability standards.  While DOD has a strong interest in

ensuring that various simulation systems can work together, the enter-
BOX 2.3Virtual Reality Modeling LanguageVRML is an evolving standard used to extend the World Wide Web tothree dimensions.  It is a widely accepted commercial standard, one thatpeople heavily involved with the Internet are seriously thinking about and
adopting for their software development.  The current version, VRML 2.0, is
based on an extended subset of the Silicon Graphics Inc.Õs (SGI) OpenInventor scene description language. It has both a static component and an
interactive component.  The static component features geometry, textures,
3D sound, and animation. The interactive component contains a flexibleprogrammability that can be added to a VRML file through the use of Javacode, another Internet technology.  This addition of Java allows not only
graphics data to be exchanged with VRML but also behaviors.  VRML isboth comprehensive and unfinished, with its current draft exceeding sever-al hundred pages.Complex issues surrounding real-time animation in VRML 2.0 include
entity behaviors, user-entity interaction, and entity coordination.  Many fac-
tors are involved.  To scale to many simultaneous users, peer-to-peer interac-
tions are necessary in addition to client-server query and response.  An ap-proved specification for internal and external behaviors is nearly complete.VRML 2.0 will provide local and remote hooks (i.e., an applications program-
ming interface, or API) to graphical scene descriptions.  Dynamic scenechanges will be stimulated by any combination of scripted actions, messagepassing, user commands or behavior protocols (such as DIS or Java).  Thus,
the forthcoming VRML behaviors standardization will simultaneously providesimplicity, security, scalability, generality, and open extensions.
VRML is not yet complete, and there is still ongoing work.  Three specif-ic areas being addressed include definition of an external API, definition ofModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA59tainment industry places strong emphasis on developing proprietary sys-tems and standards that preclude interoperability.  Mattel, for instance,

encrypted data output from its Power Glove input device so that it could

not be used with competitors
Õ game devices.  Nintendo and Sega game
machines cannot interoperate with each other or with computer-based

video games.  A flight simulator game produced by Spectrum HoloByte

Inc. cannot be used in a mock fight against Strategic Simulation Inc.
ÕsBack to Baghdad
 game.  Even within the multiplayer networked games,
each player uses the same game program.  Commercial standards have

therefore not sought interoperability between independent systems, but

have attempted to allow independently produced software titles to inte-

grate with the same user front-end software (such as operating systems,
a default browser scripting language, and compression technology.  Thepurpose of the external API is to provide a way for Web developers to writeprograms that are able to drive a VRML simulator or a VRML browser.  A
call has been issued requesting proposals for this external API, and theVRML community expects to have that finalized in 1997.  The purpose ofthe default scripting language is to have a standard language that can be
embedded in a VRML file, a language understood by every VRML browser.
A call has been requested for proposals for this language.The purpose of the compression technology call is to be able to compressVRML data, hence minimizing bandwidth requirements on the Internet. A
particular response to this call is notable in that it is a joint proposal betweenIBM and Apple Computer.  The proposal is for the binary compression ofVRML files and is significant because IBM and Apple have decided to open

up their patents on geometry compression, providing them free to the Internet.
IBM and Apple are providing royalty-free licenses to VRML developers for thiscompression. This is a significant step in the types of collaboration the Internet
environment seems to be bringing out in the commercial world.The VRML community is taking steps to ensure widespread adoption.The major step in this direction is that a VRML consortium is being formed
as a permanent fixture of the Internet community.  Additionally, the Inter-national Organization for Standardization (ISO) has picked up VRML as the3D metafile standard, a selection it has been working on for quite a few

years.  By selecting VRML, ISO changed the way it normally does business.For the 3D metafile standard, ISO put aside its normal process of buildingits own standard.  Instead it opted to adopt VRML as it is today in order to
finish quickly. The entire ISO standards process for VRML is expected to becompleted within just 14 months, cutting literally 75 percent of the timethat it normally takes to create a standard.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60MODELING AND SIMULATION
Web browsers, or graphics libraries) so that players with different com-
puter systems can play each other.   Standards such as VRML 2.0,

OpenGL, and DirectX are aimed in this direction (Box 2.3).  As a result of

these standards, a user can use the same software to run a variety of

game applications.
Research Areas
Growing interest in networked simulation suggests that research intostandards and architectures for interoperability will continue to be need-

ed.  Areas of particular interest include protocols for networking virtual

environments, architectures to support interoperability, and interopera-

bility standards.
Virtual Reality Transfer Protocol
Researchers in advanced browser and networked game technologies
are beginning to have similar concerns regarding interoperability.  The
desire from the browser side is for interactive 3D capabilities, but the

VRML standard does not have the ability to support peer-to-peer com-

munications
Ñthe type of communications required for networked inter-
active gaming.  Browsers allow heterogeneous software architectures to

interoperate, thanks to the 
http
 standard.
Additional work is ongoing toward the development of a standard
for networked virtual environments.  A 1995 National Research Council

report identified networking as one of the critical bottlenecks preventing

the creation of large-scale virtual environments (LSVEs) as ubiquitously

as home pages on the Web.
30
  Numerous important component technolo-
gies for LSVEs have been developed, but that work is not yet complete,

and significant research and integration work remain.
31
  Some of the inte-
gration work is to merge the ideas from the LSVE research community

with work from the Internet/World Wide Web community.  The integra-

tion effort discussions are occurring under various titles
Ñthe virtual re-
ality transfer protocol and the IETF
Õs large-scale multicast applications
working group.
32
Among the component technologies that have enabled rapid expo-
nential growth of the Web are HTML and 
http
.  HTML is a standardized
page markup language that allows the placement of text, video, audio,

and graphics in a nonplatform-dependent fashion.  HTML is being ex-

tended into four dimensions with VRML via the addition of 3D geometry

and temporal behaviors.  
http
 is the hypertext transfer protocol, an appli-
cations layer protocol used to serve HTML pages and other information

across the Internet.  
http
 binds together several dissimilar protocols in-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA61cluding the ftp, telnet, gopher, and mailto protocols; hence, it is an inte-
gration or metaprotocol.  To support LSVEs across the Internet, it is ex-

pected that a continuum of dissimilar protocols will have to be integrated

into a single metaprotocol, an applications-layer protocol called the vir-

tual reality transfer protocol (
vrtp
).
33
  At a minimum, 
vrtp
 will combine
http
 (for URL service), peer-to-peer communications (such as DIS and its
relatives), multicast streaming (for audio/video streams), Java agents,

heavyweight object server protocols (such as CORBA and ActiveX), and

network monitoring.
With 
vrtp
 and by using the existing Internet infrastructure, Web-scal-
able LSVEs will be constructible.  VRTP will be an open architecture that

will use standards-based public-domain software and reusable imple-

mentations, all taking advantage of the sustained exponential growth of

ÒInternetworked
Ó global information. The 
vrtp 
project is ongoing and
taking a similar standards approach to that used for VRML, an open,

public, Web-based forum for technical discussion and adoption.
Architectures for Interoperability
Outside the VRML/
vrtp
 communities, there is little academic re-
search on solving the network software architecture interoperability prob-lem.  Nevertheless, the benefits of additional research could be large, and

there are many unsolved research problems.  The key to solving the net-

work software architecture problem is to understand that doing so in a

scalable way will require attention not just to networking issues but also

to networking and software architecture issues.  This means that one

cannot just design an applications-layer protocol to establish message

formats.  Attempts to design distributed simulations must consider the

scarcity of available network bandwidth and processor cycles and must

attempt to minimize latencies across the network.  Brute-force methods

involving large computers can do simple aggregation to help minimize

bandwidth, but such methods are expensive and limited.  Distributed

solutions that work with both network bandwidth and processor cycle

limitations are inherently more scalable.
34
 Real-time simulation requires
high-performance systems and low communications latency.  Adding
more layers of abstraction and protocol, as is common for achieving in-

teroperability, can work against the need to meet the latency and perfor-

mance requirements of networked simulations.  Research into applica-

tion-level protocols and architectures must take these considerations into

account.From the networked games perspective, heterogeneity in software ar-
chitecture is not yet possible, although some research is being done.  The

desire to build large-scale gaming, on the order of thousands of players in
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62MODELING AND SIMULATION
the same virtual world, may require game companies to move toward more
malleable standardized protocols.  Game companies will have to decide

how to define their applications-layer protocols, again the same thing that

everyone in the large-scale virtual world must be able to do.  One proposal

being considered is for the creation of an applications-layer protocol called

GameScript.  The purpose behind GameScript is to define a standard appli-

cations-layer protocol that allows games designed by different manufactur-

ers to communicate.  One of the most often described uses for GameScript is

that players in one game see players in neighboring games at the bound-

aries of their virtual worlds.  This serves as a teaser for game players to

deposit money and try the next game. Several telephone companies and

small venture-capital-funded start-ups are working on this, but no new

products have been announced yet. GameScript work is similar to HLA

and to the virtual reality transfer protocol work.
Interoperability Standards
Common interoperability standards could have benefits to both DODand the entertainment industry, enabling them to solve common prob-
lems with common solutions.  At present, there is no consensus in the

games industry on the desirability of a common set of interoperability

standards.  While some game developers see common standards as a

means of facilitating attempts to move networked games onto the Inter-

net, many do not yet consider common standards a high priority.  Ac-

cording to Warren Katz of M
−K Technologies, resistance to common in-
teroperability standards is generally based on four factors:
¥Technical considerations
ÑCommon standards tend to be designed
to accommodate a wide range of potential uses and therefore are not

optimal for any particular use.  Given existing limitations in bandwidth

for Internet-based games (most potential users connect to the Internet via

modems that communicate at 14.4 or 28.8 kilobits per second), many

game companies prefer to design custom protocols that maximize perfor-

mance.¥Not-invented-here syndrome
ÑMany commercial firms have a bias
against technology developed outside their own organization.  Engineers

in many companies believe they can develop better protocols that will

provide a more elegant solution to a problem or that will speed process-

ing times considerable.  Acceptance of an existing solution implies that

they are incapable of doing better.
¥Strategic value of proprietary solution
ÑProprietary networking pro-
tocols are viewed as a strategic competitive advantage.  Use of a public

standard would eliminate one element of advantage by allowing compet-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA63itors to use the same technology.  In addition, use of a public standard
could signal that a company is unable to develop a better solution.
¥Control
ÑAdoption of an industry or public standard reduces the
control a company has over its protocols.  Standards committees deter-

mine changes to the protocol.  Companies that control their own proto-

cols can upgrade them at their own pace, as the need arises.
These factors have, to date, stymied the use of DIS standards in the
entertainment industry.  According to Warren Katz, many video game

companies have examined DIS protocols for suitability in their games,

but few have implemented them.  Some companies have found DIS pro-

tocols to be too big and complex, performing operations that were not

relevant to video games and slowing the performance of the system.
35
Others view DIS as a standard for military applications and do not con-

sider it appropriate for nonmilitary games.  As a result, the DIS protocols

have not been embraced in an unmodified form by any game company.

Several game companies have developed protocols derived from DIS that
include only those functions needed to support their applications.  Each

of these implementations is proprietary to the developing company and

not interoperable with other companies
Õ protocols.
Many companies developing networked games attempt to use their
proprietary protocols to their competitive advantage.  Proprietary solu-

tions serve as a means of differentiating one company
Õs products from
anotherÕs and, possibly, of generating revenues through licensing.  Should
one company develop a set of standards that is perceived as superior in

some critical respects (whether allowing greater numbers of participants

or by offering better games), it can make its games more attractive to

game players.  Furthermore, other companies might want to develop

games that interoperate with that standard.  The standard developer can

charge a licensing fee that generates revenues in addition to whatever

revenues it makes from selling its games.  Use of a common or public

standard does not provide such opportunities.
Not all companies will necessarily follow this business model.  Some
game companies might, for example, see their competitive advantage in

the content of their games, not necessarily their networking capabilities.

They might attempt to develop a protocol that they license freely in the

hope that it will become widely adopted and facilitate growth in the

market for networked games, leading to more sales of their titles.  Adop-

tion of this model will require a shift in the current business model of

most video game companies.  Some impetus for this shift may follow

from growth in the market for multiplayer Internet games, but none has

yet been seen in the games market.
As the Internet games industry matures, it is possible that common
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64MODELING AND SIMULATION
standards for interoperability, such as HLA, could become of interest to
game developers as a means of allowing them to reuse portions of one

simulation to populate another.  Anita Jones, DOD
Õs director of defense
research and engineering through May 1997, suggested at the workshop

that as games become more complex, incorporating more players and a

greater number of possible types of interactions between and among play-

ers, game developers may shift to a new product development strategy

in which they construct games from components already developed for

other simulations.  Gilman Louie, of Spectrum-HoloByte, suggested that

Internet-based games may encourage such change.  Much like television

or cable, Internet channels will need a great deal of programming with

frequent updates and new activities so that users can experience some-

thing new to do every time they log on.  The code base will need to be

designed to allow easy upgrades so that designers can replace particular

objects without completely redesigning the system.
36
Others at the workshop suggested that HLA might be advantageous
in allowing real-time simulations to interoperate with simulations that

progress faster or slower than real time.  In the video games world this

capability would mean that a high-level strategy game that typically runs

faster than real time could interoperate with a real-time simulator:  a

turn-based chess game could interoperate with a simulation of the mo-

tion of the pieces.  Though these capabilities could be very useful in a

game environment, it would be unreasonable to assume that any games

company would adopt HLA without a strong outside influence.  The

more likely scenario, according to Warren Katz, is that a game company

will adapt desired features of HLA within its own proprietary protocol.
COMPUTER-GENERATED CHARACTERS
One of the major challenges in creating a useful simulation system is
populating simulated environments with intelligent characters and groups

of characters.  While some or even many of the entities present in simulated

worlds may be controlled by human operators who are networked into the

simulation, many are likely to be operated by the computer itself.  Such

computer-generated characters
 are a critical element of both defense and enter-
tainment systems and serve a wide range of functions.  Computer-generat-

ed characters may serve as an adversary against which a game player or

user of a training system competes, such as an opponent in a computerized

chess game or an enemy aircraft in a flight simulator.  At other times they

may serve as collaborators that guide participants through a virtual world

or serve as a crew member.  In large networked simulations, computer-

generated characters may control the actions of elements for which human

controllers are unavailable, whether a rival tank, a wingman, or a copilot.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA65Computer-generated Characters in Entertainment
Virtually all sectors of the entertainment industry are interested in
computer-generated character technologies as a means of creating more
believable experiences for participants and allowing greater automation

of services where possible.  Companies in the video games, virtual reali-

ty, and filmmaking sectors are developing or have deployed products

that incorporate computer-generated characters.  Since the creation of

compelling virtual characters holds such allure, whoever can develop

compelling complex characters in a rich fantasy world available through

an accessible medium at an affordable price stands to profit handsomely.

It is therefore likely that any company that devises a successful approach

to solving this problem will be disinclined to share the enabling technolo-

gies in order to protect its competitive advantage.
Video Games
Almost every genre of computer games, whether it be sports, action,
strategy, or simulation, depends on computer-generated opponents.  The
ability of a game to attract and entertain players is directly linked to the

quality of the computer-generated competitors in a game.  All of the best-

selling PC games (
Chessmaster
, 
Madden Football
, 
Command and Conquer
,Grand Prix II
, 
Civilization
, 
Balance of Power
, 
Falcon 3.0,
 and EF2000
) feature
computer-generated opponents that challenge users.  Gilman Louie of

Spectrum HoloByte estimates that three of the four years required to

produce a new video game are dedicated to developing algorithms for

controlling computer-generated forces.
Increasingly capable computer-generated opponents have been in-
corporated into video games since the first commercial video game was

introduced in 1970.  Nutting and Associates
ÕComputer Space
 allowed us-
ers to control a rocket that was pitted against two computer-controlled

flying saucers.  The player avoided the flying saucer
Õs missiles while
trying to steer its missile into one of the saucers.  The flying saucers were

controlled by a simple random function.  After a few short months, play-

ers were able to quickly master the game and earn bonus time; soon after,

players became bored with the game and stopped playing.  Learning

from this experience, the designers of the next major video game, 
Pong
,replaced computer-generated agents with a second joystick so that play-

ers played against each other rather than a computer.  In the early 1980s,

Atari Games created what many considered to be the first credible strate-

gic military simulation on a personal computer, 
Eastern Front
.  Players
confronted a computer-based challenger that relied on a simple but effec-

tive rule-based system.  The system used a series of 
Òif-then
Ó statements
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66MODELING AND SIMULATION
to determine the computer
Õs response to a player
Õs move.  Continued
advances in computer technology and computer-generated forces enabledthe creation of more sophisticated agents in games such as 
Harpoon
 and
Aegis,
 as well as 
Panzer General
.  PC-based games further pushed the
development of high-quality computer-generated opponents.  Unlike

most dedicated video games (with game boxes, such as those manufac-

tured by Nintendo, Sega, and Sony), which are designed for simulta-

neous play by two to four players, PCs are generally used by one person

at a time and games are designed for individual play.  PC games there-

fore demand development of effective computer-generated forces, and

PCs typically have microprocessors with sufficient power to support

more complex computer-generated forces.
Future trends in video games will heighten the need for computer-
generated forces and characters.  Many multiplayer and on-line games

will feature 
persistent universes
 that continue to exist and evolve even
when a particular player is not engaged in the game.  These games will

take place over a significant span of time, at times without a definitive

end.  They will be similar to multiple-user domains in that users can

come in to the game and exit at will.  Persistent universes are critical to

effective on-line games because they negate the need to coordinate large

number of players and schedule games; in a persistent universe the game

is always being played.  Such games also get around the need to play an

entire campaign or game in one sitting, enabling players to enter and exit

as their schedules permit.  At the same time, such games pose several

problems:  (1) the movement of players in and out of the game may be

disorienting for the other players and destroys the continuity of the

game;
37
 (2) game masters will not be able to ensure that enough real
players are available at any given time to make the game enjoyable for

participants; and (3) it may be hard to generate an environment that gives
players a large enough role and provides the necessary rewards to keep

them coming back.  The solution to some of these problems is to create an

environment that is fully populated by computer-controlled forces:  ei-

ther automated forces that are entirely controlled by the computer or

semiautomated forces that are given high-level instructions by a real play-
er but are then controlled by the computer.  When players enter the envi-

ronment, they will be able to replace one of the automated elements until

they log off; then the computer will regain control.  Players may also give

general orders before logging off to keep units on a strategic or tactical

direction until they return.  The entertainment industry has begun to

make progress in this area.  A handful of real-time games, such as 
Com-
mand and Conquer,
 allow the player to control game pieces at a high level,
giving the player instructions as to where to move or what action to take
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA67but not specifying the details of the process.  Additional work will enable
the broader use of such techniques.
Location-based Entertainment
Computer-generated character technologies also appear in immersive
virtual reality attractions.  Walt Disney Company
Õs 
Aladdin
 attraction, for
example, puts the participant into a virtual environment with many simu-
lated individuals performing throughout the virtual world.
38
  Characters
such as shopkeepers, camel herders, the sultan
Õs guards, and others popu-
late the simulated city of Agrabah.  Participants experience this attraction

through head-mounted displays and spatialized headphones.  They sit on a

saddle and hold a section of Persian carpet that serves as their controller

and enables them to fly their magic carpet around the city.  As they explore

the city, they encounter characters who go about their own business but

react to the presence of the participant.  Behaviors are programmed into

these characters and others.  All characters react to the guest
Õs presence;
some of them have some intelligence designed into them, and they attempt

to provide useful information to the guests, based on their current circum-

stances.
In other entertainment media, books, film, and television, there are
extensive examples of intelligent agents in synthetic worlds.  In Warner

Brother
Õs 1994 film 
Disclosure
, an angelic avatar assists the protagonist in
searching a virtual reality library representing the computer
Õs file sys-
tem.  In the current television series,
 Star Trek Voyager
, the ship
Õs physi-
cian is a holographic projection with intelligence and a database com-

piled from the expert knowledge of thousands of other physicians.
One of the standards of persistent virtual worlds and characters is
the 1992 book 
Snowcrash
 by Neal Stephenson.  
Snowcrash
 defines a persis-
tent virtual world known as the Metaverse that is mostly populated by

real people who go there by donning an avatar that represents them in

that space.  There are also totally synthetic characters, of greater or lesser

capability and complexity, who interact with real characters in the

Metaverse as if they were simply avatars for real people.  Today, these

complex human-mimicking synthetic characters are simply science fic-

tion.  The challenge is to make them a reality for worlds of entertainment

as well as worlds for training.
FilmThe film industry has also expressed interest in computer-generated
characters and digital actors of various kinds.  Digital effects studios are
now creating three-dimensional digital data sets of actors, such as Tom
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68MODELING AND SIMULATION
Cruise, Denzel Washington, and Sylvester Stallone.
39
  Work in digital
actors is attempting to generate digitized versions of real actors that can
be used in making films.  While one motivation for developing digital

actors is to avoid the high costs of hiring real actors, the true motivations

include the ability to create additional scenes, if necessary, after a real

actor has finished a film and to perform actions that real actors cannot or

will not do, such as dangerous stunts.
Digital actor technology can also allow directors to create new charac-
ters that combine elements of existing actors
Ñor to resurrect dead stars.
GTE Interactive, for example, recently unveiled a digitized likeness of Mari-

lyn Monroe
Ñcreated by Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann
Ñthat can chat with
visitors on the World Wide Web and respond to typed questions with

speech and facial expressions.
40
  A short film starring the computer-gener-
ated Marilyn, 
Rendezvous ‹ Montreal
, also has been created.  Digital actors
are seen as a key element of interactive media.
41
  Interest has become large
enough to have spawned a conference on virtual humans in June 1996; a

second conference was held in June 1997.  The goal of such efforts is not just

to incorporate existing two-dimensional video images into film (e.g., as was

done in 
Forrest Gump
) but to allow films and other sorts of entertainment to
be based around digital characters that act and perform various roles.
DOD Applications of Computer-generated Characters
DOD has a strong interest in what it calls computer-generated forces
(CGFs).  CGFs fall into two categories:  (1) semiautomated forces (SAFs)

that require some direct human involvement to make tactical decisions

and to control the activities of the aggregated force and (2) automated

forces, which are completely controlled by the computer.  Both kinds of

computer-generated forces are under development now for military sys-

tems and will find extensive application in modeling and simulation as

the technology continues to mature.
DOD systems use CGFs for a variety of applications.  In systems
designed to train individual war fighters, autonomous forces are used to

create adversaries for trainees to engage in simulated battles.  In large

networked training simulations, computer-generated characters are wide-
ly used to control opposing forces since it is too expensive to have all the

opposing forces controlled by experts in foreign force doctrine.  For such

scenarios the military has also pioneered the development of SAFs, which
are aggregated forces (such as tank platoons, army brigades, or fighter

wings, as opposed to individual tanks, soldiers, and aircraft) that require

human control at a high level of abstraction.  Rather than controlling

specific actions of individual elements of the unit, the SAF operator pro-

vides strategic direction, such as moving the unit across the river or fly-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA69ing close air support.  The computer directs the forces to carry out the
command.  Hence, SAFs provide a way for training high-ranking com-

manders who must control the actions of thousands of soldiers on the

battlefield.  To date, most training tools have been directed toward stand-

alone training simulators and part-task trainers that train individuals and
systems such as SIMNET that train small groups of soldiers to work to-

gether on the battlefield.
There is now a diverse and active interest throughout the DOD mod-
eling and simulation community in the development of computer-gener-

ated forces.  DARPA is sponsoring the development of modular semiau-

tomated forces for the Synthetic Theater of War program, which includes

both intelligent forces and command forces.  This effort also involves

development of a command-and-control simulation interface language.

It is designed for communications between and among simulated com-

mand entities, small units, and virtual platforms.  The military services,

specifically the Army
Õs Close Combat Tactical Trainer program, are now
developing opposing forces and blue forces (friendly forces) to be com-

pleted in 1997.  The British Ministry of Defence also is developing similar

capabilities using command agent technology in a program called Com-

mand Agent Support for Unit Movement Facility.  DOD has several pro-

grams to improve the realism of its automated forces, such as DARPA
ÕsIntelligent, Imaginative, Innovative, Interactive What If Simulation Sys-

tem for Advanced Research and Development (I
4WISSARD).  Academic
and industrial interest in this technology led to the First International

Conference on Autonomous Agents in February 1997 in Marina del Rey,

California.
Common Research Challenges
The challenge for today
Õs researchers is to develop computer-gener-
ated characters that model human behavior in activities such as flying a

fighter aircraft, driving a tank, or commanding a battalion such that par-

ticipants cannot tell the difference between a human-controlled force and

a computer-controlled force.
42
  Doing so can help prevent participants
from looking for and taking advantage of the gaps in a logic routine

instead of developing skills that can be applied with or against other

human participants (an old pilot
Õs adage is, 
Òif you ain
Õt cheating, you
ain
Õt trying!
Ó).  In his 1996 chess match with the IBM computer 
Deep Blue
,for example, Gary Kasparov learned the computer
Õs tendencies during
his first losing game and exploited those tendencies
Ñand the computer
Õslack of adaptability
Ñto come back and win the tournament.  He was less
successful in his 1997 match because 
Deep Blue 
had been programmed to
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70MODELING AND SIMULATION
develop strategies like a human and could conceive of and execute movesunanticipated by Kasparov.
43
The key is to find ways to implement computer-generated char-
acters that behave convincingly like human participants for extended

periods of time.  Doing so requires research to develop agents that (1)

can adapt their behaviors in response to changes in the behavior of

human participants, (2) accurately model the behavior of individual

entities (as opposed to aggregated units), and (3) can be easily aggre-

gated and disaggregated.
Adaptability
A significant problem facing the development of automated forc-
es is that humans learn and adapt faster than most existing computer
algorithms.  To date, games have been short enough that computer-

generated forces based on specified scripts or simple 
Òif-then
Ó rules
could provide enough of a challenge for most players, but with per-

sistent universes simple rule-based systems will not be good enough

to control automated forces.  SAFs used in DOD systems are typically

based on aggregated behaviors of tank or aircraft crews.  Operations

are extremely regimented; tank elements, for instance, operate on the

basis of the Army
Õs combat instruction sets, which were relatively
easy to codify.  DOD is also attempting to create automated SAFs

with behaviors that can adapt.  Efforts in these areas are resulting in

a shift from SAFs that are algorithm based to ones based on artificial

intelligence (AI).  The first experiment was with a system called

SOAR, developed by Carnegie Mellon University, the University of

Southern California, and the University of Michigan.
Most such work is concentrated on knowledge acquisition by the
SAF using AI techniques such as expert systems and case-based reason-

ing.  Expert systems are developed by interviewing experts to discover

the rules of thumb used to solve problems and then putting that informa-

tion into the software in a way the computer can use.  Case-based reason-

ing represents an alternative approach in which SAFs learn from their

own successes and failures in simulations.  The SAF acquires knowledge

from new experiences in real time and adds it to its knowledge base for

later use.  The knowledge base consists of many cases that the computer

uses in real time to match the scenario it is facing and respond appropri-

ately.  This technique is the basis for machine learning in DOD
ÕsI4WISSARD program.  Currently, it is done manually during an after-
action review, but ideally the computer would do it automatically.  For

example, a pilot could train the computer by dogfighting with it.  If the

pilot performed a maneuver the computer had never seen, it would add
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA71the trick to its knowledge base and respond appropriately.  This could
provide a richer training experience for the pilot and make the simulator

training useful longer.
44
Additional experimentation is under way using complex adaptive
system techniques to generate new behaviors.  As part of a DARPA pro-

gram, McDonnell Douglas has developed a system that uses genetic al-

gorithms
45
 to develop new behaviors and tactics for military simulations.
In previous trials, tactics developed by the system were used in simula-

tors and shown to be effective for military operations.
Modeling Individual Behaviors
A related challenge is developing computer-generated characters that
mimic 
individual
 behavior rather than group behavior.
46
  Group behavior
can often be modeled using statistical modeling and rule-based decision
processes.  The goal is to develop group actions that seem 
reasonable
, but
reasonable is an easier test than 
human-like
.  Did that automated battalion
move its tanks in a reasonable and believable fashion?   Did the group react

using appropriate doctrine?  It is easier to hide errors in decision making

with a large group of units than with a computer-generated individual.  It is

more difficult to model and create automated individuals that users can

communicate and react to that is believably human.  Within DOD, SAF-

level simulation has typically gone as low as an entity like a tank or aircraft.

Individual soldiers or crew members have not generally been represented,

though work is ongoing in this area. As DOD explores more opportunities

for training individual soldiers (dismounted infantry), the need to have

realistic, intelligent simulated individuals becomes acute.
Human Representations
Research is also needed to develop ways of creating realistic digi-
tized humans that look, move, and express emotion like their real coun-
terparts.  DOD has increased its efforts in simulating and modeling indi-

vidual soldiers in synthetic environments through its Individual

Combatant Simulation objective.  A joint effort is under way between the

U.S. Army
Õs Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRI-
COM) and the Army Research Laboratory.  One of the key advances

required for developing low-cost solutions to this problem are technolo-

gies for visualization of human articulation in real-time networked envi-

ronments.  The entertainment industry is building on motion-capture
techniques pioneered by DOD for use in developing games and creating

special effects.  These techniques track the movements of various joints
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72MODELING AND SIMULATION
and extremities as real characters perform a given set of tasks.  The data
can then be used to create more realistic synthetic effects.
Supporting natural language voice communications also is impor-
tant.  During networked play, voice support is critical for coordinated

activities.  The computer-generated character must interpret the voice

input, react, and acknowledge the user using an equally natural voice.

The voice must also indicate stress and the emotional state of the com-

puter-generated character.  The user must care about the automated forc-

es and arrive at the same conclusions whether or not the forces under

control are human or computer generated.  There are many situations in

which a player would move a unit into a suicidal situation with a com-

puter-generated character but would choose not to if the force was hu-

man.Aggregation and Disaggregation
Additional research is also needed in the area of aggregation and
disaggregation.  In large simulations, inactive individual units, such as
tanks or soldiers, are often aggregated into higher-level units, such as

tank battalions or platoons, to minimize the number of elements the sys-

tem must track and to allow higher-level control of operations (such as

by a field commander).  In doing so, information about the individual

elements is lost, as only average values of mobility or capability are re-

tained for the aggregated unit.  Thus, when the aggregated unit becomes

active, the individual elements cannot be disaggregated into their origi-

nal form.  Each tank, for example, will be assigned the average mobility

and firepower capabilities of the entire grouping rather than capabilities

consistent with those it had before aggregation.  Such inconsistencies not

only limit the fidelity of the simulation but also generate incongruities

among the representations of a simulation perceived by different partici-

pants (such as the field commander who sees aggregated levels of capa-

bility and tank commanders who see their own disaggregated capabili-

ties).  Though not crucial in all simulations or all engagements, such

inaccuracies do limit the fidelity of simulations and will become more

significant as simulations move toward incorporating individual war-

riors and participants.  Improved methods of aggregation and disaggre-

gation that preserve more state information (possibly in a standardized

format) could minimize the amount of information the simulation must

retain while preserving greater fidelity and consistency.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA73Spectator Roles
Another area in which DOD and the entertainment industry have
overlapping interests is in developing technology for incorporating spec-
tators into models and simulations.  As Jacquelyn Ford Morie noted dur-

ing the workshop, not everyone involved in digital forms of entertain-

ment will want to be direct participants.  Some will prefer to engage as a

spectator, similar to sports such as baseball, football, and tennis in which

only a small percentage of the participants actually play in a match and

much of the industry is built around the fans.  Morie believes that  
Òthere
is a potentially huge market to be developed for providing a substantial

and rewarding spectator experience in the digital entertainment realm
Ó
(see position paper by Morie in Appendix D).  As Morie notes, being a

spectator does not necessarily mean being passive; it is about being a

participant with anonymity in a crowd, providing a less threatening fo-

rum in which people can express themselves.
DOD has already expressed an interest in this type of capability.  The
role of the 
Òstealth vehicles
Ó has become increasingly important in de-
fense simulations.  Such vehicles are essentially passive devices that al-

low observers to navigate in virtual environments, attach to objects in the

environments, and view simulated events from the vantage point of the

participant.  As multiplayer games become more sophisticated and inter-

esting, such a capability may evolve into a spectator facility that will

allow novices to observe and learn from master practitioners.  Popular

games may evolve to the level of current professional sports with teams,

stars, schedules, commentators, and spectators.
TOOLS FOR CREATING SIMULATED ENVIRONMENTS
Another area in which DOD and the entertainment industry have
common interests is in the development of software and hardware tools

for creating simulated environments.  Such tools are used to create and

manipulate databases containing information about virtual environments
and the objects in them, allowing different types of objects to be placed in

a virtual environment and layers of surface textures, lighting, and shad-

ing to be added.  For games this may be a 3D world that is realistic (such

as a flight simulator) or fantastic (like a space adventure), in which an

individual interacts directly with the synthetic world and its characters.

For film and television, simulated models are often used as primary or

secondary elements of scenes that involve real actors, while in other cases

the entire story is built around synthetic characters, be they traditional

two-dimensional (2D) animations or more advanced 3D animations.  For
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74MODELING AND SIMULATION
DOD these worlds are synthetic representations of the battle space
(ground, sea, and air) and virtual representations of military systems.
Sophisticated hardware and software tools for efficiently con-structing large complex environments are lacking in both the defense

and entertainment industries.  At the workshop Jack Thorpe of SAIC

stated that existing toolsets are quirky and primitive and require sub-

stantial training to master, often prohibiting the designer from in-

cluding all of the attributes desired in a simulated environment (see

position paper by Thorpe in Appendix D).  Improved tools would

help reduce the time and cost of creating simulations by automating

some of the tasks that are still done by hand.  Alex Seiden, of Indus-

trial Light and Magic, claims that software tools are the single largest

area in which attention should be focused.  Animators and technical

directors for films face daunting challenges as shots become more

complicated and new real-time production techniques are developed

to model, animate, and render synthetic 3D environments for film

and video.
Entertainment Applications and Interests
For digital film and television, special effects and animation are per-
formed during the 
preproduction
 and 
postproduction
 processes.  Preproduc-
tion brings together many different disciplines, from visual design to story

boarding, modeling to choreography, and even complete storyboard simu-

lation using 2D and 3D animations.  Postproduction takes place after all of

the content has been created or captured (live or otherwise) and uses 2D

and 3D computer graphics techniques for painting, compositing, and edit-

ing.  Painting enables an editor to clean up frames of the film or video by

removing undesirable elements (such as deleting a microphone and props

that were unintentionally left in the scene or an aircraft that flew across the

sky) or enhancing existing elements.  Compositing systems enable artists to

seamlessly combine multiple separate elements, such as 3D models, anima-

tions, and effects and digitized live-action images into a single consistent

world.  Matched lighting and motion of computer graphics imagery (CGI)

are critical if these digital effects are to be convincing.
In the games world the needs for content-creation tools are similar.
Real-time 3D games demand that real-world imagery, such as photo-

graphic texture maps, be combined quickly and easily with 3D models to

create the virtual worlds in which pilots fly.  In the highly competitive

market that computer game companies face, time to market and product

quality are major factors (along with quality of game play) in the success

of new games.  This challenge has been eased somewhat in the past few

years as companies have begun offering predefined 3D models and tex-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA75tures that serve as the raw materials that game and production designers
can incorporate into their content.
Despite the enormous cost savings that can be enjoyed from auto-
mating these processes, entertainment companies invest little in the de-

velopment of modeling and simulation tools.  Most systems are pur-

chased directly from vendors.47   Film production companies using digitaltechniques and technologies tend to write special-purpose software for

each production and then attempt to recycle these tools and applications

in their next production.  Typically, little time or funding is available for

exploring truly innovative technologies.  The time lines for productions

are short, so long-term investments are rare.  Leveraging commercial
modeling and animation tools from both the entertainment world

(Alias|Wavefront, Softimage, etc.) and DOD simulation (Multigen, Cory-
phaeus, Paradigm Simulation) is starting to form a bridge between the

entertainment industry and DOD.
DOD Applications and Interests
DOD faces an even greater challenge in its modeling and simulation
efforts.   Because of the large number of participants in defense simula-

tions, the department requires larger virtual environments than the en-

tertainment industry and ones in which users can wander at their own

volition (as opposed to traditional filmmaking in which designers need

to create only those pieces of geometry and texture that will be seen in

the final film).  Beyond training simulations, content-creation tools are

potentially useful in creating simulations of proposed military systems to

support acquisition decisions.  DOD could use such models to prototype

aircraft, ships, radios, and other military systems.  The key would be

linking conceptual designs, computer-aided engineering diagrams, anal-

ysis models, or training representations into a networked environment

that would enable DOD to perform 
Òwhat if?
Ó analyses of new products.
Finding some way to allow these varied types of data to fit into a com-

mon data model would greatly facilitate this process.
Like the entertainment industry, DOD lacks affordable production
tools to update simulation environments and composite numerous CGI

elements.  While its compositing techniques are useful and efficient for

developing certain types of simulation environments, they cannot handle

the complexity demanded by some high-fidelity applications.  Some mod-

els and simulation terrain must be built and integrated using motion,

scale, and other perceptual cues.  Here, DOD personnel encounter prob-

lems similar to those of entertainment companies that set up, integrate,

and alter CGI environments.  Human operators can be assisted by appro-

priate interactive software tools for accomplishing these iterative tasks.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76MODELING AND SIMULATION
Having better tools to integrate and create realistic environments could
play a major role in the overall simulation design of training systems,

exploring simulation data, and updating simulation terrain.  Interactive

tools could empower more individuals to participate in this process and

would increase strategic military readiness.
Research Challenges
Database Generation and Manipulation
Both the entertainment industry and DOD have a strong interest in
developing better tools for the construction, manipulation, and compos-

iting of large databases of information describing the geography, fea-

tures, and textures of virtual environments.  Simulations of aircraft and

other vehicles, for example, require hundreds or thousands of terrain

databases; filmmakers often need to combine computer-generated imag-

es with live-action film to create special effects.  Most existing systems for

modeling and computer-aided design cannot handle the gigabyte and

terabyte data sets needed to construct large virtual worlds.  As Internet

games companies begin to develop persistent virtual worlds and archi-

tectural, planning, and military organizations develop more complete and
accurate models of urban environments, the need for software that can

create and manipulate large graphics data sets will becoming more acute.

At DOD the data used to create these databases are typically captured in

real time from a satellite and must be integrated into a completed data-

base in less than 72 hours to allow rapid mission planning and rehearsal.
Today
Õs modeling tools can be very powerful, allowing users to cre-
ate real-time models with texture maps and multiple levels of detail us-

ing simple menus and icons.  Some have higher-level tools for creating

large complex features, such as roadways and bridges, using simple pa-

rameters and intelligent modeling aids.  At the assembly level, new tools

use virtual reality technology in the modeling stage to help assemble

large complex environments more quickly and intuitively.  Still, model-

ing tools have not gotten to the point of massive automation.  There are

some automated functions, but overall responsibility for feature extrac-

tion, creation, and simplification is in the hands of the modeler.  More

research is needed in this area.
48
Bill Jepson from UCLA is exploring systems for rapidly creating and
manipulating large geo-specific databases for urban planning.  With a

multidisciplinary research team, he has designed a system capable of

modeling 4,000 square miles of the Los Angeles region.  It uses a client-

server architecture in which several multiterabyte databases are stored

on a multiprocessor system with a server.  Communications between
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA77client and server occur via asynchronous transfer mode, at about 6 mega-
bytes per second.  Actual 3D data are sent to the client based on the

location of the observer, incorporating projections of the observer
Õs mo-
tion.  Additional research is under way to link this system with data from

the Global Positioning System so that the motions of particular vehicles,

such as city buses, can be tracked and transmitted to interested parties.

Similar systems could be useful for the Secret Service or the Federal Bu-

reau of Investigation for security planning or for U.S. Special Forces or

dismounted infantry training operations in a specific geographic locale.

Other work at the University of California, Berkeley, is exploring the

automatic extraction of  3D data from 2D images.
49
  These methods are
likely to play a large role in the future in the rapid development of realis-

tic 3D databases.
Another area of possible interest to both the entertainment industry
and DOD is in the development of technologies that allow image se-

quence clips to be stored in a database.  This would permit users in both

the defense and entertainment communities to rapidly store and retrieve

video footage for use in modeling and simulation.  A prototype system

has been developed by Cinebase, a small company working with Warner

Brothers Imaging Technology.  Additional development is required to

make the technology more robust and widely deployable.
Additional efforts to develop more standardized formats for storing
the information contained in 3D simulated environments would be bene-

ficial to both DOD and the entertainment industry.  A standard format

could be developed that allows behaviors, textures, sounds, and some

forms of code to be stored with an object in a persistent database.  Such

efforts could build on the evolving VRML standard.  The goal is to devise

a common method for preserving and sharing the information inherent

in 3D scenes prior to rendering.
50
Compositing
Both DOD and the entertainment industry are interested in software
tools that will facilitate the process of combining (or compositing) visual

images from different sources.  Such tools must support hierarchy and

building at multiple levels of detail:  they must allow a user to shape

hills, mountains, lakes, rivers, and roads as well as place small items,

such as individual mailboxes, and paint words on individual signs.  They

must also allow designers to develop simulated environments in pieces

that can be seamlessly linked together into a single universe.  This need

will become more acute as the scale of distributed simulations grows.

Existing computer-aided  design tools do not have the ability to easily
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78MODELING AND SIMULATION
add environmental features, such as rain, dust, wind, storm clouds, and
lightning, to a simulated scene.
There are many unsolved compositing problems in pre- and postpro-
duction work for filmmaking that are directly related to simulation and

modeling challenges.  For example, a need exists for postproduced light

models for digital scenes and environments.  To create appropriate light-

ing for composited realistic live-action scenes, lighting models must af-

fect digitized images that were captured under variable lighting condi-

tions.  Such a simulation problem is encountered when realistic

photographic data are composited into simulation data and the lighting

must be interactively adjusted from daylight to night during persistent

simulations.  Here, it is necessary to develop lighting models that image-

process photographic data to provide postproduced lighting adjustments

after scenes have been captured.  Solutions to these problems do not

exist, yet the research would be applicable to both the entertainment in-

dustry and DOD.
Opportunities may exist for DOD and the entertainment industry to
share some of the advances they have made in designing systems for

creating models and simulation.  DOD might be able to use some of the

advanced compositing techniques that have been developed by the en-

tertainment industry to integrate live-action video with computer graph-

ics models.  The entertainment industry
Õs software techniques for match-
ing motion and seamlessly integrating simulated scenes into a virtual

environment might also be beneficial to DOD.  However, most entertain-

ment software is extremely proprietary.  It will be necessary to address

proprietary issues and methods of information exchange before exten-

sive collaboration can occur between the entertainment industry and
DOD.  Conversely, some DOD technologies might prove to be very bene-

ficial for entertainment applications as well.  At the workshop, Dell

Lunceford, of DARPA, suggested that some of the technologies devel-

oped as part of DOD
Õs Modular Semiautonomous Forces (ModSAF) pro-
gram might be useful in creating some of the line drawings used in pre-

production stages of filmmaking.  ModSAF cannot support the detailed

graphical animation needed for facial expressions, but it could facilitate

the simpler earlier stages of production in which characters are outlined

and a story
Õs flow is tested.
Interactive Tools
Interactive tools that facilitate the creation of simulations and models
and that can be used for real data exploration could be valuable to both

the entertainment industry and DOD.  The computer mouse and key-

board are extremely limited when creating CGI scenes, and individuals
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA79are often impaired or constrained by these traditional input devices.  A
recent project of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications

located at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign resulted in an

interactive virtual reality interface to control the computer graphics cam-

era in 3D simulation space.  The project created an alternative virtual

reality computer system, the Virtual Director, to enhance human opera-

tor control and to capture, edit, and record camera motion in real time

through high-bandwidth simulation data for film and video recording.

This interactive software was used to create the camera choreography of

large astrophysical simulation data sets for special effects in the IMAX

movie, 
Cosmic Voyage
.  This project has proven to be valuable for film
production as well as scientific visualization.  Such uses of alternative

input devices to explore and document very large data sets are nonexist-

ent in commercial production because of the time line required to devel-

op such technology, yet this type of tool is extremely important to solve

many problems in the entertainment industry as well as DOD simulation

and modeling.
CONCLUSION
As this chapter illustrates, the defense modeling and simulation com-
munity and the entertainment industry have common interests in a num-

ber of underlying technologies ranging from computer-generated charac-

ters to hardware to immersive interfaces.  Enabling the two communities

to better leverage their comparative strengths and capabilities will re-

quire that many obstacles be overcome.  Traditionally, the two communi-

ties have tended to operate independently of one another, developing

their own end systems and supporting technologies.  Moreover, each

community has developed its own modes of operation and must respond

to a different set of incentives.  Finding ways to overcome these barriers

will present challenges on a par with the research challenges identified in

this chapter.
NOTES1.For a more comprehensive review of research requirements for virtual reality, see
National Research Council.  1995.  Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Challenges,Nathaniel I. Durlach and Anne S. Mavor, eds.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
2.DOD has several ongoing programs to extend the military
Õs command, control, com-
munications, computing, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systems to the dis-
mounted combatant.  These include the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
ÕsSmall Unit Operations Program, Sea Dragon, Force XXI, and Army After Next.
3.Latency is not the only factor that causes simulator sickness, and even completely
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80MODELING AND SIMULATION
eliminating latency will not eliminate simulator sickness.  See position paper by Eugenia M.
Kolasinski in Appendix D.
4.This subsection is derived from a position paper prepared for this project by the
Defense Modeling and Simulation Office; see Appendix D.
5.Sheridan, T.B.  1992.  
Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control.
  MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
6.For a more complete description of the SIMNET program see Van Atta, Richard, et
al., 1991, 
DARPA Technical Accomplishments, Volume II:  An Historical Review of Selected DAR-
PA Projects,
 Institute for Defense Analyses, Alexandria, Va., Chapter 16; and U.S. Congress,
Office of Technology Assessment, 1995, 
Distributed Interactive Simulation of Combat
, OTA-
BP-ISS-151.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., September.
7.U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, 
Distributed Interactive Simulation of
Combat,
 p. 32, note 6 above.
8.Gilman Louie, Spectrum Holobyte Inc., personal communication, June 19, 1996.

9.Pausch, Randy, et al.  1996.  
ÒDisney
Õs Aladdin:  First Steps Toward Storytelling in
Virtual Reality,
Ó ACM SIGGRAPH 
Õ96 Conference Procedings:  Computer Graphics.
  Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, New York, August.
10.RTime Inc. introduced an Internet-based game system in April 1997 that supports
100 simultaneous players and spectators.  See 
RTIME News
,Vol. 1, February 1, 1997.
11.The National Research Council
Õs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
has another project under way to examine the extent to which DOD may be able to make

better use of commercial technologies for wireless untethered communications.  A final
report is expected in fall 1997.  Another project to examine DOD command, control, com-
munications, computing, and intelligence systems was initiated in spring 1997.
12.Specifications for implementing multicast protocols over the Internet are outlined by
S.E. Deering in 
ÒHost Extensions for IP Multicasting,
Ó RFC 1112, August 1, 1989, available
on-line at  http://globecom.net/ietf/rfc1112.html.  See also Braudes, R., and S. Zabele,
ÒRequirements for Multicast Protocols,
Ó RFC 1458, May 1993.
13.As such, multicast stands in contrast to 
broadcast
, in which one designated source
sends information to all members of the receiving community, and to 
unicast
 systems in
which a sender transmits a message to a single recipient.
14.This capability is called 
routing spaces.
  It will permit objects to establish 
publish
regions
 to indicate areas of influence and 
subscription regions
 to indicate areas of interest.
When publish and subscription regions overlap, the RTI will cause data to flow between
the publishers and the subscribers.  The goal of this effort, and the larger Data Distribution

Management Project, of which it is part, is to reduce network communications by sending
data only when and where needed.  See Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, 
HLA
Data Distribution Management:  Design Document Version 0.5
, Feb. 10, 1997; available on-line
at http://www.dmso.mil/projects/hla/.
15.Internet Engineering Task Force, 
ÒLarge Scale Multicast Applications (lsma) Char-
ter,
Ó available on-line at http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/lsma-charter.html.
16.Much of the material in this section is derived from a position paper prepared for
this project by Will Harvey of Sandcastle Inc.; see Appendix D.
17.Deployment of a new algorithm for queue management, called Random Early Detec-
tion, may help greatly reduce queuing delays across the Internet.
18.Floyd, S., and V. Jacobson.  1993.  
ÒRandom Early Detection Gateways for Conges-
tion Avoidance,
Ó IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking
 1(4):397-413; Wroclawski, J.  1996.
ÒSpecification of the Controlled-Load Network Element Service,
Ó available on-line as ftp:
//ftp.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-intserv-ctrl-load-svc-03.txt.
19.Clark, D.  1996.  
ÒAdding Service Discrimination to the Internet,
Ó Telecommunications
Policy
 20(3):169-181.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA8120.Sandcastle Inc., an Internet-based game company, is one source of research on syn-
chronization techniques.
21.DOD defines 
modeling and simulation interoperability
 as the ability of a model or simu-
lation to provide services to and accept services from other models and simulations and to
use the services so exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together.  See U.S.
Department of Defense Directive 5000.59, 
ÒDOD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Manage-
ment,
Ó January 4, 1994, and U.S. Department of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition and Technology, 
Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan
, DOD 5000.59-P,
October 1995.
22.All participants in a simulation do not need an identical representation of the envi-
ronment.  Individual combatants, for example, will differ from fighter pilots in the amount

of terrain they can see and the sensor data (radar, infrared, etc.) available to them.  The key

is ensuring that their views of the environment are consistent with one another (e.g., that all
players would agree that a given line of trees obstructs the line of sight between two partic-
ipants in the simulation).
23.DIS conveys simulation state and event information via approximately 29 PDUs.
Four of these PDUs describe interactions between entities such as tanks and personnel

carriers; the remainder transmit information on supporting actions, electronic emanations,

and simulation control.  The 
entity state
 PDU is used to communicate information about a
vehicle
Õs current position, orientation, velocity, and appearance.  The 
fire
 PDU contains
data on weapons or ordinance that are fired or dropped.  The 
detonation
 PDU is sent when a
munition detonates or an entity crashes.  The 
collision
 PDU is sent when two entities physi-
cally collide.  The structure of each PDU is regimented and changed only after testing and

subsequent discussion at the biannual DIS workshops convened by the Institute for Simula-

tion and Training at the University of Central Florida.
24.Macedonia, Michael R.  1995.  
ÒA Network Software Architecture for Large-Scale
Virtual Environments.Ó  Ph.D. dissertation, Naval Postgraduate School, June; available fromthe Defense Technical Information Center, Fort Belvoir, Va.
25.Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, 
HLA Management Plan:  High-Level Archi-
tecture for Modeling and Simulation, Version 1.7
, April 1, 1996.
26.The Navy alone has over 1,200 simulation systems that do not currently comply with
HLA.  A compliance monitoring reporting requirement and waiver process, similar to the

Ada waiver process, were put into place.  Each affected service is to fund retrofits of simu-
lation systems from their own budgets.
27.Ordering information is available on the DMSO Web site at http://www.dmso.mil.
28.The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board workshop provided an op-
portunity for representatives from Internet game companies to learn more about HLA.

Several agreed to review the specifications to see if they would be applicable to them
29.Lantham, Roy.  1996.  
ÒDIS Workshop in Transition to. . . What?,
Ó Real Time Graphics
5(4):4-5.
30.National Research Council.  1995.  
Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Chal-
lenges
, Nathaniel I. Durlach and Anne S. Mavor, eds.  National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, D.C.
31.Macedonia, Michael R., et al.  1995.  
ÒExploiting Reality with Multicast Groups,
ÓIEEE Computer Graphics & Applications
, September, pp. 38-45.
32.Brutzman, Don, Michael Zyda, and Michael Macedonia.  1996.  
ÒCyberspace Back-
bone (CBone) Design Rationale,
Ó paper 96-15-99 in 
Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Stan-
dards for DIS, Institute for Simulation and Training, Orlando, Florida; Brutzman, Don,Michael Zyda, Kent Watsen, and Michael Macedonia.  1997.  
ÒVirtual Reality Transfer Pro-
tocol (vrtp) Design Rationale,
Ó accepted for the 
Proceedings of the IEEE Sixth International
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82MODELING AND SIMULATION
Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises
 (WETICE 
Õ97),
held June 18-20, 1997, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.
33.Brutzman et al., 1996, 
ÒCyberspace Backbone (CBone) Design Rationale,
Ó and Brutz-
man et al., 1997, 
ÒVirtual Reality Transfer Protocol (vrtp) Design Rationale,
Ó note 32 above.
34.Macedonia, 
ÒExploiting Reality with Multicast Groups,
Ó note 31 above.
35.A standard 14.4-kilobit-per-second modem can transmit or receive a standard DIS
packet in approximately 80 milliseconds, meaning that only about five players can partici-
pate in a real-time interactive game if each must send and receive messages (updating
positions, velocities, etc.) to and from each other player at each stage in the game and

latencies must be kept below 100 milliseconds.
36.From this perspective the code base is like the way a television studio thinks of it
sets, props, and sound stages.  The code base needs to be able to be data driven so that new

episodes can be created in less than a week instead of a couple of years.  Programming will
be developed using scripting tools that allow writers and designers to quickly develop new
stories.  These tools will be important to help the writers and designers not only create new

environments but also direct automated units and characters to 
Òperform
Ó new roles for the
new scenarios.
37.For example, a player may be flying an F-15 along with a wingman when a pair of
enemy MiGs engages them in battle.  As a player breaks into a turn, he or she may realize
that the wingman has disconnected (intentionally or unintentionally) from the game.
38.The 
Aladdin
 attraction is something of an anomaly in that Walt Disney Imagineering
approached it not only as a theme park attraction but also as scholarship.  It published

results of its research in the open literature.  See Pausch, Randy, et al.  1996.  
ÒDisney
ÕsAladdin:  First Steps Towards Storytelling in Virtual Reality,
Ó  
ACM SIGGRAPH 
Ô96 Confer-
ence Proceedings:  Computer Graphics.
 Association of Computing Machinery, New York, pp.
193-203.
39.Fryer, Bronwyn, 
ÒHollywood Goes Digital,
Ó available on-line at http://zeppo.cnet.
com/content/Features/Dlife/index.html.
40.Ditlea, Steve.  1996.  
ÒÔ
Virtual Humans
Õ Raise Legal Issues and Primal Fears,
Ó New
York Times
, June 19; available on-line at http://www.nytimes.com/library/cyber/week/

0619humanoid.html.
41.Magneanat Thalmann, N., and D. Thalmann.  1995.  
ÒDigital Actors for Interactive
Television,
Ó Proceedings of the IEEE
, August.
42.An agent that could meet this requirement would satisfy the 
ÒTuring test.
Ó  Alan
Turing, a British mathematician and computer scientist, proposed a simple test to measure
the ability of computers to display intelligent behavior.  A user carries on an extended
computer-based interaction (such as a discussion) with two unidentified respondents
Ñone
a human and the other a computer.  If the user cannot distinguish between the human and
the computer responses, the computer is declared to have passed the Turing test and to
display intelligent behavior.
43.Chandrasekaran, Rajiv.  1997.  
ÒFor Chess World, A Deep Blue Sunday:  Computer
Crushes Kasparov in Final Game,
Ó Washington Post
, May 12, p. A1.
44.U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment.  1995.  
Distributed Interactive Simu-
lation of Combat
, OTA-BP-ISS-151.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., Sep-
tember, pp. 123-125.
45.Genetic algorithms are computer programs that evolve over time in a process that
mimics biological evolution.  They can evolve new computer programs through processes
analogous to mutation, cross-fertilization, and natural selection.  See Holland, John H.  1992.ÒGenetic Algorithms,
Ó Scientific American
, July, pp. 66-72.
46.The National Research Council is conducting another project on the representation
of human behaviors in military simulations.  See National Research Council.  1997.  
Repre-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING A COMMON RESEARCH AGENDA83senting Human Behavior in Military Simulations
ÑInterim Report
, Richard W. Pew and Anne S.
Mavor, eds.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
47.Paul Lypaczewski of Alias|Wavefront estimates that the market for off-the-shelf
modeling and simulation tools is about $500 million per year.
48.See National Research Council, 
Virtual Reality,
 note 30 above.
49.Debevec, P.E., C.J. Taylor, and J. Malik.  1996.  
ÒModeling and Rendering Architec-
ture from  Photographs:  A Hybrid Geometry- and Image-based Approach,
Ó Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH 
Õ96:  Computer Graphics.
  Association of Computing Machinery, New York, pp.
11-20.50.The process of rendering computer graphics is the process of making frames from
objects with motion so they can be displayed by the computer or image generator.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.843Setting the Process in Motion
Encouraging the defense and entertainment industries to work to-
gether to strengthen the technology base for modeling and simulation
will require more than a common research agenda.  As workshop partic-

ipants noted, large cultural barriers exist between the U.S. Department of

Defense (DOD) and the entertainment industry that will impede attempts
to work together.  If collaboration is to succeed, these barriers must be

overcome and a process must be established to facilitate the kinds of

collaboration that could advance this nationÕs modeling and simulation

technology base.  Consideration needs to be given to coordinating the

research agendas of the two communities, such as through greater shar-

ing of information, and to structuring cooperative research.  In addition,

both DOD and the entertainment industry will need to workÑindividu-

ally and collectivelyÑto ensure the continued viability of the research

base from which both communities draw.  They must ensure that human

resources are developed that have the requisite skills for creating effec-

tive computer-based simulations and that adequate funding is provided

to sustain the research base, particularly at the university level.  Doing so

will require additional input and advice from the academic community,

whose participation in the workshop was limited.
OVERCOMING CULTURAL BARRIERS
The entertainment industry and DOD are two different cultures, withdifferent languages, different business models, and separate communi-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION85ties of constituents (Box 3.1).  To date, they have operated relatively inde-
pendently of one another.  Though some sharing of technology and re-

search has occurred, much of the technology transfer has been mediated

through the university research community; few direct connections have

been made between companies actively engaged in developing entertain-

ment products and services and DOD.
Movement of people between DOD and the entertainment industry
is limited.  Many people from the entertainment industry were reluctant

to participate in the workshop
Ñor serve on the steering committee that
convened the workshop
Ñbecause of the project
Õs connection with de-
fense and their impressions that few opportunities exist for collaboration.

Nevertheless, workshop participants provided personal examples of the

key movements of people between the two communities that have cross-

pollinated each other
Õs efforts:  Eric Haseltine, vice-president of research
and development and chief scientist at Walt Disney Imagineering, began

his career in flight simulation at Hughes Aircraft Company; and Carl

Norman, a senior producer with the games company Strategic Simula-

tions Inc., is a former Marine officer who later worked on simulation and

training systems for the Corps.  Yet most workshop participants agreed

that a movement of people between defense and entertainment  is not the

trend.  Jordan Weisman, of Virtual World Entertainment, remarked that

employee migration between the entertainment industry and DOD is
minimal and that this is a contributing factor to the minimal amount of

technology transfer between the two communities. Such differences both

influence and are influenced by differences in the business models that

the two communities follow.  Overcoming them will require efforts to

improve communication between members of the two communities.
Different Business Models
DOD and the entertainment industry differ significantly in their
goals, motivations, and methods of doing business.  These differences

make it difficult for the communities to work together to advance the

technology base for modeling and simulation, but with sufficient interest

on both sides, ways can be found to overcome these obstacles.  While few

formal attempts at coordinating research or conducting joint research
have been tried, a handful of companies have successfully transitioned

from defense work to commercial work, demonstrating the possibility of

success.  Further attempts to facilitate greater coordination of research

activities between DOD and the entertainment industry will have to build
upon these examples to find ways to bridge the gap between the two

communities.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86MODELING AND SIMULATION
BOX 3.1From DOD to Entertainment:  A Personal JourneyRobert Jacobs, president and director of Illusion Inc., recounted at theworkshop some of the cultural differences he has noticed between the de-fense modeling and simulation community and the entertainment industry.

Illusion Inc. has its roots in defense simulation, owing to work on DODÕssimulation network (SIMNET) project.  In 1994 the company merged withanother company as part of an effort to develop simulation-based systems
for entertainment.  As of 1996, roughly 80 percent of IllusionÕs revenuesderived from entertainment systems.What we discovered immediately was an enormous culture shock.
Our entertainment partners had a different way of thinking than we did.The basis for pricing defense work, for example, is cost.  There are several

different kinds of contractual formats that are used to govern what defensecontractors can charge for their time and for their products, but all of themhave as the base what it costs to do the job and some allowance for rea-
sonable profitÑthe amount of which depends on whether the client or the
contractor takes the risk.  In the commercial world, things are very differ-
ent.  You get a good idea, you invest your own money and effort in bring-

ing that idea to fruition, and then you charge what the market will bear.What the market will bear depends on what the other companies are do-ing and what the perceived value of the product is to the ultimate consum-

er, the public.  You have to be pretty confident of your instincts in that
kind of an arena to invest significant money in bringing a product to mar-
ket.  If you donÕt make it, you canÕt go back for an overhead rate adjust-
ment and you canÕt tell the client ÒGee, IÕm sorry I underestimated this

thing, and youÕve got to help me out here.ÓI suggested that IllusionÕs new partners ought to fill out time sheetsand allocate their time to the jobs they were working on.  They didnÕt
understand why that was necessary because they said, ÒWeÕre going to
work all year, and at the end of the year whatÕs left over after we pay
everybody is the profit.  So why do we have to keep track of all this stuff?Ó
Well, we keep track of all that stuff because we still do DOD work, too,
and the auditors want to see what weÕre doing all the time, not just while

weÕre working on defense work.There is also a big difference in what is considered important in thebusiness.  We had a client come in and ask us to describe the technical
approach for the system we were developing.  I proudly launched into a
very detailed description of the marvelous new motion system that we

were using on a ride we were building and how it has advanced servo
actuators, and it is very fast and high performance, and it was a terrific
bargain compared to what was available in the marketplace.  I noticed
that the clientÕs eyes were glazed over; what the client really wanted to
know was what the ride was like and what the story was that accompa-
nied it.  So, I let my partner from the entertainment industry describe it,

and the client was much happier.  I thought that the technical details were
terrific, but nobody cares about that kind of thing.  What they want to
know is what theyÕre going to get for the money they pay in terms of the
customerÕs experience.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION87Some of the more notable differences between the DOD and enter-
tainment communities are listed below:
¥Time horizons.
  Military research and development programs typi-
cally span several years; it is not unusual for a large-scale program to
take a decade or more to complete.  Products are often designed to be

used for long periods of time, with requisite upgrades and support.
1  En-tertainment projects are generally much shorter in duration.  Game com-

panies may spend up to three years developing a new product; film com-

panies will also spend a year or two producing a new film.   Little

attention is given to upgrades and support for older products.  Many

game companies, in fact, intend for their games to become obsolete soon

so that customers will buy new versions.
¥Market structure.
  Defense contractors serve a single customer
(DOD) that, though comprised of many heterogeneous parts, operates

with a fairly consistent business model and a standard set of procure-

ment policies.  Typically, DOD specifies up front the requirements of a

system it wants developed and invites contractors to design a system

that will meet the specifications.  Contractors are generally reimbursed

for their expenses plus a fixed profit.  Entertainment companies, in con-

trast, serve diverse markets, with varied tastes and business models.
Companies must identify market needs, formulate creative concepts that

addresses those needs, and invest their own capital in developing the

concept.  They must also invest considerable effort in marketing new

products to consumers, who may or may not buy the product in the end.
¥Profitability.
  Most defense contracts specify the profit a contractor
may make on a given project, typically on the order of 6 percent.  Enter-

tainment companies have no guarantees on profits and assume large risks
with each undertaking.  At the same time, successful projects in the en-

tertainment industry can generate profit margins of 100 percent or more;

the film industry relies on a limited number of such blockbuster hits to

underwrite its operating expenses and compensate for the more numer-

ous failures.  Nevertheless, the great potential profitability of entertain-

ment products limits the enthusiasm with which entertainment compa-

nies would embrace defense-related work.
¥Research.
  DOD operates a large research and development pro-
gram with fairly centralized budgeting and direction.  Military needs are

translated into technical requirements that spur research programs.  In

1996, DOD spent $688 million on basic and applied research in computer

science and mathematics.  The entertainment industry lacks any coordi-

nated direction of research.  Individual firms select research projects that

meet their business needs.  According to Alex Seiden, of Industrial Light

and Magic, most companies in the entertainment industry do not con-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88MODELING AND SIMULATION
duct long-term research; scientists and engineers in film and game pro-
duction environments, in particular, are primarily interested in solving

the problems at hand on a short time line coupled to a movie premier or

game release
Ñoften only three months.  A few entertainment companies,
such as Disney, do invest more in longer-term research and development

products, but such companies are few in number.
¥Intellectual property.
  Entertainment companies have strong concerns
over intellectual property rights and endure great pains to ensure control.

Despite the rapid product cycles in the entertainment industry, many prod-

ucts build on technology incorporated into earlier products or adhere to

proprietary standards and architectures that have longer useful lifetimes.

While defense contractors have similar interests and concerns, working for

the federal government often implies a lack of control over intellectual prop-
erty rights that entertainment companies would not tolerate.
Such differences pose hurdles to any attempts to bring the entertain-
ment industry and DOD closer together to develop modeling and simu-

lation technologies.  Indeed, defense contractors have generally failed in

their attempts to diversify into commercial markets of many kinds be-

cause of the great differences in business practices.
2  Defense contractors
who spend internal research and development money on projects with

commercial implications find they have great difficulty spinning off suc-

cessful projects to commercial industry.
3Similarly, the entertainment industry complains that DOD
Õs bureaucra-
cy inhibits its desire to do defense-related work.  Many small companies,

such as video game designers and manufacturers of peripheral devices,

lack the resources (money and staff) to adhere to DOD
Õs acquisition regula-
tions, which cover both the purchase of finished products and many re-

search and development activities.  Given the growing markets for enter-

tainment products and the potential profitability of successful products,

many entertainment companies do not find working with DOD to be an

attractive alternative to their usual entertainment efforts.  According to Buzz
Hoffman, of ThrustMaster Inc., 
Òdeveloping products for the mass com-
mercial market offers far more opportunities for profit than Defense De-

partment contracts.
Ó Until the potential benefits of collaboration become
more apparent to the entertainment industry and the associated costs can

be reduced, formal collaboration will be difficult to initiate.
4Facilitating Coordination and Cooperation
A first step toward bridging the gap between the defense modeling
and simulation community and the entertainment industry would be to

encourage greater sharing of information between the two communities.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION89DOD and the entertainment industry have a great deal to learn from one
another, and open collaboration and cross-fertilization could allow each

to tap into the other
Õs knowledge and better target its own research pro-
grams.  Eric Haseltine, of Walt Disney Imagineering, claimed at the work-
shop that 
Òthe thing that the entertainment industry can get the most
from DOD is just knowing what
Õs been done, so they don
Õt have to rein-
vent the wheel.  If there were some places where [the entertainment in-

dustry] could go to find out what
Õs been done before we go off and do it
ourselves, that would be hugely valuable.
ÓFew participants from DOD or the entertainment industry seem toknow how to effectively exchange information between the two communi-

ties, nor are they generally aware of the mechanisms that might exist.  Many
workshop attendees agreed that connections between DOD have been in-

formal and based on a limited number of personal contacts; there is a gener-

al frustration in both communities regarding ways to connect to solve prob-

lems that might be common to both.  A number of workshop attendees

complained that it sometimes seems easier to get information for product

development from outside sources rather than government agencies, pre-

cluding many opportunities for collaboration.  At the same time, workshop

participants acknowledged that the entertainment industry is very frag-

mented and that no centralized mechanism exists for collecting information

or learning about the needs of the industry as a whole.  While some at-

tempts have been made, through such organizations as the Technology
Council of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers, they

have been limited in scope and success.  Because the entertainment indus-

try is very competitive and proprietary, entertainment companies do not

freely share information about research programs or interests, and the fre-

quent changes in employment make individual connections fleeting.
One mechanism for promoting informal information sharing betweenmembers of the defense modeling and simulation community and the

entertainment industry and breaking down cultural barriers is to encour-

age attendance at relevant conferences that cross industry boundaries.

To date, entertainment companies have not been well represented at con-

ferences on defense modeling and simulation, nor have members of the

defense industry been prominent at entertainment industry conferences.

The Association of Computing MachineryÕs annual Special Interest Groupin Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH) conference provides a forum and

marketplace for exciting ideas combining research, art, education, and

business in computer graphics but lacks a significant military presence.

Other important conferences are the Computer Game Developer
Õs Con-
ference, which has seminars and roundtable discussions on many topics

relevant to modeling and simulation, and the annual Electronic Enter-

tainment Expo, which has large exhibits and presentations related to in-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90MODELING AND SIMULATION
teractive entertainment.  Several members of the entertainment industry
stated that DOD
Õs lack of participation at such conferences is a major
factor behind their belief that the department has little to offer the enter-

tainment industry in the way of relevant research or technology.  By

presenting more work at such conferences or setting up booths on con-

vention floors, DOD could help artists, software developers, and execu-

tives in the entertainment industry learn about relevant DOD technology

and research.  At the same time, DOD would be able to see and hear

about current developments in the entertainment industry that will enter

the marketplace 18 to 24 months later and start to make the social connec-

tions that always facilitate information flow.
One way to help bridge the gap between DOD and entertainment
industry standards initiatives is for representatives from each communi-

ty to attend the other
Õs meetings.  For example, the High-level Architec-
ture (HLA) community
Õs Architecture Management Group (AMG) could
incorporate representatives of the Internet community and of the net-

worked games community, thereby providing them a platform for dis-

cussions and information exchanges.  Greater representation from the

distributed interactive simulation (DIS) community also might be consid-

ered by the AMG.  In return, the communities engaged in developing

Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) and virtual reality transfer

protocol (
vrtp
) standards could encourage DOD
Õs HLA community to
attend its forums, such as the VRML Consortium.  Currently, the only

DOD representation at that consortium is through a membership paid

for by the NPSNET Research Group of the Naval Postgraduate School.

The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) should consider

joining the VRML Consortium to benefit from the work going on there

and from the contacts.
While seats on each other
Õs technical guidance boards are one method
of collaboration, another is establishment of an annual workshop similar to

the successful DIS workshops.  The workshop could build on the initial

effort hosted by the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board

(CSTB) as part of the present project, which demonstrated the mutual bene-

fits of bringing together members of the defense and entertainment com-

munities.  The goal of an annual workshop would be to attract technical

papers and presentations from DOD, the entertainment industry, and the

Internet community.  Unlike the DIS workshop, the papers for this new

workshop would be peer reviewed and the workshop should be held at a

university center set up to shepherd the process and to provide a neutral

meeting ground for defense and entertainment participants, similar to the

Institute for Simulation and Training at the University of Central Florida.

The workshop could be funded jointly by industry and DOD.
Additional progress toward collaboration in interoperability stan-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION91dards may emerge from the newly formed Simulation Interoperability
Standards Organization (SISO).  SISO is a reorganization and replace-

ment of the group that developed DIS standards.  It will continue to

expand the semiannual workshops started by DIS but will separate stan-

dards development work from the workshops.  SISO was established

primarily to broaden interests from the real-time, platform-level simula-

tions of DIS to all forms of interoperable simulations.  SISO
Õs mission is
to (1) continue to support DIS standards, (2) assume responsibility for

commercializing DOD
Õs HLA standards, and (3) develop simulation in-
teroperability standards for any organization that needs them.  SISO
sponsored a one-day seminar in January 1997 and its first Simulation

Interoperability Workshop in March 1997, both of which tried to attract

participation from the entertainment industry.  To date, participation by

the entertainment industry appears to have been limited by a lack of

interest in interoperability standards and by the perception that SISO
Õsinterest is in defense simulation and propagation of the HLA.
At CSTB
Õs workshop, several different models were discussed for
facilitating collaborative work that could benefit both defense and enter-

tainment.  One possibility is for joint funding of university research in

technologies associated with modeling and simulation, such as computer

graphics, networking, and computer-generated characters.  University

research has played a key role in developing modeling and simulation

technology and in disseminating that technology, largely through stu-

dents, to both the entertainment and the defense industries.  Alternative-

ly, a few companies have demonstrated the possibility of operating in

both the defense and the entertainment communities, either by develop-

ing technologies and products that support both industries or simply

drawing on research in both fields to make separate defense and enter-

tainment products.
5  As Robert Jacobs, of Illusion Inc., stated,  
ÒWe want
to stay in the defense world as well as the entertainment world because

of the access to wonderful technology that we recognize exists there.  We

think that the technology transfer happens much more effectively if the

company is working in both environments.
ÓThe federal government has also established programs to encourage
transfers of technology and cooperative research between government

and commercial organizations.  The Small Business Innovative Research

program, which earmarks a percentage of federal research and develop-

ment budgets for small business, requires award winners to submit plans

for commercializing their technologies.  The Federal Technology Transfer

Act requires all federal laboratories with research and development bud-

gets above a certain threshold to each establish an Office of Research and

Technology Applications to promote technology transfer.  These offices

are authorized to both license federal technology to commercial industry

and to enter into cooperative research and development agreements
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92MODELING AND SIMULATION
(CRADAs) with commercial companies.  Under CRADAs, federal labora-
tories and private companies may work jointly on projects of mutual

interest:  laboratories may contribute researchers or facilities to an en-

deavor; industry may contribute researchers, facilities, or funding.  In

general, laboratories are authorized to negotiate intellectual property
agreements that reflect the relative contributions of government and in-

dustry to a project.
6  In the defense modeling and simulation community
the Technology Transfer Program of the Naval Air Warfare Center Train-

ing Systems Division is playing a lead role.  The Navy
Õs Office of Train-
ing Technology and DMSO
Õs Information Analysis Center also coordi-
nate technology transfer activities, but it is not clear that such activities

have successfully transferred technology to the commercial sector.
Two programs exist within the federal government to foster link-
ages between government laboratories and industry.  The Federal
Laboratory Consortium helps industry understand technology trans-

fer and assists with referrals to appropriate government agencies.
The National Technology Transfer Center, a federally funded center

located in West Virginia, also helps researchers from industry solve

problems by linking them with relevant experts at federal laborato-

ries.  Such programs are not well publicized or well known within

the entertainment industry and therefore have not served as effective

vehicles for sharing information as yet.
Other techniques might be useful in stimulating collaborative work
between DOD and the entertainment industry.  At the workshop, Jordan

Weisman suggested funding competitions to stimulate the entertainment

industry to work on topics that are interesting to DOD researchers.  Such

competitions do not need to have large monetary rewards, just great pro-

motional opportunities.  For example, a $10,000 prize has been estab-

lished for computer chess systems.  Alternatively, an Internet site could

be set up specifically to exchange information between DOD and the

entertainment industry concerning hot topics in modeling and simula-

tion.  Often there is no need to transfer algorithms; just knowing that

someone else has solved a problem and seeing the solution in action will

often spur the creation of better solutions. Thus, dissemination of infor-

mation on existing developments might be enough to enable the two

communities to benefit from each other
Õs successes.
HUMAN RESOURCES
Workshop participants agreed that one of the most significant steps
the entertainment industry and DOD can take to jointly advance model-

ing and simulation is to ensure a continued supply of well-educated

workers and researchers.  Both the entertainment industry and DOD are
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION93critically dependent on skilled workers who understand how to develop
simulations that are visually pleasing and who can resolve the technical

problems associated with large-scale distributed simulations, such as la-

tency, graceful degradation of performance as scale increases and net-

work latencies lengthen, and maintenance of consistent state information

across large numbers of simulators.  The development of workers with a

mixture of technical and artistic capabilities represents a particular chal-

lenge because of its interdisciplinary nature.  Whereas computer science

and electrical engineering departments will train technical workers to

address questions about networking and distributed simulation, the cre-

ation of visually literate workers demands cooperation between engi-

neering and art departments, which are separated by large cultural and

institutional gaps.
Demand for workers with an understanding of the artistic and tech-
nical considerations embodied in modeling and simulation is growing

faster than the supply.
7  Such people are important not only in entertain-
ment and defense but in manufacturing industries as well, where they

can help design automobile, aircraft, and defense systems.  Workshop

participants indicated a shortage of talented, high-quality, experienced

people to develop virtual environments, modeling and simulation soft-

ware, digital animation, design, and scripting of virtual worlds.  
ÒAsk the
production manager of any effects studio,
Ó reported Alex Seiden, of In-
dustrial Light and Magic, 
Òand [he or she] will tell you their biggest
problem is the shortage of skilled animators and technical directors.
Ó
Several workshop participants noted that the rapid pace at which tech-

nology is evolving is reducing the number of individuals who know how

to effectively exploit the new technologies.  Scott Watson, of Walt Disney

Imagineering, suggested that experienced programmers who deal with

multiplayer multiprocessor technical problems are at a premium.  He

estimated that less than 5 percent of the programming population under-

stands such issues.
As Ed Catmull, of Pixar Animation Studios, noted, U.S. entertain-
ment companies are raiding foreign countries for talented animators.  As

a result, salaries for talented animators are rising rapidly.  Starting sala-

ries for animators range from $60,000 to $100,000 per year.  Production

companies tend to bid up salaries as they hire away each other
Õs workers
in order to learn about new technologies  and techniques.  Continued

salary growth in the entertainment industry could make DOD less able to

attract top talent.  It has already experienced problems retaining top in-

formation technology officers, both because of limited avenues for ad-

vancement at DOD and lucrative offers from commercial industry.
8  Ac-
cording to John Latta, a consultant with 4th Wave Inc., rapid expansion

of three-dimensional graphics capabilities (in hardware and software)
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94MODELING AND SIMULATION
will continue to strain the talent pool, especially among women and mi-
norities who are already underrepresented in this type of work.  Accord-

ing to many workshop participants from the entertainment industry, the

shortage of qualified workers is the single most confounding issue in the

digital film effects and gaming industries today.
9Digital artists and designers are particularly valuable in creating vi-
sual models and designing graphical interface tools.  Eric Haseltine, of

Walt Disney Imagineering, has found that the best-designed computer

user interfaces are not created by computer scientists or human factors

engineers but by artists and designers who are visually literate (Box 3.2).

While Disney funds and employs many university graduates with such

training, the demand is much greater than the supply.  Likewise, digital

designers are in demand for creating virtual spaces for the Internet.  Mi-
BOX 3.2Visual LiteracyTom West, author of In the MindÕs Eye, discusses visual literacy in rela-tion to advances in computer graphics:  ÒIt will be left to humans to maxi-mize what is most valued among human capabilities and what machinescannot doÑand increasingly these are likely to involve the insightful andintegrative capacities associated with visual modes of thought.Ó  Three-dimensional (3D) computer graphics experts extrapolate from software al-
gorithms to graphical models and scenes; visual literacy informs individu-als with creative solutions that help bridge this gulf and provide innovation.For example, an extremely valuable skill is efficiently enhancing a 3D sim-
ulated environment with realistic light, shade, and geometry while success-fully managing computational and technical constraints.  Mastering the
economy of detail, color, compositing, and visualization techniques can
provide realism to simulations.  Knowledge of these types of computer
graphics techniques involves a combination of visual literacy and technicalexpertise.  While  this highly developed combination of skills is difficult to
find in a single individual, workshop attendees argued that it would providemore powerful simulations that bring about believability and convincingvirtual worlds, with computational  economy. This type of skill set directly
overlaps with the needs of both the entertainment industry and the DOD
simulation community. Visual literacy crosses into the boundary of art and
design education, and many workshop attendees believe it important thatsuch educational needs be reported.SOURCE:  West, Thomas G.  1991.  In the MindÕs Eye:  Visual Thinkers,Gifted People with Learning Difficulties, Computer Images, and the Ironiesof Creativity.  Prometheus Books, Buffalo, New York, p. 254.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION95crosoft Corporation is employing increasing numbers of designers for its
VChat
 and other social virtual spaces.  The company has found that inter-
disciplinary and multigender teams of artists and computer scientists cre-

ate the richest interactive social spaces for the Internet.
10
The need for visually literate workers may also become more appar-
ent in the defense industry, as DOD attempts to make its simulations

more engaging and believable to participants.  Fidelity will continue to

be important in DOD
Õs training simulations, but the fidelity of defense
simulations is only part of the greater problem.  As Danny Hillis, of Dis-

ney, observed at the workshop:
If you think of the basic problem of what these [training] simulators are
for, it is not a problem of 
simulation
.  We are not trying to simulate the
reality of, let
Õs say, a tank.  The problem is not to get something that
looks like a tank.  The problem is instead to cause a change in the per-

son
Õs mind, so that when they get into a real tank in a battlefield, they do
the right thing.
In this view, the goal of a simulation is not to approximate reality as
nearly as possible, but to present individuals with the appropriate set of

cues to produce the training effect desired.  Creating the desired change

in a person
Õs mind requires a suspension of disbelief in the individual
who is experiencing, interacting, and making decisions in the simulation.

It requires a complex combination of attributes that engage and teach the

user.  Being able to express such traits in virtual environments is a com-

munication skill, and animators are trained in ways to map human be-

havior to models and motion.  Many workshop participants (from both

the entertainment industry and DOD) believe that these types of talents

have historically been considered less important than technical skill and

fidelity in defense training applications.  But as one DOD participant

noted, 
ÒDOD needs people telling them things they never knew about
how their systems could be used.
ÓOther nontechnical skills also are becoming more important to mod-
eling and simulation.  For example, one challenge is to model human and

cultural behavior in realistic interactive virtual spaces.  Creating a sense

of social space in virtual reality is becoming more important to DOD,

according to some workshop participants.  Kirstie Bellman, of the De-

fense Advanced Research Projects Agency, noted that there is a sense of

social reality that is important in certain simulations, such as those repre-

sented by multiple user domains.  Understanding human behavior in

these artificial realities involves the expertise of multiple disciplines, com-
bined as teams.  Learning why some of these places work while others

fails often requires the insight of anthropologists.  Increasing demands

for DOD to participate in noncombative activities, such as drug interdic-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96MODELING AND SIMULATION
tion and peacekeeping, demand increasing understanding of the human
component of behaviors, which needs to be incorporated into modeling

and simulation.  While DOD has not historically funded some of these

areas, it is important to reexamine the funding domain with which it

operates.Workshop participants from both the entertainment industry andDOD agreed that cross-disciplinary programs blending computer science

and art are needed to provide workers with the education to support

both entertainment and defense applications of modeling and simula-

tion.  Few university programs currently exist that combine visual litera-

cy, digital design, computer science, and engineering; most universities

have separate departments
Ñor separate schools
Ñfor engineering and
the arts.  Nevertheless, the Naval Postgraduate School recently estab-

lished a master
Õs degree program in modeling, virtual environments, and
simulation.  After several years of operation as a two-year program in

Vancouver, the DigiPen School plans to open a four-year accredited pro-

gram in Seattle, Washington, that will concentrate on training students in

the creation of video games.  The program combines courses in physics,

math, and computer science with art and storytelling.
11
  The goal of such
programs is not to provide graduates with narrow training in specific

technologies or systems used for creating simulated environments but to

ensure that they are well grounded in the disciplines involved in model-

ing and simulation.
Creating such programs presents a challenge.  According to Alex
Singer, an independent film director, some U.S. universities demonstrate

tremendous resistance to the whole range of computer studies within the

arts.  At the workshop, Gilman Louie, of Spectrum HoloByte Inc., com-

mented that 
Òif you
Õre in a computer science program, the art depart-
ment won
Õt let you into their advanced classes.  The same with computer
science departments
Ñunless you change your major.
Ó  This observation
is often a result of classes being oversubscribed in a major
Õs courses that
relate to digital imaging; however, the shortage of cross-disciplinary

courses is related to the structure of universities.  Few U.S. universities

provide faculty with incentives to teach across disciplines; universities

are divided into departments where funding and promotion are disci-

pline specific.  While there has been increasing emphasis on interdiscipli-

nary work at funding agencies, such as the National Science Foundation,

most such efforts have tended to focus on scientific and engineering
fields, not on merging science and engineering with art and design.
Trying to create an academic discipline that combines science and
engineering with art creates specific problems.  As with other fields of

science and engineering, computer science rewards researchers for pub-

lishable research, the results of which are typically expressed mathemati-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION97cally.  Fields that combine computer science with art (e.g., computergraphics, virtual environments) have difficulty being recognized as seri-

ous areas of study, noted Michael Zyda, of the Naval Postgraduate

School, because they are new fields that are often viewed as applications

of computer science rather than core research areas.  Proponents will

have to convince the computer science community that work in this field

will yield publishable results and that the arts can play more than a sup-

portive role.  According to one reviewer of this report, the SIGGRAPH

community has been working on this problem for several years, with

limited results.
DOD and the entertainment industry could take a more active role in
encouraging the development of such programs, using existing funding

mechanisms as a lever.  While DOD has not historically funded educa-

tional programs in digital arts and design, these areas do appear to have

a growing relevance to defense needs.  Other government agencies with

interests in education and work-force issues also may have an interest in

such programs.
To further promote strengthening of the education system in this
country, both the entertainment industry and DOD communities could

promote internships to help students and administrators gain a better

understanding of real-world applications of modeling and simulation.

Formal arrangements might be made between universities, the entertain-

ment industry, and DOD research labs to create programs for intern-

ships.  Such programs may encompass more than just universities.  Dur-

ing her tenure at the Visual Systems Laboratory at the Institute for

Simulation and Training, Jacquelyn Ford Morie helped create such a pro-

gram for undergraduate and high school students, the ÒToy Scouts.ÓThrough this program, students were given access to the laboratory
Õsvirtual reality equipment and were given opportunities to develop inno-

vative projects.  Researchers and professionals from the entertainment

industry, DOD, and the laboratory mentored the students, who devel-

oped several innovative applications of virtual reality technology (see the

position paper by Morie in Appendix D).  Similar programs at the high

school and vocational levels might be effective in filling the need for

skilled workers in modeling and simulation.
MAINTAINING THE RESEARCH BASE
Closely related to the problem of developing human resources is the
need to maintain a strong base for research into modeling and simula-

tion, especially at the university level.  DOD has historically played a

major role in funding university research in computer science.  As recent-

ly as 1996, DOD provided nearly half of all federal funding for university
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98MODELING AND SIMULATION
research in computer science; the National Science Foundation (NSF) pro-vided most of the rest.
12
  Early DOD investments in university research
spurred development of many technologies that have turned into billion-

dollar industries that now lie at the core of both entertainment and de-

fense modeling and simulation:  workstations, graphics technology, and

virtual reality.
13
  Such funding for university research has not only pro-
duced new knowledge and new technologies but also provided research

opportunities that are significant component of students
Õ education.
ÒPeople,
Ó says Ed Catmull, 
Òare the best products from research dollars.
ÓMany workshop participants believe that the funding environment
has changed in ways that could prove detrimental to the long-term via-

bility of the technology base for modeling and simulation.
14
  Attempts to
reduce the federal budget deficit and trim defense spending have put

additional pressure on federal research expenditures.  While total re-
search funding for computer science has continued to grow in real terms,

funding for basic research has remained flat since 1990.  Most of the

growth in research funding is attributable to increases in funding for

applied research.  Workshop participants claim that government-funded

research projects are now more product oriented than they used to be.
15
Research contracts
Ñeven for projects considered basic and applied re-
search
Ñoften specify particular products, completion dates, and interim
deliverables.  University researchers claim that this shift, while respon-

sive to calls for greater accountability in publicly funded research, is in-

compatible with fundamental research, which by its very nature is specu-

lative and unpredictable and more likely than product-oriented research

to generate fundamental change.  As Ed Catmull noted at the workshop:
The thing that has benefited us all in the past are those programs where
people are free to pursue wilder visions, where [researchers] can
Õt see
things exactly clearly, but they themselves become the foundations on
which we build growth in the future.
Others noted that NSF funding, though it has grown in recent years,
entails a higher degree of administrative overhead; the need to generate

frequent proposals has taken critical research time away from research-

ers, including those at the NSF-funded Science and Technology Center

for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization.
16
Industry funding for university research has not compensated for the
change in federal funding.  Though total industry contributions to uni-

versity research have grown in recent years, industry still supports just a

fraction of university research.
17
  Workshop participants claimed that in-
dustry support for research in digital arts, virtual environments, and dis-

tributed simulation is especially small.  Many entertainment companies

do not support university research because they are small and see them-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION99selves as users of technology more than developers.  In addition, indus-
try funding of university research is generally linked to specific industry

needs that are closely coupled with business priorities.  As Paul Lypacze-

wski of Alias|Wavefront noted at the workshop, companies are in the

business of generating profits, so they fund those schools and those pro-

grams whose area of research and competencies are aligned with the

types of problems that companies want to fix or understand better.  Com-

panies also expect nearer-term returns from their research investments

than does the government.  While industry-funded university research is

not necessarily incorporated immediately into products, it must move

technology forward in ways that ultimately benefit industry; thus, fund-

ing decisions center around finding bodies of research that are applicable

to both industry and university.  Corporate sponsors also tend to de-

mand greater control over intellectual property that results from research

programs, creating a requirement for greater secrecy, which limits the

dissemination of new research knowledge.
In addition, several workshop participants suggested that industry is
not contributing equipment to university laboratories as it did in the past.
University researchers perceive a decline in contributions by traditional

donors and note that many of the newer industry leaders have not

stepped up to the challenge to provide donations.  The lack of computer

hardware and software technology affects the availability and quality of

technology for research and training in universities by limiting the kinds

of systems on which students may work.
Many of these concerns mirror changes seen in funding for science
and technology generally.  The demise of high-profile national initiatives

to invigorate scientific and technical research programs (such as the space
race or the Cold War),
18
 constraints on federal budgets for science and
engineering, and changes in patterns of industrial research and develop-

ment (including the restructuring  of corporate research laboratories at

such companies as IBM, Xerox, and AT&T) influence the nature of re-

search and development in many fields.  Resolution may therefore re-

quire action beyond the modeling and simulation community.  Never-

theless, to the extent that the modeling and simulation community can

succinctly and accurately convey the nature of its concerns, such as

through this report, it may be able to influence the process.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
As evidenced by the workshop, strong commonalities exist between
defense and entertainment applications of modeling and simulation and

in the technologies needed to support them.  Whereas DOD has tradi-

tionally led the field and provided a significant portion of related fund-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100MODELING AND SIMULATION
ing, the entertainment industry has made rapid advances in 3D graphics
generation, networked simulation, computer-generated characters, and

immersive environments.  Aligning the research agendas of these two

communties to allow greater coordination of research developments,

sharing of information, and collaborative research could provide an op-

portunity to more rapidly and economically achieve the goals of both the

defense and entertainment industries.
Linking these two communities represents a significant challenge;
differences in business practices and culture need to be overcome in or-

der to find mechanisms for cooperation and collaboration.  Additional

efforts will be needed to ensure adequate education of visually literate

people who can create engaging simulated environments and to ensure

funding for continued research.  Success will rely on sustained commit-

ment from both sides
Ñand from a shared belief that the benefits of col-
laboration are worth the costs.  This workshop represented the first step

toward exploring the benefits and the costs of such collaboration; the fact

that it attracted many participants from the entertainment industry, as

well as DOD, suggests that some degree of mutual interest exists.  Addi-

tional steps will need to be taken to capitalize on that interest.
NOTES1.DOD has recently expressed some interest in leasing computer hardware and soft-
ware for its systemsÑespecially training systems
Ñin order to shorten the time required to
acquire new technologies.
2.U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment.  1992.  
After The Cold War:  Living
with Lower Defense Spending.
 U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., Chapter 6.
3.Lunceford, Dell, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, personal communica-
tion, November 6, 1996.
4.However, as noted in Chapter 1, at least one project is under way to develop a
system that can be used both as a military training device and a game, demonstrating that
cultural obstacles can potentially be overcome.
5.Bray, Hiawatha.  1997.  
ÒBattle for Military Video Game Niche On,
Ó Boston Globe
,April 16, p. 1.
6.For a more complete discussion of federal technology transfer efforts and CRADAs,
see U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, 1993, 
Defense Conversion:  Redirecting
R&D,
  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
7.Armour, Barry.  1997.  
ÒA Different Kind of Artist,
Ó Computer Graphics,
 February, pp. 23-25.
8.Lardner, Richard.  1997.  
ÒThe Future of Army Automators,
Ó Inside the Army
, April 29.
9.Such sentiments have been expressed outside the workshop as well.  Scott Ross,
president of Digital Domain, a leading digital effects studio, also has noted a growing needfor technical directors, animators, compositors, and digital artists in general.  See ÒHolly-
wood Reporter,
Ó New Media,
 July 31, 1996.
10.Stone, Linda.  1996.  
ÒOn-line Multimedia Communities,
Ó speech before the Fourth
Annual Living Surfaces Conference:  Design for the Internet, Chicago, Ill., November 16.
11.Wolkomir, Richard.  1996.  
ÒThe School Where It
Õs OK to Major in Fun and Games,
ÓSmithsonian
, December, pp. 86-97.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SETTING THE PROCESS IN MOTION10112.In 1996 federal obligations for university research in computer science and mathe-
matics totaled $593 million.  DOD provided $280 million, and NSF contributed $261 mil-
lion.  Of the DOD funding, DARPA provided $184 million.  See National Science Founda-
tion.  1996.  
Federal Funds for Research and DevelopmentÑFiscal Years 1994, 1995, 1996.
National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., Table C-58.
13.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.
Evolving the High-Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs

Information Infrastructure.
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
14.The discussion of changes in the size, scope, and nature of research and develop-
ment has implications far beyond those for the modeling and simulation community and

are not discussed in detail in this report.  CSTB has another study in progress, 
ÒInformation
Technology Research in a Competitive World,
Ó that will more fully examine the implica-
tions of structural changes in the conduct of research and development in information

technology in universities, government, and industry.
15.National Science Foundation.  1996.  
National Patterns of R&D Resources:  1996.
  Na-
tional Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., Tables C-25, C-26, and C-27.  Conversion to

constant 1996 dollars is based on gross domestic product deflators contained in Table C-1.
16.The center includes computer graphics programs at Brown University, the California
Institute of Technology, Cornell University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel

Hill, and the University of Utah.  It has a long-term research mission (11 years) to help
improve the scientific bases for the next generation of computer graphics environments

(both hardware and software).  Its research is directed toward modeling, rendering, interac-
tion, and performance.
17.In real terms, total industry funding for university research (in all fields of
science and engineering) grew nearly 60 percent between 1987 and 1996, but it still

represents just 7 percent of total university research funds.  See National Science
Foundation.  1996.  
National Patterns of R&D Resources:  1996.
  National Science Foun-
dation, Washington, D.C., Table C-2.
18.The space program generated many technologies related to modeling and simula-
tion.  Satellite imagery and mapping together have been a significant driver of imaging
technology.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105AWorkshop Agenda
Saturday, October 19, 1996
9:00 a.m.
Welcome and Introductory Remarks
Michael Zyda, Committee Chair

Anita Jones, Director of Defense Research and Engineering

Danny Hillis, Walt Disney Imagineering

Ed Catmull, Pixar Animation Studios
10:15
Break10:30
Session 1:  Electronic Storytelling

Moderator:
  Donna Cox
Panelists:Alexander Singer, Alex Seiden, Rebecca Allen
12:15 p.m.
Lunch, 
Dining Terrace
1:30Session 2:  Strategy and War Games

Moderator:
  Gilman Louie
Panelists:Kirstie Bellman, Peter Bonanni, Paul Chatelier,

Mat Genser, Carl Norman, Scott Randolph
3:00Break3:15Session 3:  Experiential Computing and Virtual Reality

Moderator:
  Joshua Larson-Mogal
Panelists:Ben 
Delaney, Mark Bolas, Scott Watson, Bill Jepson,
Eugenia Kolasinski, Traci Jones
5:15Reception, 
Dining Terrace
6:00Dinner, 
Atrium
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106APPENDIX A
Sunday, October 20, 1996
9:00 a.m.
Session 4:  Networked Simulation
Moderator:
  Michael Zyda
Panelists:Warren Katz, Robert Jacobs, Brian Blau,

Will Harvey, David King
11:00
Break11:15
Session 5:  Low-Cost Simulation Hardware

Moderator:
  Jordan Weisman
Panelists:David Clark, Buzz Hoffman, Jeff Potter,

Gary Tarolli
12:15 p.m.
Lunch
, Refectory
1:30Session 6:  Finding Common Ground

Moderator:
  Paul Lypaczewski
Panelists:Jim Foran, John Latta, Jacquelyn Ford Morie,

Jack Thorpe
3:00Synthesis:  Setting the Research Agenda

Moderator:
  Michael Zyda
Panelists:Steering Committee
3:45AdjournModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.107BWorkshop Participants
Rebecca Allen
University of California at
Los Angeles
Kirstie Bellman

Defense Advanced Research

   Projects Agency
Brian Blau
Intervista Software
Mark Bolas
Fakespace Inc.
Peter Bonanni
Virginia Air National Guard
F. T. Case
Defense Advanced Research

   Projects Agency
Edwin E. Catmull
Pixar Animation Studios
Paul Chatelier

Defense Modeling and Simulation
OfficeDavid Chen

RGB Technology Inc.
David Clark
Intel Corporation
Ronald Cobb
ArtistJudith Dahmann
Defense Modeling and Simulation
OfficeBen Delaney

CyberEdge Information Services
Inc.
Clark Dodsworth, Jr.

Osage Associates
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108APPENDIX BJames Foran
Silicon Graphics Inc.
John Geddes
Ames Research Center
Mathias Genser
Spectrum HoloByte Inc.
Martin Gundersen
University of Southern California
Will Harvey
Sandcastle Inc.
Eric Haseltine
Walt Disney Imagineering
Janet Weisenford Healy
Naval Air Warfare Center
W. Daniel Hillis
The Walt Disney Company
Buzz Hoffman
ThrustMaster Inc.
James Hollenbach
Defense Modeling and Simulation
OfficeRobert Jacobs

Illusion Inc.
Mark Jefferson
Defense Modeling and Simulation
OfficeBill Jepson

University of California at Los
AngelesAnita Jones

Office of the Secretary of Defense
Traci Jones
U.S. Army Simulation, Training

   & Instrumentation Command
David King
Total Entertainment Network
Eugenia Kolasinski
Consultant
John Latta
4th Wave Inc.
Richard Lindheim
Paramount Television Group
George Lukes
Defense Advanced Research

   Projects Agency
Dell Lunceford
Defense Advanced Research

   Projects Agency
Farid Mamaghani
Consultant
Dennis McBride
Office of Naval Research
William McQuay
USAF Wright Laboratory
Jacquelyn Ford Morie
Walt Disney Feature Animation
Studios
Carl Norman

Strategic Simulations Inc.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B109Jeffrey Potter
REAL 3D
David Pratt
Joint Simulation Systems/Joint

   Program Office
Scott Randolph
Spectrum HoloByte Inc.
Vance Saunders
Ball Aerospace and Technologies

   Corporation
Alex Seiden
Industrial Light and Magic
Steven Seidensticker

Consultant
Sandeep Singhal
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Gary Tarolli
3Dfx Interactive
Jack Thorpe
Science Applications International

   Corporation
Scott Watson
Walt Disney Imagineering
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110CBiographical Sketches of
Committee Members
MICHAEL ZYDA is a professor in the Department of Computer Science
at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in Monterey, California.  Dr.

Zyda is also an academic associate and associate chair for academic af-

fairs in that department.  He has been at NPS since February 1984.  Dr.

ZydaÕs main research focus is computer graphics, specifically the devel-

opment of large-scale, networked, three-dimensional virtual environ-

ments and visual simulation systems.  Dr. Zyda was a member of the

National Research Council committee that produced the report 
Virtual
Reality:  Scientific and Technical Challenges.
  He is also the senior editor for
virtual environments for the MIT Press quarterly 
PRESENCE
, the journal
of teleoperations and virtual environments.  Dr. Zyda has been active

with the Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and was the chair of the

1990 conference, held in Snowbird, Utah, and chair of the 1995 sympo-

sium, held in Monterey, California.  Dr. Zyda began his career in com-

puter graphics in 1973 as part of an undergraduate research group, the

Senses Bureau, at the University of California, San Diego.  He received a

B.A. in bioengineering from the University of California, San Diego, in

1976; an M.S. in computer science/neurocybernetics from the University

of Massachusetts, Amherst, in 1978; and a D.Sc. in computer science from

Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, in 1984.
DONNA J. COX
 is a professor in the School of Art & Design and
associate director for technologies in the School of Art at the Univer-
sity of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.  She is also codirector for Scien-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  C111tific Communications and Media Systems at the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications.  Ms. Cox has exhibited computer im-

ages and animations in more than 100 invitational and juried exhibits

during the past nine years, including shows at the Bronx Museum of

Art in New York, the Everson Art Museum in New York, the Feature

Gallery in Chicago, the Feature Gallery in New York City, the Fermi-

lab in Chicago, and the Museum of Contemporary Photography in

Chicago.  She has authored many juried papers on computer graphics

and scientific visualization and received the Coler-Maxwell Medal

for Excellence in 1989.  Her work has been reviewed or cited in more

than 75 publications, including 
Time
, 
National Geographic
, 
Wall Street
Journal
, and
 IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
.  Ms. Cox spent a
sabbatical working on an IMAX film, 
Cosmic Voyage
, for the Smithso-
nian Institution
Õs National Air and Space Museum.  As associate pro-
ducer for scientific visualization and art director, she has orchestrat-

ed scientific visualization software, data, and design for Pixar

Animation Studios, Santa Barbara Studios, Princeton University, the

University of California at Santa Cruz, the San Diego Supercomputer

Center, and the National Center for Supercomputing Applications.

Ms. Cox received an M.F.A. in computer graphic arts and a B.A. from

from the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
WARREN J. KATZ
 is vice president and cofounder of M
−K Technol-
ogies.  His responsibilities include corporate operations, new busi-
ness development, and program management.  M
−KÕs corporate goal
is to provide cutting-edge research and development services to the

Department of Defense in the areas of distributed interactive simula-

tion (DIS) and networked virtual reality (VR) systems and to convert

the results of this research into commercial products for the enter-

tainment and industrial markets.  M
−KÕs first commercial product,
the VR-Link
ª developer
Õs toolkit, is the most widely used commer-
cial DIS interface in the world.  It is an application programmer
Õstoolkit that makes possible networking of distributed simulations and
VR systems.  The toolkit complies with the Defense Department
Õs DIS
protocol, enabling multiple participants to interact in real time via

low-bandwidth network connections.  VR-Link is designed for easy

integration with existing and new simulations, VR systems, and

games.  From June 1987 to October 1990, Mr. Katz worked for Bolt,

Beranek, and Newman on the SIMNET project.  He was the resident

drive-train simulation expert, responsible for mathematical modeling

of the physical systems and software development.  Mr. Katz received
B.S. degrees in mechanical engineering and electrical engineering

from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112APPENDIX  CJOSHUA LARSON-MOGAL
 is manager of product strategy for Silicon
Graphics
Õ Light Client Division.  He is responsible for supervising prod-
uct management of the division
Õs products and for driving innovation
into commercial applications for the range of markets addressed by the
division.  He was previously the manager of the Enabling Technologies

Group in the Advanced Systems Division at Silicon Graphics, where he

oversaw a group of product managers working on the OpenGL, IRIS

Performer, Open Inventor, REACT, and ImageVision Library software

products and the real-time and virtual reality market/technology spaces.

In previous positions at Silicon Graphics, Mr. Larson-Mogal served as

manager of the market development group, market manager for emerg-

ing technologies, product manager for advanced graphics systems, and

senior graphics software developer.  In these positions he identified new

growth markets for advanced graphics hardware and initiated Silicon

Graphics
Õ participation in markets for visual simulation, virtual reality,
and interactive entertainment.  He also initiated the product planning

process for the Infinite Reality graphics subsystem, the follow-on to Real-

ity Engine, managed the Power Vision (VGX) graphics workstation prod-

ucts, and developed feature-based solid modeling applications for com-

puter-integrated design, analysis, and manufacturing.  In 1985 Mr.

Larson-Mogal founded Deneb Robotics Inc., where he designed the sys-

tem architecture and developed the user interface for IGRIP, a software

application for robot work-cell simulation and off-line training.  As a

graphics software developer at Auto-Trol Technology Corporation, he

developed device-independent graphics libraries to support both com-

puter-aided design and computer-aided facilities management applica-

tions.  Mr. Larson-Mogal received a B.S. degree in computer science from

Cornell University.
GILMAN LOUIE
 has been chair of Spectrum HoloByte Inc. since 1992.
In 1982 Mr. Louie founded Nexa Corporation, a developer of entertain-

ment software that later merged with Spectrum HoloByte.  Mr. Louie is

the creator of the best-selling Falcon air combat simulation, one of the

company
Õs leading brand franchises.  He received a B.S. in business ad-
ministration from San Francisco State University.
PAUL LYPACZEWSKI
 is part of the management team continuing to
build and manage Alias|Wavefront in Toronto.  He is working with the
former executive vice-president of Wavefront to form a distributed de-

velopment organization of engineers and support staff in Toronto, Cali-

fornia, Vancouver, Santa Barbara, and Paris.  Mr. Lypaczewski continues

to manage corporate research and development (R&D) and oversees all

levels of development from product planning, product release, and stra-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  C113tegic account management for all of the Toronto products.  Mr. Lypacze-
wski joined Alias Research Inc. in February 1992 as part of a management

turnaround team.  In his role as vice-president of product development,

he oversaw the restructuring of R&D and all levels of development from

product planning to product release for all Alias products and was in-

volved in legal and intellectual property issues associated with R&D.

Prior to joining Alias, Mr. Lypaczewski worked at CAE Electronic Ltd., a

producer of real-time systems, including flight training simulators, air

traffic control and energy control systems, and space systems, such as the

controls for the Space Shuttle
Õs Canadarm.  Mr. Lypaczewski joined the
company as an autopilot systems engineer and held a variety of manage-

ment positions, including senior manager of simulator programs engi-

neering and manager of avionics simulation.  In these positions he was

responsible for all project engineering and sales proposal support for

flight simulation and computer-based training systems.  Mr. Lypaczews-

ki received a B.Eng. degree from McGill University and is a member of

LÕOrdre des Ingenieurs du Quebec.
RANDY PAUSCH
 is an associate professor of computer science, human-
computer interaction, and design at Carnegie Mellon University.  He re-

ceived a B.S. in computer science from Brown University in 1982 and a

Ph.D. in computer science from Carnegie Mellon in 1988.  He has been a

National Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator and a Lilly

Foundation Teaching Fellow.  In 1995 he spent a sabbatical with the Walt

Disney Imagineering virtual reality studio.  Dr. Pausch is the author or

co-author of five books and more than 50 reviewed journal and confer-

ence proceedings articles, is an active consultant with both Walt Disney

Imagineering and Xerox PARC, and has served on a number of National

Research Council panels.ALEXANDER SINGER
 began his career as a photojournalist and educa-
tional filmmaker.  His 30-year directing career has resulted in 250 televi-

sion shows, several full-length feature movies, and many commercials.

His directorial credits include 
Profiles in Courage, Police Story, The Fugitive,
Run for Your Life, Hill Street Blues, Lou Grant, Cagney and Lacey, Star Trek:

Voyager, 
and
 Deep Space 9
.  Mr. Singer won an Emmy for an episode of
The Bold Ones
 (1972) and represented the series 
Police Story
 (1975) and 
Lou
Grant
 (1979) for their Emmys.  He has lectured on film production, cine-
matography, and directing and has taught courses at private institutions,

universities on two continents, the University of California at Los Ange-

les extension, and for the Directors Guild of America Special Projects.  In

addition to his directorial work, Mr. Singer has, for the past several years,

been a member of the Global Business Network, a consulting group basedModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114APPENDIX  Cin San Francisco with wide-ranging concerns centered on the global econ-omy.  Recently, Mr. Singer was under contract as a film consultant to

Universal Studio
Õs Orlando theme park and MCA/Matsushita.  His work
at MCA/Matsushita centered on the development of an entertainment

application for virtual reality technology.
JORDAN WEISMAN
 is chief creative officer for Virtual World Enter-
tainment Inc.  This title recognizes his pivotal role as the principal cre-
ative architect at Virtual World.  Acclaimed as one of the world
Õs premier
game and software designers, Mr. Weisman has led the company to its

present position atop the fledgling 
Òexperience
Ó industry.  In 1980 Mr.
Weisman and his partner, Ross Babcick, formed the FASA Corporation, a

fantasy role-playing board-game publishing company.  As FASA
Õs presi-
dent, Jordan codesigned two of the top five best-selling games in the

industry, 
BattleTech
 and 
Shadowrun.
  FASA now publishes multiple lines
of fantasy and science fiction novels based on its game universes.  It was

at FASA that Mr. Weisman began to develop the principles behind the

interactive games that Virtual World Entertainment now practices at Vir-

tual World.  Virtual World opened its BattleTech Center in Chicago in

August 1990.  As the first location-based virtual reality center in the
world, it gave the public a taste of a technology that was formerly the

private domain of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration

and the military.  Mr. Weisman has received numerous awards for game

design and has lectured extensively on virtual reality and game design

around the world.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.115DPosition Papers
Prior to the Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardÕs Oc-
tober 1996 workshop on modeling and simulation, participants were
asked to submit a one- to three-page position paper that responded to

three questions:
1.  How do you see your particular industry segment evolving over
the next decade (i.e., how will markets and products evolve)?
2.  What technological advances are necessary to enable the progress
outlined in your answer to question 1?  What are the primary research

challenges?
3.  Are you aware of complementary efforts in the entertainment or
defense sectors that might be applicable to your interests?  If so, please

describe them.
This appendix reproduces a number of these position papers.  The pa-
pers examine technologies of interest to the entertainment industry and

the U.S. Department of Defense, as well as some of the barriers to collab-

oration.  Several of the papers are cited in the body of the report; substan-

tial portions of some have also been incorporated there.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116APPENDIX DBRIAN BLAU
VRML: Future of the Collaborative 3D Internet
INTRODUCTION
VRML (virtual reality modeling language) is the three-dimensional
computer graphics interchange file specification that has become the stan-dard for Internet-based simulations.  It is being used in many industries,

and the momentum of the standard and industry acceptance continues to

grow at a fast pace. Most of the major software and hardware corpora-

tions are now starting serious efforts to build core VRML technologies

directly into business applications, scientific and engineering tools, soft-

ware development tools, and entertainment applications.
One of the most significant developments in the history of VRML
was its adoption by Silicon Graphics Inc. (SGI), Netscape, and Microsoft

during 1995-1996.  This broad level of industry acceptance continues to

challenge the VRML community to provide an official international stan-

dard so that wide adoption will be possible.  Given that creation of VRML

came from a unique and open consensus-based process, its future de-

pends on continued innovation in the directions of true distributed simu-

lations as well as efforts to keep the standards process moving forward.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF VRML
Over the past two years the development of a standard for distribut-
ing 3D computer graphics and simulations over the Internet has taken

the quick path from idea to reality.  In 1994 a few San Francisco cyber-

space artisans (Mark Pesce, Tony Parisi, and Gavin Bell) combined their

efforts to start the VRML effort.  Their intention was to create a standard

that would enable artists and designers to deliver a new kind of content

to the browsable Internet.
In mid-1995 VRML version 1.0 emerged as the first attempt at this
standard.  After an open Internet vote, VRML 1.0 was to be based on

Silicon Graphics
Õ popular Open Inventor technology.  VRML was widely
evaluated as unique and progressive but still not useable.  At this point

broad industry support for VRML was coalescing in an effort to kick-

start a new industry.  Complimentary efforts were also underway to de-

liver both audio and video over the Internet.  The general feeling was

that soon the broad acceptance of distributed multimedia on the Internet

was a real possibility and that VRML would emerge as the 3D standard.
After completion of the VRML 1.0 standard, the VRML Architecture
Group (VAG) was established at SIGGRAPH 1995 and consisted of eight
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D117Internet and 3D simulation experts.  In early 1996 VAG issued a request
for proposals on the second round of VRML development.  The call was

answered by six industry leaders.  Through an open vote SGI emerged as

the winner with its Moving Worlds proposal. By this time over 100 com-

panies had publicly endorsed VRML, and many of them were working

on core technologies, browsers, authoring tools, and content.  At SIG-

GRAPH 1996 VAG issued the final VRML 2.0 specification and made a

number of other significant announcements.
To help maintain VRML as a standard, VAG made several concrete
moves.  First, it started the process of creating the VRML Consortium, a

nonprofit organization devoted to VRML standard development, con-

formance, and education.  Second, VAG announced that the Internation-

al Standards Organization (ISO) would adopt VRML and the consensus-

based standardization process as its starting place for an international 3D

metafile format.
DISTRIBUTED AND MULTIUSER SIMULATIONS USING VRML
Based on the current state of technology, it is now obvious that dis-
tributed 3D simulations are clearly possible for a wide audience.  Distrib-

uted simulation is the broad term that defines 3D applications that com-

municate by standards-based communications protocols.  Military

training, collaborative design, and multiuser chat are examples of such

applications.
Widespread adoption of this technology depends on the following
key technology factors:  platforms, rendering, multimedia, and connec-

tivity.  Today, the most popular platforms for accessing the Internet are

desktop machines
Ñnamely, Windows 95/NT and the Macintosh Power-
PC family.  These operating systems are running on computing plat-

forms powerful enough to display complex 3D-rendered scenes.  The

tools are readily available as well, thanks to Microsoft
Õs DirectX media
integration APIÕs and ActiveX Internet controls as well as NetscapeÕsLive3D and LiveConnect developer platforms.  These software tools, com-
bined with powerful desktop processors, make it easy for software devel-

opers to create VRML technologies and products.
Another key aspect of development is the tight integration of multi-
media into these platforms. Hollywood and the video games industry see

the desktop PC as the next major platform for delivery of multimedia

content.  This means VRML technology development will be accessible to

developers of all types of integrated Internet-based media.
The final key is development of open-protocol communications stan-
dards suited for Internet use.  Currently, the military uses distributed

interactive simulation (DIS) as the communications protocol for training
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118APPENDIX Dapplications and has been successful to date.  The integration of DIS with
Internet technology is key but not the entire solution.  DIS was developed

only for military applications.  Its broader acceptance by industry is de-

pendent on significant changes to its infrastructure, including the simula-

tion model, numerical representation, integration with VRML, and de-

pendence on Department of Defense initiatives.
Another complementary area of interest is multiuser VRML spaces.
These applications are the next step in on-line human-to-human commu-

nication and are enabled by the Internet and VRML.  Several companies

have products that let individuals directly interact with others.  In these

on-line worlds each person views a fully interactive 3D VRML world,

including moving graphical avatars that are the virtual representations

of their human counterparts.  Some of these applications also include

real-time voice that is syncopated with movements of the avatar
Õs eyes
and mouth.  It is very compelling to communicate with someone and

only be able to see their virtual representation.
Several companies and organizations are now starting to collaborate
on a standard for VRML-based avatars.  These groups are now in the

formative stages and are being published by fairly small companies. The

first avatar standard will roll out later in 1996.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
VRML technology and content development in 1996-1997 will focus
on several areas.  On the standards front, the VRML Consortium and ISO

will continue to broaden acceptance of VRML.  The VRML Consortium

will have its first official meetings in late 1996.  Creating the organization

and filling it with technical, creative, process-oriented people will be a

goal.  The VAG will continue to serve as the focus for standards-based

VRML work until the consortium is self-sustaining.  Also during 1997,

ISO will officially adopt VRML as the only international 3D metafile for-

mat for the Internet.  Once the VRML Consortium is operational, the

focus of activities will be on continued development of the VRML specifi-

cation and the creation of working groups.
On the software and hardware development fronts many advances
will be made.  VRML 2.0 browsers will emerge and will integrate directly

into the popular HTML-based browsers.  Manufacturers  of three-dimen-

sional hardware accelerators will add features that directly support basic

VRML graphics.  Tool manufacturers, such as polygonal modelers and

scene creation tools, will incorporate VRML read-and-write capabilities.

Integration of DIS and other distributed simulation communications pro-

tocols will quickly help content authors build multiuser capabilities into
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D119their worlds.  Finally, content developers will enjoy the flood of new
modeling and programming tools.
Given all of these advances there are still three immediate technical
areas that need to be addressed before VRML becomes widely adopted:

common scripting language, external API, and binary file format. Cur-

rently, these areas are quite controversial, but it is clear within the VRML

community that solutions to the problems are within reach.
VRML RESOURCES ON THE INTERNET
http://vag.vrml.org
ÑOfficial home of the VRML spec and the VAG
http://sdsc.vrml.org
ÑVery comprehensive list of VRML resources
http://www.intervista.co
ÑPopular VRML browser
http://www.microsoft.com/ie/ie3/vrml.htm
ÑPopular VRML browser
http://www.sgi.com/cosmo
ÑPopular VRML browser
http://home.netscape.com/eng/live3d
ÑPopular VRML browser
http://www.blacksun.com
ÑMultiuser 3D application
http://www.onlive.com
ÑMultiuser application with real-time voice
http://www.dimensionx.com
ÑJava-based VRML tools
http://www.ktx.com
ÑVRML tools
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120APPENDIX DMARK BOLAS
INTRODUCTION
If the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Õs  VIEW labo-
ratory marks the beginning of the virtual reality (VR) industry, the indus-
try is just about to pass its 10-year mark.  There is a rule of thumb stating

that it takes about 20 years for a new technology to find its way into the

mainstream economy.  Applied here, this means 10 years before VR is in

the mainstream economy.  This prediction seems completely reasonable,

or even pessimistic.  Consumers can currently purchase VR headsets with
integrated tracking for less than $800.  A handful of automotive manufac-

turers and aerospace contractors use VR on an ongoing basis to solve

design and engineering problems.  However, early adopters are incorpo-

rating the technology into their work and lives.  They face all of the

frustrations and challenges typically associated with being on the cutting

edge.  The next 10 years will see the VR industry evolve in a straightfor-

ward and boring fashion
Ñearly adopters will have paved the way for
easy use by the mainstream.
This evolution will require a fundamental shift in the way VR tech-
nology is viewed and used.  The technology must cease to stand apart; it

needs to become an invisible part of a user
Õs lifestyle and work habits.
This requires progress on two basic fronts:  First, the technology must be

integrated into the user
Õs physical environment.  Second, it must be inte-
grated into the user
Õs software environment.
EVOLUTIONFor mainstream users to benefit from VR technologies, the technolo-
gies must become pervasive.  They must extend throughout our indus-

tries and lives.  They must diligently work for their users and quietly

become part of their lifestyle.  The facsimile machine is an example of a

technology that has accomplished this.
Walkmen, dishwashers, televisions
ÑAll these have become perva-
sive by thoroughly changing the way people do things.  A person does

not talk about using a walkman, or a dishwasher, or a television.  If

anything, a person discusses the content or end result as opposed to the
NOTE:  The industry segment described here is defined as industries that benefit from
immersive human-computer interfaces.  The term virtual reality is intended to include this
definition.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D121actual device.  
ÒI heard a good song,
ÓÒ
The dishes are clean,
ÓÒ
Did you
see that stupid show last night?
ÓThere is little question that three-dimensional (3D) graphics and sim-
ulation are on the way to becoming pervasive.  In industry the design
process is being transformed to demand 3D models and simulations.  This
Christmas consumers will be choosing between the Sony or Nintendo

platforms with 3D graphics capability being assumed.
However, the VR industry must evolve to provide such 3D systems
with immersive interfaces that multiply the utility and effect of the 3D

graphics.  Currently, most 3D graphics are shown on a 2D screen and

manipulated via a 2D mouse.  These interfaces effectively remove much

of the value present in the 3D environments.  The VR industry must

maintain the utility and comfort present in a user
Õs natural ability to
perceive and manipulate 3D environments and objects.
ADVANCES
For VR to become a pervasive tool, it must become integrated into
both the user
Õs physical and software environments.  Seamless integra-
tion with a user
Õs physical environment is not simple because immersive
interfaces tend to immerse
Ñthat is, they surround and envelop the user.
This can easily intrude on a user
Õs physical and mental environment.
The VR industry needs to minimize this intrusion to the point where

immersive interfaces are as natural to use as a telephone or mouse.  It is

interesting to note that both these examples are not inherently natural,

but both have been integrated into users
Õ workspaces and lifestyles.
To achieve a natural interface, paradigms that transcend the stan-
dard goggles-and-gloves paradigm need to be pursued.  The fact that

people collaborate, multitask, and eat while they work are down-to-earth

aspects that must be considered in the design of immersive tools.
Equally challenging is the integration of these new interfaces in the
software environment.  Application software packages have typically
been written for 2D screens and interfaces.  As a result, most immersive

interfaces are poor retrofits onto existing packages that were never de-

signed to incorporate them.  This lack of integration severely cripples the

utility of immersive interfaces.
This integration is probably best achieved by starting with a 
Òtop
down/bottom up
Ó design approach on a number of key applications.
For example, the entertainment industry could use an immersive set de-

sign and preview system, while the Defense Department would benefit

from a simulation-based design and modeling system that fully utilizes a

human
Õs ability to think, design, and manipulate 3D space.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122APPENDIX DPETER BONANNI
The U.S. armed forces have created the most advanced training sys-
tems in the world.  Some segments of the armed forces, however, are
facing true training shortfalls for the first time in decades.  These training

deficiencies are being caused by worldwide deployments.  U.S. Air Force

active duty and reserve squadrons, for example, have experienced a re-

duction in training sorties of up to 25 percent.  This reduction is a direct

result of deployments in support of contingency operations over Iraq and

Bosnia.  Pilots are most proficient and able to fight when they are first

deployed to these areas.  As the deployment wears on, with little or no

training opportunities, pilot proficiency slips.  The same problem is oc-

curring in other combat arms as the trend to use U.S. forces in peace-

keeping roles accelerates.  Since conducting realistic training is impossi-

ble on most of these missions, simulators provide the only realistic

training alternative.  Unfortunately, most of the simulators in use today

are very expensive, are limited to single-crew training, and are not de-

ployable.
Emerging commercial simulation technology, however, may provide
a near-term solution to this military training problem.  Some fighter pilot

skills, for example, cannot be practiced in simulation, regardless of the

fidelity.  The most important (and perishable) skills, however, can be

honed by very-low-cost simulators.  The computer game 
Falcon 4.0
 is an
example of a commercial product that is shattering the fidelity threshold

and providing a model for very-low-cost simulation.  There are several

key components to 
Falcon 4.0
 that allow this type of breakthrough.  
Falcon
4.0 features ÒSIMNET-likeÓ networking protocols that create a large man-in-the-loop environment.  These features of 
Falcon 4.0
 provide the basic
building blocks for producing a simulator that will be low in cost and

deployable and that will provide pilots with team training opportunities.

In the near term this capability will be enhanced with the development of

commercial head-mounted displays and voice recognition systems.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D123DEFENSE MODELING AND
SIMULATION OFFICE
DOD Modeling and Simulation Overview and
Opportunities for Collaboration Between the
Defense and Entertainment Industries
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) is building a robust model-
ing and simulation (M&S) capability to evaluate weapons system require-ments and courses of actions; to reduce the time line, risk, and cost of

complex weapons system development; to conduct training; and for real-

istic mission rehearsal.  Part One of this paper provides a description of

the current and envisioned application of M&S in the training, analysis,

and acquisition support functional areas.  It also summarizes the plan

that is in place to help achieve DOD
Õs M&S vision.  Part Two is a list of
technology areas that DOD believes have a potential for collaborative

development with the entertainment industry.
PART ONE:
DOD MODELING AND SIMULATION OVERVIEW
Vision and Application
The foundation for the above set of DOD M&S capabilities will be the
development of a common technical framework to maximize interopera-

bility among simulations and the reuse of simulation components.  The

cornerstone of the common technical framework (CTF), the High-level

Architecture (HLA), has just been adopted as DOD-wide policy.  Togeth-

er with the other elements of the CTF, data standards, and a common

understanding (or conceptual model) of the real world, the HLA will

enable DOD to use and combine simulations in as-yet unimagined ways.

Establishment of a commercial standard will follow as applications

spread to training for natural disaster response, weather and crop fore-

casting, and a host of other business and social problems.
Common services and tools also will be  provided to simulation devel-
opers to further reduce the cost and time required to build high-fidelity

representations of real-world systems and processes.  Realistic simulations,

interacting with actual war-fighting systems, will enable combatants to re-

hearse missions and 
Òtrain as we fight.
Ó  Virtual prototypes developed in a
collaborative design environment using the new integrated product and

process development concept will be evaluated and perfected with the help

of real war fighters before physical realizations are ever constructed.  DOD
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124APPENDIX Dwill enforce recently approved policies and procedures for the verification,
validation, and accreditation of models and simulations to ensure accuracy,

thereby enhancing the credibility of simulation results.
The advanced M&S capability envisioned by DOD will be a rapidly
configured mix of computer simulations, actual war-fighting systems,

and weapons systems simulators geographically distributed and net-

worked and involving tens of thousands of entities to support training,

analysis, and acquisition.  Not only is there a desire to quickly scale the

size and mix of simulations, but DOD also is pursuing the capability

whereby both groups and  individuals can interact equally well with a

synthetic environment.  The major challenge in providing scalability, as

well as the group and individual experience, is achieving consistency

and coherence of both time and space.
Other areas of ongoing research in DOD that show promising results
are the accurate representation of human behavior, systems, and the nat-

ural environment (air, space, land, sea, weather, and battle effects).

DOD
Õs efforts are focused on just-in-time generation of integrated and
consistent environmental data to support realistic mission rehearsals any-
where in the world, including inaccessible or operationally dangerous

locations.   Investments in the rapid extraction of land and water surfac-

es, features existing on those surfaces, and features derived from ocean,

air, and space grided fields have begun to yield results.  The goal is to

develop a capability to generate feature-integrated surfaces that require

minimal editing and model-based software for feature extraction.

Achieving this will, for example, ensure that weather fronts that bring

rain or snow change the characteristics of the ground so that transit rate

is affected and the associated wind patterns move trees, create waves,

and alter dispersal patterns of smoke and dust.  The resulting realism

will add significantly to training, analysis, and acquisition.  These effects,

when coupled with dial-up capability to create custom correlated condi-

tions, can provide year-round training.
TrainingWarriors of every rank will use M&S to challenge their skills at the
tactical, operational, or strategic level through the use of realistic synthet-
ic environments for a full range of missions, to include peacekeeping and

providing humanitarian aide.  Huge exercises, combining forces from all

services in carefully planned combined operations, will engage in realis-

tic training without risking injury, environmental damage, or costly

equipment damage.  Simulation will enable leaders to train at scales not

possible in any arena short of full-scale combat operations, using weap-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D125ons that would be unsafe on conventional live ranges.  Simulation will be
used to evaluate the readiness of our armed forces as well.
The active duty and reserve components of all forces will be able to
operate together in synthetic environments without costly and time-con-

suming travel to live training grounds.  In computer-based training, both

the friendly and opposition forces, or computer-generated forces (CGFs),

are highly aggregated into large command echelons and carry out the or-

ders resulting from staff planning and decision making.  CGFs fall into two

categories:  (1) semiautomated forces (SAFs), which require some direct

human involvement to make tactical decisions and control the activities of

the aggregated force, and (2) automated forces, which are associated with

autonomous agent (AA) technology.  AAs are in early development phases

and will find extensive applications in M&S as the technology matures.
There is now a diverse and active interest throughout the DOD M&S
community, academia, and the software industry in the development of

CGFs and AAs.  The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is
sponsoring the development of Modular Semi-Automated Forces for the

Synthetic Theater of War program, which includes both intelligent forces

and command forces.   This effort also involves development of the com-

mand and control simulation interface language.  It is designed for com-

munications between and among simulated command entities, small

units, and virtual platforms.  The services, more specifically the Army
ÕsClose Combat Tactical Trainer program, is now developing opposing

forces and blue forces to be completed in 1997.  The British Ministry of

Defence also is developing similar capabilities using command agent
technology in a program called Command Agent Support for Unit Move-

ment Facility.  Academic and industrial interest in this technology has

led to the First International Conference on Autonomous Agents, which

will take place in Marina del Rey, California, on February 5-8, 1997.
AnalysisM&S will provide DOD with a powerful set of tools to systematically
analyze alternative force structures.  Analysts and planners will design
virtual joint forces, fight an imaginary foe, reconfigure the mix of forces,

and fight the battle numerous times in order to learn how best to shape

future task forces.  Not only will simulation shape future force structure,

but it will also be used to evaluate and optimize the course of action in

response to events that occur worldwide.
M&S representations will enable planners to design the most effec-
tive logistics pipelines to supply the warriors of the future, whether they

are facing conventional combat missions or operations other than war.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126APPENDIX DAcquisitionOperating in the same virtual environments, virtual prototypes will
enable acquisition executives to determine the right mix of system capa-
bility and affordability prior to entering production.  Fighting synthetic

battles repeatedly while inserting new systems or different components

will help determine the right investment and modernization strategy for

our future armed forces.  Models and simulations will reduce the time,

resources, and risks of the acquisition process and will increase the qual-

ity of the systems produced.
M&S will allow testers to create realistic test and evaluation proce-
dures without the expense and danger of live exercises.  
ÒDry runs
Ó of
live operational tests will minimize the risks to people, machines, and

testing ranges.
M&S will enhance information sharing among designers, manufac-
turers, logisticians, testers, and end users, shortening the system devel-

opment cycle and improving the Integrated Product Team development

processes.The DOD M&S Master Plan
The DOD M&S Master Plan (MSMP) is a corporate plan to achieve
DOD
Õs vision.  Its first objective is the establishment of a common techni-
cal framework, anchored by the HLA.  The HLA has been defined and

adopted as the standard simulation architecture for all DOD simulations.

Development continues on the other elements of the CTF, and DOD
Õsinvestment strategy for M&S is focused on achieving the vision.
The second objective of the MSMP is to provide timely and authorita-
tive representations of the natural environment.  To this end, Executive

Agents (EAs) have been established to coordinate development in their

respective areas of oceans, aerospace, and terrain.  EAs have also begun

to explore potential commercial marketplaces for their databases.
The remaining objectives address representation of systems, human
behavior, and establishing a robust infrastructure to meet the needs of

simulation developers and end users.  The infrastructure will include

resource repositories
Ñvirtual libraries
Ñand a help desk for users.
The final objective of the plan is to share the benefits of M&S.  DOD
must educate potential users about the benefits of employing M&S.  To that

end, an extensive study is under way to quantify objective data on the cost-

effectiveness and efficiency of M&S in training, analysis, and acquisition

applications throughout DOD.  Extensive anecdotal data exist, but no con-

certed effort to demonstrate the return on investment has been done.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D127PART TWO:
M&S TECHNOLOGY AREAS
Although the vision for M&S described previously is focused onmeeting the needs of the military, implementing the vision requires the
development and exploitation of technologies that also have application

to the entertainment industry.  The following partial list of technologies

was identified by members of the DOD M&S community as areas where

cooperative development with the entertainment industry will have the

greatest benefit to both communities.
Virtual Presence
Virtual presence is the subjective sense of being physically present in
one environment when actually present in another environment (Sheri-

dan, 1992).  Researchers in virtual reality (VR) have hypothesized the

importance of inducing a feeling of presence in  individuals experiencing

virtual environments if they are to perform their intended tasks effective-

ly.  Creating this sense of presence is not well understood at this time, but

among its potential benefits may be (1) providing the specific cues re-

quired for task performance, (2) motivation to perform to the best of

one
Õs abilities, and (3) providing an overall experience similar enough to
the real world that it effectively allows suspension of disbelief while at

the same time the synthetic environment elicits the conditioned or de-

sired response while in the real world.
Visual Stimulus
This is the primary means to foster presence in most of today
Õs simu-
lators.  However, because of an insufficient consideration of the impact of
granularity, texture, and style in graphics rendering, the inherent capa-

bility of the available hardware is not utilized to the greatest effect.  One

potential area of collaboration could be to investigate the concepts of

visual stimulus requirements and the various design approaches to im-

prove graphics-rendering devices to satisfy these requirements.
Hearing and 3D Sound
DOD has initiated numerous efforts to improve the production of 3D
sound techniques, but it has not yet been effectively used in military
simulations.  Providing more realistic sound to a synthetic environment

can have two potential benefits for training:  (1) providing more realistic
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128APPENDIX Dsound cues and (2) providing a more realistic aural environment that
enhances realism.
Olfactory Stimulus
Smell can contribute to task performance in certain situations and
can contribute to the full sense of presence in the synthetic environment.
There are certain distinctive smells that serve as cues for task initiation.

A smoldering electrical fire can be used to trigger certain concerns by

individuals participating in a training simulator.  In addition, smells such

as hydraulic fluid can enhance the synthetic environment to the extent of

creating a sense of enhanced danger.
Vibrotactile and Electrotactile Displays
Another sense that can be involved to create an enhanced syn-
thetic environment is touch and feel.  Current simulator design has
concentrated on moving the entire training platform while often ig-

noring the importance of surface temperature and vibration in creat-

ing a realistic environment.
Coherent Stimuli
One area that has not received much research is the required coherent
application of the above-listed stimulations to create an enhanced synthetic
environment.  Although each stimulation may be valid in isolation, the real

challenge is the correct level and intensity of combined stimulations.
Virtual Environment Representation
This area includes technologies that emphasize the representation of
individuals and the interactions among virtual and live participants in an
individual or group experience.
Representation of Human Figures
While methods are evolving  for creating computer-generated repre-
sentations of human figures that are anthropometrically valid, in general
these methods are computationally complex while at the same time stylish-

ly rigid.  Approaches for automated modeling of human figures that result

in more natural representations that are more computationally efficient is a

topic of great interest in a number of disciplines, including medicine.  The

need is to determine the minimum essential information required to pro-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D129vide a representation of human actions that are sufficiently realistic for both
communities.  Animation of human figures, including speech, running, and

facial expressions, still requires significant development.
Human Body Tracking
Research has begun on methods for tracking and capturing the mo-
tion of humans that support real-time interaction with both virtual and
constructive simulations.
Virtual Backgrounds
Creation of a full virtual environment requires generating the natural
and/or cultural features of the background in which the interaction takes
place.  Specific areas of research include automating the production of back-

ground environments and efficient representations in scalable databases.
Group/Team Interactions
Most of the research in virtual presence has been single person ori-
ented (e.g., head-mounted displays and tracking systems, hand and foot

controls).  DOD has a direct interest and experience in developing the

group or team training experience, which is also of interest to the enter-

tainment industry. DOD would like to enhance its capability for an entire

group to interact with a virtual environment and each other without the

need for unique individual hardware devices.
SUMMARY
The DOD vision is to apply M&S to the full range of military applica-
tions, including training, analysis, and acquisition.  The vision can only

be met if the technology defined above is readily available, of low cost,

and operationally valid.  It is the desire of DOD to explore technologies

with the entertainment industry that are relevant to modeling and simu-

lation.  These technologies may include animation, graphical imaging,

data communication and storage, architectures, and human immersion.

DOD believes research in collaboration with the entertainment industry

will provide mutual benefit to both communities.
REFERENCESheridan, T.B.  1992.  
Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control.
  MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130APPENDIX DJAMES FORAN
Nintendo 64, the first truly interactive three-dimensional video game
machine, provides a level of experiences that has not generally been avail-
able outside the traditional simulation and training community.  It does

so at a price point that allows virtually every household to own one.  The

implications of the technology embedded in the machine for all types of

training and simulation are tremendous. Not only does it provide a low-

cost ubiquitous platform, but it also portends a future where even more

powerful and realistic machines will be pervasive.
Silicon Graphics, relying on 15 years of experience, was able to uti-
lize state-of-the-art semiconductor technology to achieve a low-cost, high-
performance, high-volume product for Nintendo.  The chips utilized were

among the first logic chips to be produced using 0.35-micron technology.

This represents a fundamental change in the way technology is driven.

In the past, advanced technologies were first used to produce low-vol-

ume, high-cost systems principally for military use.  These seed applica-

tions provided the opportunity to make the technology viable economi-

cally.  Over time the technology moved down in product price point

until eventually it appeared in consumer devices.
All of this has now changed.  Today, with fabrication facilities cost-
ing over $1 billion, large-scale markets must exist to justify the expense of

construction.  Although DRAM [dynamic random access memory] has

long been the primary justification for new fabrications, the cyclical na-

ture of demand requires that other applications need to exist to balance

capacity utilization.  Video games are the largest market for consumption

of advanced semiconductor technologies; their public acceptance is or-

ders of magnitude higher than that of traditional computer products.  In

its first six months, 2.7 million units are expected to be sold, increasing to

a total of 5 million within the first nine months.
In the video game market it is possible to get an advanced product
like this out at a price point that is acceptable to the consumer only be-

cause it is possible to subsidize hardware with software. The hardware is

brought to market with a very low margin throughout the chain from

manufacture to distribution.  Much like a CD player, the box has no

intrinsic value to the consumer; it is simply a necessary expense in order

to enjoy the game.  Over the product life it is typical for each platform to

average 10 games.  This provides the return on investment to the manu-

facturer as well as a living for the content providers.
This is a great development for kids who want to play games, but
what implications does it have for other markets?  It is instructive to look

at some of the similarities to the requirements that are traditionally asso-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D131ciated with the military market.  Typical military programs have stressed
advanced technology.  After all, competitiveness is the cornerstone of

any military development.  The video game business is a war for the

consumer pocketbook.  Because  of the requirement for competitive ad-

vantage, both applications are up-front and capital intensive.  Long-term

product stability also is important for both markets.  In this respect, vid-

eo games are unusual for a consumer product.  Each hardware unit in the

field must play every game cartridge the same as every other machine.

Maintenance of the design for a 10-year period is accepted.
So we can see that there are many characteristics of video game hard-
ware that match up with typical military requirements.  How could this

type of hardware be put to use?  In the field of training and simulation

the military has long led the way.  With increasing sophistication of weap-
onry and the political sensitivities associated with the type of actions

encountered in today
Õs world, military preparedness is more necessary
than ever.  Simulation also provides the cost-effectiveness required by

today
Õs budget realities.  Nevertheless, practical training equipment, al-
though decreasing in price, has not yet become ubiquitous.  This type of

video game platform now makes that possible.
The question before this group is, How can the military take advantage
of this commercially developed technology?  One immediate answer is that

training cartridges can be developed for the actual home game platform.

This requires the setting up of some sort of development rights with the

game platform manufacturer.  This is actually a very practical method for

training applications where the home game hardware is sufficient to achieve
the training objective.  In the case where input devices must be similar to

actual operational hardware or where systems must be embedded into op-

erational equipment, one must go beyond the box available at the toy store.
Some of these requirements can be met by physically reconfiguring
the hardware and developing the appropriate accessories.  In other cases,

where requirements may exceed the capabilities of the home game box,

more powerful systems can be built utilizing the same components.
Generally, a semiconductor process yields a speed range of parts that
can vary in horsepower by 50 percent or more.  In the case of a product

like Nintendo64, because of the requirement for high volume and low

cost, all devices must work in the target system.  This means that through

speed grading much more powerful components can be obtained.  By

using these components and more robust system configurations it is pos-

sible to satisfy more demanding requirements.  Since the semiconductor

process used to manufacture these state-of-the-art devices is itself quite

new, it is a natural that as the process matures a shift of yield to higher-

speed parts will result.  This is a quite common phenomenon in the
DRAM business.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132APPENDIX DSo what is the issue that prevents this type of technology from being
utilized by the military?  The military can accomplish tremendous
projects during times of war or national emergency, but during peace

time the design and procurement cycle moves at a snail
Õs pace.  I recently
talked to a customer
Ña military system integrator
Ñabout designing a
graphic function for use in a new vehicle.  He was concerned that he

might prototype with something that would not be cost-effective in im-

plementation.  I asked him:  
ÒWell, how far out is production?
Ó  The
answer was that production would start in six to seven years.  I told him

there wasn
Õt anything on Earth with regard to electronics that would not
be cost-effective in six years if it exists today.
How can the military deal with this situation?
1.  
It can think long term.
  We have to have a vision of what kind of
technology we will want to be using 5 to 10 years from now.  We have to
be practical.  There are far too many 
Òfuturists
Ó on the speaking circuit
whose ideas are either too far out in time or lack any understanding of

the infrastructure required to provide a whole solution.  Nevertheless, a

long-term vision is a necessity.
2.  
It can focus.
  Focus on specific objectives of large scale.  This pro-
vides volume, which is necessary to entice companies to commit resourc-

es.  However, don
Õt get trapped into trying to define a universal device
that meets all needs for everyone.  The desired product must be simple to

describe and easily understood by everyone involved.
3.  
It can make commitments.
  No company with shareholders is going
to make a major investment of its resources for something that might

happen.  The military must realize that despite everyone
Õs good inten-
tions some of these commitments will result in failure.  Monitoring of

progress and conditions is required, but this needs to be at arm
Õs length.
4.  
It can cut the red tape.  Companies need to be able to do what is
business as usual to them.  Requirements need to be clearly communicat-

ed and feasibility agreed.  After that, get out of the way and focus on

results rather than procedures.
5.  
It can put the infrastructure in place.
  No solution will succeed unless
the proper infrastructure is put in place on the customer side.  There needs

to be honesty in the assessment of how fast infrastructure changes can be

accomplished, and these must mesh with the time scale of the project.
In closing, there is no limit to where technology can go.  The limits lie in
our ability to apply technology.  The reason that entertainment markets are

able to apply technology successfully is that major commitments are made

for specific focused objectives of large magnitude.  This provides lucrative

opportunities for technology companies to provide new solutions.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D133JOHN GEDDES
Collaborative Challenges:
Understanding Cultural Differences
There is a broad cultural chasm between the U.S. Department of De-
fense (DOD) and the entertainment/computer industry.  This chasm can
present a serious obstacle to successful collaboration.  Processes and atti-

tudes will have to be created or modified if collaboration is going to

succeed between the two groups.
In the context of modeling and simulation, DOD can be characterized
by varied and often competing interests, funding that is renewed annual-

ly, and extremely hierarchical and time-consuming approval and review

processes.¥Varied and competing interests.
  Three domains of simulation com-
peting for funding (ACR, RDA, TEMO); uncertainty and competition be-

tween DARPA, RDECs, STRICOM, and major commands like SSDC for

primacy in development and program management of new simulation

activities.
¥Funding uncertainty.
  Annual budget processes, effects of changingmilitary and civilian leadership on priorities; for example, Army Model-

ing and Simulation organizations (MISMA, AMSO, DUSA/OR, M&S

GOWG) and National Rotorcraft Technology Center funding profile.
¥Need for coordination across commands and agencies
 to get approval
and requirements for periodic reviews at multiple levels; examples in

ACTD processes, Soldier System development.  Long duration of

projects
Ñone year to get consensus, two years until funding; examples in
Louisiana Maneuvers, Battlefield Visualization.
In comparison, the commercial entertainment/computer industry canbe characterized by short project horizons, more stable funding, relative-

ly flat heirarchies for approval, and more informal and spontaneous re-

view processes.
¥Product horizons are one to three years from concept to product
on the shelf; an example is the Nintendo 64.
¥Once a company approves a project for development and produc-
tion, funding is programmed and maintained generally for the duration

of the effort and is not subject to the whims of elected representatives.
¥Flatter hierarchies and more informal reviews, resulting from total
quality management or reengineering and closer scrutiny of value-added

functions; less internal regulation.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134APPENDIX DRecommendations for successful collaboration:
1.  Create an advisory board with power to sponsor and recommend
collaborative and cooperative efforts.  Publish annual report with posi-
tive results and with opportunities that were neglected.  Include lessons

learned about positive and negative collaborative results.
2.  Exchange liaisons.  Create positions that are geographically proxi-
mate for providing effective coordination and for seeking opportunitiesÑa few that work for advisory board, more that work for specific partici-

pants, both DOD and non-DOD.
3.  Allow decisions at the lowest levels.  Minimize hierarchical re-
views.  Nonproductive time for most participants.  Use advisory board

liaisons.4.  Understand and use existing cooperative mechanisms
Ñcoopera-
tive research and development agreements, cooperative agreements, and

other transactions.  Involve a congressional staff in advisory panel to

help shape future mechanisms.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D135MARTIN GUNDERSEN
Advanced modeling and simulations for games, entertainment, manu-
facturing, education, the U.S. Department of Defense, finance, and other
applications will grow with the development of integrated media systems

incorporating software and hardware development at many levels.  Inte-

grated media systems will powerfully impact all fields of inquiry and tech-

nology.  Integrated media systems of the future will seamlessly combine

digital video, digital audio, computer animation, text, and graphics into

common displays in such a way as to allow for mixed media creation, dis-

semination, and interactive access in real time.  Prodigious national and

international resources are currently being marshaled for integrated media

technologies
Õ research, development, infrastructure installation, product cre-
ation and commercialization, public performance, and training.  According

to a recent projection, multimedia and creative technologies will represent a

new total market of $40 billion by the year 2000 and $65 billion by the year

2010.
The beckoning opportunity is to accelerate progress in this new disci-
pline by revolutionizing our access to information sources, easing the

effort required to author original works, and transforming our capacity

to augment and enhance the productivity of human creative endeavors.

The corresponding challenge is to first recognize the impact of these dra-

matic changes on the very nature of our teaching tools, manufacturing

methods, defense systems, health care systems, and entertainment/art

forms and to then exert sufficient positive leadership to assure maximum

benefit.  At the University of Southern California we are pursuing a large-
scale program that is relevant to the goals of utilizing entertainment-

oriented technology. We have established a Center for Integrated Media

Systems, which is directed by Max Nikias, for research, development,

and teaching in advanced systems for multimedia applications, includ-

ing entertainment.  This research has recently received one of four Engi-

neering Research Center awards this year from the National Science

Foundation, the proposal ranking first out of 117 proposals.
There are three major areas of importance with opportunities for re-
search and development: interfaces, communications, and databases.

These are discussed below.  The next generation of integrated media sys-

tems in the augmented reality, interactive multimedia, heterogeneous
computing, distributed database, wireless communication, and high-

speed network environments will impact every facet of our lives.  Access

to a wealth of diverse and distributed information resources will be pos-

sible from within an individualized 
Òinformation framework.
Ó  Interac-
tive media will enable new paradigms for education, training, manufac-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136APPENDIX Dturing, and entertainment that provide worlds
Ñreal, augmented, and
fantasy
Ñfor people to experience, learn through, and interact with.  De-
sign-based industries will develop products through virtual design sys-
tems that integrate software applications and manage both the design

process and the design data, as well as incorporate input from intended

consumers, designers, production engineers, quality assurance and qual-

ity control specialists, cost analysts, and manufacturing engineers.
CREATOR-COMPUTER-CONSUMER INTERFACES
Computer interfaces are unidirectional and inefficient.  A significant
bottleneck has emerged at the creator-computer and computer-consumer

interfaces owing to an increasing mismatch between computational and

display power, on the one hand, and human-computer input/output (I/

O) on the other.  Simply put, highly visually and aurally oriented human

beings are constrained to interact with an assistant that cannot see, hear,

or speak. The human-computer interface has evolved over four decades

from plug boards, lights, punch cards, and text printers to postscript la-

ser printers, mouse-based window systems, and primitive head-mount-

ed displays.  The trend has clearly been toward interaction modes that

are more intuitive, enabling people to communicate more effectively to

and through computer systems.  Today, enhanced video and audio capa-

bilities fuel the explosive success of both multimedia-equipped studio-

grade workstations (the creator-computer interface) and personal com-

puters (the computer-consumer interface), as particularly evidenced by

the trend toward truly interactive media applications.
Technological advances in the area of human-computer interfaces
are necessary to achieve a new level of even richer and more percep-

tive interfaces that are characterized by the 
immersion
 of the user/
participant in highly communicative multisensory interactions.  These

advances must span both visual and aural interface technologies.  In-

put to the computer can be enhanced by means of 
smart cameras
 for
environmental awareness and expression recognition and with 
robust
speech recognition
 for extended natural language interactions.  
Immer-
sivision
 methods for panoramic scene reprojection and novel ap-
proaches to 
three-dimensional (3D) displays
 enrich the presentation of
graphic output.  The computerÕs sense of the environment is enhancedthrough smart-camera-based 
tracking technology
, which in turn is piv-
otal for both 
augmented reality applications
 and the synthesis of an ac-
curate 3D aural environment through 
immersive sound reproduction
.Furthermore, the coupling of these technologies with advances in
wireless networks and distributed databases will allow the integra-

tion of mobile workstations (personal data assistants) with tracked
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D137head-up displays for application in augmented office, classroom, fac-
tory, and cockpit environments.
MEDIA INTERCONNECTION AND DELIVERY FABRICS
Real-time distribution and storage of multimedia information is expen-
sive.  Even with compression, which can only be employed in certain appli-

cations, digital video and audio can consume large portions of database

storage and network bandwidth.  Access to even currently available net-

work bandwidth is limited by workstation I/O design bottlenecks.  A need

therefore exists for both high-bandwidth interconnections and interfaces

and real-time artifact-free compression and decompression algorithms.
Over the past decade, user demands on networks and databases haveescalated from the bandwidth and storage requirements characteristic of

text to those characteristic of both images and real-time production-qual-

ity video and audio.  As integrated media systems evolve to incorporate

the advanced interfaces described above, they will impose even greater

demands on high-speed wired and wireless communications networks.

These enhanced visual and aural interfaces, as well as real-time digital

video servers, integrated media databases, and distributed processing

systems will require the effective and efficient image and data compres-

sion methods, multi-gigabit-per-second (Gbps) fiber-optic networks, and

high-bandwidth wireless networks developed in this thrust.  Two cases

illustrate how the need for such delivery fabrics arises depending on the

number of connected users.  In todayÕs manufacturing environments withhundreds of untethered workers, or in video-on-demand networks with

thousands of consumers, each person requires on the order of 20 Mbps of

bandwidth over wireless or wired networks to receive compressed video

and graphics.  On the other hand, in today
Õs video production environ-
ment with dozens of users, each requires about 270 Mbps for D1 digital

video.  A shared network is an efficient means for distributing data in

both of these cases.  One challenge for such a system with multi-Gbps (2

to 50 Gbps) aggregate throughput is to seamlessly support multiple data

types such as D1, MPEG, text, and graphics.  In addition, the interconnec-

tion and delivery fabric must be capable of satisfying future standards,

such as video quality that is significantly superior to that of D1 or high-

definition television.  The research challenge in this area is focused on the

development of technologies for shared integrated media networks.
DISTRIBUTED MULTIMEDIA INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
An effective methodology for managing large integrated media data-
bases does not exist.  Integrated media databases of the future will con-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138APPENDIX Dtain terabytes of information.  Information relevant to a given need will
likely reside in a collection of interconnected heterogeneous and distrib-

uted knowledge bases.  Techniques for locally organizing, browsing, dis-

covering, and querying such integrated media repositories are needed.

Furthermore, many applications demand seamless synchronous access to

multiple audio and video threads from distributed digital databases, a

capability that does not currently exist.
Advanced human-computer interfaces and enhanced wired and wire-less media interconnection and delivery networks cannot function effec-

tively without access to dramatically scaled-up databases that can seam-

lessly manage multiple media types.  Hence, the central integrated

media-systems-related issue that must be addressed during the next de-

cade is the storage, indexing, structuring, manipulating, and 
Òdiscovery
Óof integrated multimedia information units (MIUs) that include struc-

tured data values (strings and numbers), text, images, audio, and video.

The key research focus in this area centers on managing multimedia in-

formation units in the context of a highly distributed and interconnected

network of information collections and repositories.  Current data and

knowledge management technology that addresses collections of format-

ted data and text is inadequate to meet the needs of video and audio

information, as well as the mixture of modalities in MIUs.  Furthermore,

the highly distributed and interconnected nature of the emerging infor-

mation superhighway accentuates the need for techniques that enable

multimedia information sharing.  The research challenge in this area in-

volves the development of mechanisms that address four critical aspects

of distributed multimedia information management:  (1) multimedia in-

formation content representation and extraction; (2) multimedia database

networking: discovery, filtering, query, sharing; (3) storage of and access

to continuous media data types; and (4) visual presentation of informa-

tion across cultures.
We are developing collaborations with other efforts, including relat-
ed research activity at Howard University and the University of South

Carolina.  The South Carolina program has initiated development of a

Òvirtual testbed,
Ó which is a top-down, mission-oriented approach em-
phasizing simulation of complete electrical systems on U.S. Navy ships

using advanced visualization techniques.  This program is under the di-

rection of Professor Roger Dougal.
At the University of Southern California we have developed an
industrial partnership with over 50 companies that are literally a
cross-section of industry working to develop and apply the new tech-

nology.  In entertainment we have formed a panel of entertainment

professionals who will foster collaboration with the Hollywood in-

dustry that will be strongly impacted by multimedia simulations and
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D139modeling.  The professionals are a cross-section of the industry, in-
cluding actors, directors, film editors, audio engineers, computer net-

work experts, writers, and others, including investors.  Over the next

few years we will be working to provide an academic venue for this

technology to be researched, viewed, and understood, with emphasis

on entertainment applications.  The panel on entertainment applica-

tions will be meeting with industrial partners of the center at USC in

a review that will occur in November of 1996.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140APPENDIX DWILL HARVEY
The Future of Internet Games
Latency is a major barrier to fast-action Internet games.  Game devel-
opers can either hope the problem goes away or adopt new game archi-
tectures that work around it.  There is compelling evidence that the prob-

lem will never go away and that the hardware will never improve to the

point that developers can afford to treat the Internet like a local area

network (LAN).  Sandcastle offers an alternative, a software solution that

enables fast-action Internet games.
High latency is incompatible with the client/server and lockstep de-
signs that current LAN games use.  A response time of 33 milliseconds

(ms) has been the industry standard for over 20 years, and even with

premium on-line services, Internet performance is nowhere near that lev-

el.  In fact, it 
cannot
 reach that level.  In fiber, light takes 54 ms to travel
roundtrip between New York and San Francisco.  Networking experts

agree that the Internet
Õs latency will plateau between 100 and 130 ms
cross country (Figure D.1).
Fast-action client/server and lockstep games are no fun at this speed.
A player trying to dodge a bullet will feel either frustrated, because the

response time is too slow for him to dodge, or cheated, because the pro-

gram displays his character such that it appears he has dodged when he

has not.  Punches a player could land will miss; opponents a player could

tackle will evade.  Without responsiveness, fast-action games are not fun.
THE SHIFT TO DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING
The solution is to move to a distributed architecture.  In a distributed
game, each player controls a character on his local machine, so it re-

sponds to his actions instantly, with no latency.  The new challenge is

then to synchronize the game state on all the machines and to coordinate

interactions among objects that different players control.
In Figure D.2 the big circle is a server or multicast router in a build-
ing.  The small circles are machines in people
Õs homes.  X, Y, and Z
represent objects controlled by users from their own homes.  Proxies not

shown in these figures display the objects on every machine.  The X, Y,

and Z letters represent the point of control of each object.
In the lockstep architecture, each machine broadcasts its user input
to the other machines and advances one simulation cycle when it has

received a complete set of user input from all participating machines.

Since advancing a cycle requires complete exchange of user input, the

responsiveness is limited by the speed of the worst communications la-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D141tency of any machine.  In the client/server architecture, each machine
independently sends its user input or action request to the server in order

to perform an action in the simulation.  Controlling an object from a

client machine still entails a roundtrip delay, but the responsiveness of

any individual client machine is not affected by the communications
speed of the other machines.  In a distributed architecture, machines con-

trol objects locally and broadcast the results of actions to other machines,

which receive the information with some time delay.  Each machine has

immediate responsiveness controlling its own objects but must synchro-

nize interactions between its own objects and objects controlled by re-

mote machines.
In both the lockstep and client/server architectures, responsiveness
is limited by the roundtrip communication latency to the server, which

will always be too long for fast-action games.  Controlling objects locally

and synchronizing interactions between them is the only solution.  The

shift from a central architecture to a distributed architecture transforms

the latency problem into a synchronization problem.
FIGURE D.2
FIGURE D.1
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142APPENDIX DSOLVING THE SYNCHRONIZATION PROBLEM
Methods of solving the latency and synchronization problems fall
into three categories, represented in Table D.1.
At the lowest level, the first approach attempts to improve the speed
of the network to reduce the latency problem by brute force, instead of
adopting a distributed architecture.  This approach will always have slow

reactions because of the speed of light and network overhead, so it will

be limited to domains like Quake, where players don
Õt have a true oppor-
tunity to dodge bullets.
The second approach follows a software technology called distribut-
ed interactive simulation developed for military simulations.  This ap-

proach accommodates the delay in which information is received from

other participants by 
Òdead-reckoning
Ó or predicting the actions of the
other participants to bring all objects displayed on a machine into the

same time frame.  Because predicting only works for predictable and

continuously moving objects, such as planes and tanks, it does not apply

to domains of rich human interaction like playing Nintendo
Õs Mario 64
or playing catch with a ball over the Internet.
The third approach, synchronization, leverages off of the other two
technologies, but more importantly it picks up where the other technolo-

gies reach their fundamental limitations.  Information from remote ma-

chines will 
always
 be received with a time delay, and many actions 
cannot
be predicted.  Thus, remote objects 
must
 be shown in time delay.  If a user
has no interactions with remote objects, he cannot tell that he is seeing

those objects 
Òin the past
Ó; but if he does interact with them, those inter-
TABLE D.1EnablesGunsPlanes, tanksPicking upan object,catching aballLimitationsSlowreactionsLimited topredictabledomainsLatency
150 ms0 msperceived0 msperceivedTechnologyPremiumserviceDIS andderivativesSandcastleDescriptionImprove networkÑtoreduce discrepancybetween time framesDead-reckonÑtopretend objects are inthe same time frame bypredicting their
positionsSynchronizeÑinteractions betweenobjects in different timeframesModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D143actions must accommodate the time difference.  Synchronization technol-
ogies are a set of software networking components that enable interac-

tions between objects in different time frames.
SANDCASTLEÕS DIRECTION
Sandcastle is developing synchronization technologies that give us-
ers the impression that the network has zero latency, or immediate re-

sponsiveness.  Specifically, the technologies address the problems of in-

teracting with shared objects, like throwing a football between users, and

interacting directly with objects controlled by remote machines, as in a

fighting game or a race.
Our view is that the latency problems of central processing are fun-
damental.  Over time, the demands for high responsiveness will drive an

inevitable shift in programming paradigms from central processing to

distributed processing.  As this shift occurs, the technologies and tools

that address the critical problems of real-time distributed applications

will become increasingly important.  We believe that these contributions

are the beginnings of a foundation not just for games and chat environ-

ments but for all of twenty-first century interactive entertainment.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144APPENDIX DROBERT JACOBS
As the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of
the National Research Council assesses research priorities for defense
and entertainment simulation, it must be mindful of the significant dif-

ferences in objectives, risk and reward environment, and business tradi-

tions and customs, especially with respect to proprietary intellectual

property, that characterize these two simulation industries.
Defense simulation programs focus on the solution of problems, the
production of operational skills through training, the support of combat

development test and evaluation, or the resolution of complex engineering

optimization questions as a part of design and development.  How well a

defense simulation achieves its mission is usually determined by how its

designers tailor the technology to address the problem of interest.  Enter-

tainment simulations, on the other hand, are a medium for the delivery of

recreational experiences; the measure of success is not a matter of problem

solution or production of information or skill but rather is determined large-
ly by how exciting and enjoyable the experience is for the paying customer.

The 
Òfun quotient
Ó of an entertainment simulation is predominantly a mat-
ter of art rather than technology;  the technical side of the system must be

capable of presenting the 
Òstory,
Ó but the perceived value of the experience
hinges largely on the quality of the creative element.
Defense simulations are developed to a specification that defines the
nature of the virtual world and the expectations of the customer for be-

haviors to be executed within it.  As long as the product meets the speci-

fication, the development is deemed a success.  Developers are compen-

sated on the basis of their development cost plus a modest margin whose

magnitude is negotiated in accordance with guidelines reflecting wheth-

er the customer or the developer takes on the development risk.  There is

no end-user specification to be met for an entertainment simulation.  The

developer must identify a market need, formulate a creative concept that

addresses that need, and then back his intuition by investing his own

money to field the concept.  Maybe the marketplace will accept the con-

cept; maybe it will reject it.  For the most part, the market has been disap-

pointed to date.  If the simulation sells, it is priced in accordance with

what the market will bear in view of competition, useful economic life,

perceived value, return on investment, and so forth.  What the market

will bear may or may not be enough to recover development costs and to

realize an attractive margin.
When the government contracts for research and development, both
the client and the contractor generally acknowledge that the product of

the effort belongs at least in part to the client.  In the best case (from the
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D145contractor
Õs point of view), the developer may share in the right to future
exploitation of what is produced; however, the government belongs to all
of us, and the government
Õs equity in the ideas and technology is part of
the public domain.  In the entertainment world, proprietary intellectual

property is the principal stock in trade, and ownership of the right to

future exploitation is the primary asset resulting from the investment in a

project.  The customer buys the right to exhibit the product but never the

right to the underlying proprietary intellectual property.  Technological

and creative innovations are important contributors to the asset value of

the enterprise.  To the extent that they can be protected, they will not be

willingly given away.
WHERE IS IT ALL GOING?
These contrasts, particularly the last point, create an interesting
challenge for the CSTB in its quest to encourage open collaboration

between defense and entertainment simulation developers.  There is

such a difference in the operational norms between these two indus-

try segments that the resulting cultural barrier has been successfully

breeched in only very few instances.  One might expect that there

also is a divergence of views as to how the industry and its technolo-

gy will evolve in the coming decade.
On the defense side, the next few years will see continuing efforts to
develop and disseminate technologies for more effective application of

simulations to military and civil problems.  These will include:
¥Increased emphasis on large-scale simulations of military activity
at the joint and coalition levels.
¥Increased dependence on simulation technology to offset cuts in
OpTempo, to conduct distributed planning and rehearsal, and to provide

visualization for distributed command and control.
¥Increased ubiquity of simulation, so that players will be able to
join distributed virtual activities from any place and at any time.
¥Increased capability for scalability
Ñfrom combat theater to foxhole
Ñwith appropriate level of detail to support activity at either extreme.
¥Improved ability to represent the behaviors of forces by computer-
driven virtual entities to include complex concept formulation, planning,

and reasoning activities in addition to simple drills.
¥Increased availability of communication bandwidth to accommo-
date more simultaneous players, accommodate demand for more tightly

coupled and reactive simulation processes, to realistically stress players,

and to realistically simulate 
Òfast
Ó processes.
¥Increased availability of tools for economical 
Òrapid prototyping.
ÓModeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146APPENDIX DIn the entertainment simulation world, return on investment is a key
consideration.  Research and development will focus on achieving value
in the perception of the end customer.  The need to impress end custom-

ers whose experience base is grounded in television and the real world

will focus the competition at the highest levels of fidelity consistent with

economic pricing.  Pressure will continue to increase the performance

and reduce the cost of leading-edge technologies so that each new gener-

ation of a product stimulates new demand and creates a competitive edge
over its predecessor.
A conflict can be expected to develop between advocates of open stan-
dards and guardians of proprietary intellectual property.  The substantial

barrier to entry represented by development investment and the reduction

of same that common standards promote will be cited by both groups as

justification for promoting or avoiding the adoption of technologies com-

mon to competitive development teams.  Ultimately, competition will refo-

cus on the creative aspects of entertainment simulations, as developers real-

ize that economy and speed in bringing an idea to market are greater factors
in economic success than proprietary technology.
Entertainment developers suffer an approach-avoidance conflict overthe accelerating pace of technological innovations, both because of the

diminishing economic half-life of a development investment and the cha-

os in the competitive environment that the continuing avalanche of new

capabilities will create.  Even savvy buyers will become dizzy and indeci-

sive as great products are eclipsed by pending spectacular ones.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
What are some of the research priorities that will fuel the evolution
suggested here?  (1) Continuing geometric advancement in computing

power, especially in the special-purpose hardware that creates imagery,

with an accompanying dramatic reduction in price per performance.  We

can look ahead to the availability of photorealistic interactive systems at

a price affordable by every household
Ñe.g., the cost of a television set.
(2) Dramatic improvements in the capability to display virtual environ-

ments to human senses:  very-high-resolution visual displays; true spa-

tial sound; and tactile displays that communicate surface qualities (fric-

tion), resilience, and thermal characteristics (heat capacity).
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D147TRACI A. JONES
There has recently been an increased focus on simulating and model-
ing the individual soldier within the synthetic, or virtual, battlefield.   TheU.S. Department of Defense (DOD) has approved a Defense Technology

Objective (DTO) for Individual  Combatant Simulation (ICS).  The ICS

DTO is currently supported by an Army Science and Technology Objec-

tive (STO) for ICS.  This is a joint STO between the Simulation, Training

and  Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) and the Army Research Lab-
oratory, coordinated with the Natick Research and Engineering Director-

ate.  The program intends to procure and demonstrate technologies for

creating real-time simulations to immerse the individual soldier and al-

low for interaction in a synthetic environment.  The cost-effectiveness of

networked virtual reality devices will be determined using a multisite

distributed laboratory consistent with DODÕs High-level Architecture.The STRICOM Engineering Directorate is working closely with the

Project Manager for Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) on the Dis-

mounted Warrior Network project, which will take advantage of several

technology-based efforts to provide an engineering proof of principle for

immersing an individual into a synthetic environment.
The products that will evolve within DOD include the definition of a
systems architecture to support the requirements for ICS as well as plat-

forms and simulations that will support low-cost capabilities for mission

rehearsal, materiel development, and training of individual soldiers and

marines.  There also is potential application of these technologies to train-

ing and rehearsal for the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the law

enforcement industry.
The technological advances required and the technological challeng-
es include low-cost solutions for:
¥Visualization of human articulation in real-time networked envi-
ronments,
¥High-fidelity fully immersive systems,
¥Interoperability between different fidelity simulators,
¥Expansion of computer-generated forces for intelligent individual
soldier interaction and decision making,
¥Integration of high-resolution terrain databases with immersive
simulations instrumentation of the individual for high-precision engage-

ment data collection capability within buildings,
¥Rapidly generated terrain databases to support mission planning
and rehearsal while en route to a conflict, and
¥Accurate simulation of weapons systems in real-time computer-
generated environments.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148APPENDIX DRegarding complementary efforts in the entertainment or defense sec-
tors that might be applicable to my own interests, I am aware of the motion-
capture techniques used by the entertainment industry, primarily for game

development and motion picture special effects.  One such product is being

used for the STRICOM Dismounted Soldier Simulation (DSS) system, un-

der contract to Veda Inc.  DSS uses a wireless optical tracking system devel-

oped by the Biomechanics Corporation for Acclaim Entertainment.  The

technology has been integrated into a real-time DIS environment.  The un-

tethered soldier, outfitted with a set of optical markers and wireless helmet-

mounted display, moves about freely in a real-world motion-capture area,

while position and orientation data are gathered and sent to a DIS network

via tracking cameras and image-processing computers.  Fully articulated

human motion rotations and translations are sent out to the DIS network

using entity state and data protocol data units.  Issues such as network

bandwidth limitation and system latency have been analyzed.
Other potential products being developed by STRICOM have appli-
cation to the entertainment industry.  The Omni-Directional Treadmill is

an example of a locomotion simulator that allows an individual to walk

and run in a virtual world.  As the user moves on the treadmill, his view

of the computer-generated world changes, immersing him into the virtu-

al environment.  The Army may use this technology, for example, to

rehearse for a mission by walking through a hostile environment before-

hand.  It is anticipated that additional technologies developed by the

entertainment industry can be leveraged to  support DOD requirements

for individual combatant simulation.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D149EUGENIA M. KOLASINSKI
Predicted Evolution of Virtual Reality
As this report indicates, virtual reality (VR) technology has many
promising applications in both the simulation and entertainment arenas.
VR technology is already being used for simulation, and, as the cost de-

creases, its many potential applications will likely lead to widespread use

of VR, especially in the home for entertainment.
NECESSARY TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES AND
PRIMARY RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Unfortunately, a phenomenon exists that may pose a threat to the
ultimate usability of this new technology.  That phenomenon is referred

to as 
Òsimulator sickness
Ó and it is a well-documented effect of simulatorexposure (Reason and Brand, 1975; Kennedy and Frank, 1983; Kennedy
et al., 1989; Casali, 1986).  Simulator sickness is similar to motion sickness
but can occur without actual physical motion.  The cardinal signs resem-

ble those of motion sickness: vomiting, nausea, pallor, and cold sweating.

Other symptoms include drowsiness, confusion, difficulty concentrating,
fullness of head, blurred vision, and eye strain.  Along with the potential
discomfort to the individual, there are several operational consequences
of simulator sickness:  decreased simulator use, compromised training,

and ground and flight safety (Crowley, 1987).  There are additional ef-
fects of simulator exposure:  delayed flashbacks and aftereffects (a sud-

den onset of symptoms) (Baltzley et al., 1989); shifts in dark focus (the
physiological resting position of accommodation) (Fowlkes et al., 1993);
eye strain (Mon-Williams et al., 1993); and performance changes

(Kennedy et al., 1993).
One potentially critical effect of simulator exposure is postural dise-
quilibrium, referred to as 
ataxia.
  Baltzley et al. (1989) suggested that
unsteadiness and ataxia are the greatest threats to safety because there

have been reports of such posteffects lasting longer than 6 hours and, in

some cases, longer than 12 hours.  Clearly, occurrence of ataxia has the

potential for disastrous consequences.
Recent research (Kolasinski, 1996; Knerr et al., 1993; Regan, 1993) has
documented that simulator sickness can also occur in conjunction with

VR exposure.  The potential consequences of such sickness
Ñparticularly
with widespread use of VR technology
Ñraise important safety and legal
issues for both manufacturers and users alike.  Thus, simulator sickness

(including effects such as ataxia) as it occurs with VR exposure must be

understood if the technology is to make its predicted progress over the
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150APPENDIX Dnext decade.  To meet this goal, the primary research challenges will be
to thoroughly investigate the phenomenon.
Fortunately, simulator sickness in a virtual environment (VE)ÑorÒcybersickness,
Ó as it is called
Ñneed not be regarded as an entirely new
phenomenon.  As already noted, simulator sickness is related to motion

sickness, a phenomenon for which a body of literature exists (Reason and

Brand, 1975).  In addition, a body of literature exists for simulator sick-

ness occurring in military flight simulators and, to a lesser degree, other

simulators such as driving simulators (Crampton, 1990).  Thus, VR re-

searchers need not entirely reinvent the wheel but can and should draw

on the existing literature, at least in the initial stages of investigation.
Much of the sickness literature that may be applicable to VEs is re-
viewed by Kolasinski (1995).  In this report, three major categories of

factors that may be related to simulator sickness as it occurs in a VE were

identified:  factors related to the individual using the system, factors re-

lated to the task performed in the VE, and factors related to the VR sys-

tem itself.  Although simulator sickness is not a new phenomenon, a VE

may differ in several important respects from the typical simulator.  For

example, depending on how a VE is defined, such a system is likely to

involve some form of direct sensory input, probably through a head-

mounted display (HMD), at least.  Such devices may pose unique con-

cerns, and current research efforts (Mon-Williams et al., 1993) are exam-

ining the effects of HMD use on the visual system.  Thus, although

research into sickness occurring in VEs can draw on previous simulator

sickness research, new research must be conducted specifically in VEs in

order to address sickness issues unique to the VR setting.  Very little

research exists on sickness as it occurs in conjunction with VR exposure.

Furthermore, with few exceptions (Regan and Price, 1994), the majority

of VR studies currently reported in the literature were not designed to

specifically investigate sickness.  Instead, most studies investigated the

use of VR systems, with sickness examined only as an aside.
Kolasinski (1996) represents one of the first experimental investiga-
tions of simulator sickness as it occurs in VEs.  The primary focus was to

investigate the prediction of sickness based on characteristics associated

with an individual using a VR system, but the occurrence of ataxia fol-

lowing exposure also was investigated.  This research established that

sickness did, in fact, occur.  In some cases it was severe
Ñone participant
vomited
Ñand/or involved lingering or delayed effects.  Ataxia, howev-
er, was not found.
This latter finding
Ñthat ataxia did not occur even though sickness
did
Ñsupports findings presented by Kennedy et al. (1995), who found
that, with repeated exposure to a simulator, sickness decreases over time

but ataxia increases.  Although their finding has implications for repeat-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D151ed use of VR technology, the finding of Kolasinski (1996) raises some
specific issues of importance to the future application of VR technology.

Ataxia is a well-documented effect of simulator exposure (Kellogg and

Gillingham, 1986; Kennedy et al., 1993), and previous research has sug-

gested that ataxia may also occur in conjunction with VR exposure.

Rolland et al. (1995) found degradation in hand-eye coordination and

errors in pointing accuracy following the wearing of a see-through

HMDÑresults that demonstrate that negative aftereffects are indeed pos-sible.  There have also been anecdotal observations of individuals dem-

onstrating significant ataxia following a 30-minute VR exposure (K.M.

Stanney, personal communication, April 9, 1996).  Finally, recent research

(Kennedy et al., 1996) has concretely established the occurrence of ataxia

following VR exposure.
The VE used in conjunction with the anecdotal observations referred
to above was a maze, the traversal of which involved both forward and

left/right-represented movements.  On the other hand, the task employed
in Kolasinski (1996)
Ñthe computer game 
Ascent
Ñinvolved represented
movements primarily in the forward direction only. This suggests that

the kinematics of the task performed in the VE may have an important

effect on the occurrence of ataxia.  For example, VR applications involv-

ing limited represented movement
Ñsuch as teleoperation or simple
games
Ñmay pose limited risks of ataxia, whereas applications involving
a high degree of represented movement
Ñsuch as highly dynamic
games
Ñmay pose greater risks of ataxia.  Clearly, this unresolved issue
is a critical one that must be investigated further.
Research on simulator sickness in VEs should also look at one area
that has been neglected in the military simulator environment.  Although

studies indicate that sickness can occur, little
Ñif any
Ñresearch has in-
vestigated whether such sickness has an impact on training effectiveness.

Given the great emphasis often afforded to the use of VR technology for

training and education, investigation of the effects of sickness on training

effectiveness is an important research issue whose time has come.
APPLICABLE COMPLEMENTARY EFFORTS
As is clear from the above discussion and the references therein, a
plethora of complementary efforts
Ñboth past and present research
Ñex-
ist in the area of simulator sickness.  Most of these efforts are directed

toward military simulators.  Leaders in such research include the Sys-

tems Effectiveness Division of  Essex Corporation and the Spatial Orien-

tation Systems Department at the Naval Aeromedical Research Laboratory

(http://www.accel.namrl.navy.mil).
However, as noted, research specific to VEs also must be conducted
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152APPENDIX Dto address the phenomenon specifically as it occurs in VR systems.  VR
research is being conducted in many laboratories around the globe, sev-

eral of which are also interested in the investigation of simulator sick-

ness.  Such laboratories include the Human Interface Technology Labora-

tory at the University of Washington (http://www.hitl.washington.edu)

and the Ashton Graybiel Spatial Orientation Laboratory at Brandeis Uni-

versity (http://www.bio.brandeis.edu/pages/faculty/dizio.html).  There

are also many laboratories in the United Kingdom conducting VR re-

search.  The major VR researchers there have established a group known

as the UK Virtual Reality Special Interest Group (http://www.crg.cs.
nott.ac.uk/ukvrsig/), made up of representatives from both industry and
academia, which aims to provide a communications network for all VR

researchers and users in the United Kingdom.  Some of the member labo-

ratories, such as the Virtual Environment Laboratory at the University of

Edinburgh (http://hagg.psy.ed.ac.uk/), also are interested in investiga-

tion of the effects of VR exposure.
A final major contributor to the investigation of simulator sickness in
VEs is the Simulator Systems Research Unit (SSRU) of the U.S. Army

Research Institute (http://www.ari.fed.us/ssru.htm).  SSRU is investi-

gating the use of VEs for the training of dismounted infantry (Lampton et

al., 1994a) for the ultimate goal of integrating the dismounted soldier into

large-scale networked simulations.  As part of its research effort, SSRU

also is dedicated to investigation of the occurrence of sickness in VEs

(Lampton et al., 1994b).
REFERENCES
Baltzley, D.R., R.S. Kennedy, K.S. Berbaum, M.G. Lilienthal, and D.W. Gower.  1989.  
ÒThe
Time Course of Postflight Simulator Sickness Symptoms,
Ó Aviation, Space, and Environ-
mental Medicine
 60(11):1043-1048.
Casali, J.G.  1986.  
Vehicular Simulation-induced Sickness, Volume 1:  An Overview.
  IEOR
Technical Report No. 8501, NTSC TR 86-010.  Naval Training Systems Center, Orlan-
do, Fla.
Crampton, G. (ed.).  1990.  
Motion and Space Sickness.
  CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
Crowley, J.S.  1987.  
ÒSimulator Sickness:  A Problem for Army Aviation,
Ó Aviation, Space,
and Environmental Medicine
 58(4):355-357.
Fowlkes, J.E., R.S. Kennedy, L.J. Hettinger, and D.L. Harm.  1993.  
ÒChanges in the Dark
Focus of Accommodation Associated with Simulator Sickness,
Ó Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine
 64(7):612-618.
Kellogg, R.S., and K.K. Gillingham.  1986.  
ÒUnited States Air Force Experience with Simu-
lator Sickness, Research and Training,
Ó in 
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the
Human Factors Society
 1:427-429.
Kennedy, R.S., and L.H. Frank.  1983.  
ÒA Review of Motion Sickness with Special Reference
to Simulator Sickness,
Ó paper presented at the National Research Council Committee
on Human Factors Workshop on Simulator Sickness, September 26-28, Naval Post-
Graduate School, Monterey, Calif.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D153Kennedy, R.S., J.E. Fowlkes, and M.G. Lilienthal.  1993.  
ÒPostural and Performance Chang-
es Following Exposures to Flight Simulators,
Ó Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medi-
cine
 64(10):912-920.
Kennedy, R.S., M.B. Jones, K.M. Stanney, A.D. Ritter, and J.M. Drexler.  1996.  
ÒHuman
Factors Safety Testing for Virtual Environment Mission-operation Training,
Ó Contract
No. NAS9-19482.
Kennedy, R.S., D.S. Lanham, J.M. Drexler, and M.G. Lilienthal.  1995.  
ÒA Method for Certi-
fication That Aftereffects of Virtual Reality Exposures Have Dissipated:  Preliminary
Findings,
Ó pp. 263-270 in A.C. Bittner and P.C. Champney (eds.), 
Advances in Industrial
Ergonomics Safety VII
.  Taylor and Francis, London.
Kennedy, R.S., M.G. Lilienthal, K.S. Berbaum, D.R. Baltzley, and M.E. McCauley.  1989.
ÒSimulator Sickness in U.S. Navy Flight Simulators,
Ó Aviation, Space, and Environmen-
tal Medicine
  60(1):10-16.
Knerr, B.W., D.R. Lampton, J.P. Bliss, J.M. Moshell, and B.S. Blau.  1993.  
ÒHuman Perfor-
mance in Virtual Environments:  Initial Experiments,
Ó Proceedings of the 29th Interna-
tional Applied Military Psychology Symposium.
  Wolfson College, Cambridge, U.K.
Kolasinski, E.M.  1995.  
ÒSimulator Sickness in Virtual Environments,
Ó ARI Technical Re-
port 1027.  U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, Alex-

andria, Va.; available on-line at www.ari.fed.us/ssru.htm.  Also available by anony-
mous ftp at ftp.hitl.washington.edu/pub/scivw/publications/SimSick.rtf.
Kolasinski, E.M.  1996.  
ÒPrediction of Simulator Sickness in a Virtual Environment,
Ó Disser-
tation Abstracts International
, 57-03.  University Microfilms No. 96-21485.  Available on-
line at http://www.hitl.washington.edu/projects/vestibular/kolasinski/.
Lampton, D.R., B.W. Knerr, S.L. Goldberg, J.P. Bliss, J.M. Moshell, and B.S. Blau.  1994a.
ÒThe Virtual Environment Performance Assessment Battery (VEPAB):  Development
and Evaluation,
Ó Presence
 3(2):145-157.
Lampton, D.R., E.M. Kolasinski, B.W. Knerr, J.P. Bliss, J.H. Bailey, and B.G. Witmer.  1994b.
ÒSide Effects and Aftereffects of Immersion in Virtual Environments,
Ó Proceedings of
the 38st Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
, Vol. 2, pp. 1154-
1157.Mon-Williams, M.A., J.P. Wann, S.K. Rushton, and R. Ackerley.  1993.  
ÒReal Problems with
Virtual Worlds,
Ó Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics
 13:435-436.
Reason, J.T., and J.J. Brand.  1975.  
Motion Sickness
.  Academic Press, London.
Regan, E.C.  1993.  
ÒSide-effects of Immersion Virtual Reality,
Ó paper presented at the
International Applied Military Psychology Symposium,
 July 26-29.
Regan, E.C., and K.R. Price.  1994.  
ÒThe Frequency of Occurrence and Severity of Side-
effects of Immersion Virtual Reality,
Ó Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
65(6):527-530.
Rolland, J.P., F.A. Biocca, T. Barlow, and A. Kancherla.  1995.  
ÒQuantification of Adapta-
tion to Virtual-eye Location in See-thru Head-mounted Displays,
Ó Proceedings of the
Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium 1995.
  IEEE Computer Society Press, Los
Alamitos, Calif., pp. 56-66.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154APPENDIX DJOHN N. LATTA
Flights of Fantasy:  An Oxymoron
ÑDefense and Entertainment
The lure is engrossing
Ñincredible defense technology being convert-
ed to the best entertainment this side of watching war on CNN.  Visions
of long lines of want-to-be war fighters can be seen making entertain-

ment operators salivate at the thought of bulging bank accounts based on

skyrocketing cash flow per square foot.  Fantasy or a potential winner?

Just a dream.  Entertainment is a business, and war fighting is about

execution in combat.  There is no congruence in commercial business

models and military mission statements.  Out-of-home entertainment is a

social experience, while winning on the battlefield is about doctrine, plan-
ning, leadership, and team effectiveness.  Defense is also about leverag-

ing technology to superior advantage in war.  Yet in entertainment, tech-

nology is a lever to increase play rates and draw in the context of social

environment.  The often-heard chorus is that defense technology has ap-

plications in many sectors and the entertainment industry may be one.

Yet, for example, in three-dimensional technology the conversion has
largely taken place and the fuel of innovation is not Department of De-

fense (DOD) reuse but entrepreneurs seeking to get rich as they spend

venture capitalists
Õ money in new start-ups.  DOD can help the entertain-
ment industry by having more movie theaters on military bases.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D155WILLIAM K. McQUAYAdvances in software and computer technology are making possible
complex simulations based on  affordable and reusable modeling compo-
nents.  Businesses will soon be able to realize increases in productivity

through the widespread employment of simulations as aids for decision

making and training.  As a result, the commercial marketplace will in-

crease for generic simulation techniques, simulation infrastructure, and

off-the-shelf components for applications in financial industries, manu-

facturing, industrial  process control, biotechnology, health care, commu-

nication and information systems, and entertainment.
DOD TECHNOLOGY FOR INDUSTRY
The entertainment industry has brought simulation technology and
synthetic environments into the media mainstream. However, develop-

ment of the software to enable such simulations is a manpower-intensive

endeavor and thus is costly. Industry has the opportunity to exploit cur-

rent U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) research and simulation technol-

ogies to bring products to market faster and at lower cost. Industry can

leverage  DOD joint standards and modeling and simulation (M&S) initi-

atives such as the DOD High-level Architecture, distributed interactive

simulation (DIS), joint simulation system (JSIMS), the joint warfare simu-

lation (JWARS), and the joint modeling and simulation system (JMASS).

The joint M&S standards provide execution frameworks and emphasize

models based on interoperability, reuse, portability, distributed opera-

tion, scalability, broad applicability, technological evolvability, and max-

imum feasible use of commercial off-the-shelf software.  A potential high-
payoff defense simulation technology is desktop M&S
Ñsimulation
brought to the personal computer on the desktop of the engineer, ana-

lyst, and decision maker.  Desktop M&S technology could be the basis for

future video games, Internet games, or location-based attractions.
As entertainment simulations become increasing complex, the indus-
try will face some of the same challenges faced by DOD in military simu-

lations.  As a result, DOD and industry could benefit from technology

sharing in such areas as:
¥Extensible architectural frameworks for tools and models that sup-port a 
Òplug-and-play
Ó concept;
¥The ability to geographically distribute simulations across a heter-
ogeneous computer network;
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156APPENDIX D¥Simulation development tools to support creation of model com-
ponents that comply with architectural standards;
¥Multiple language support:  a user can specify the target source
language (C, C++,  Objective C, Ada, Java, etc.) to ease the transition to
Internet-based entertainment; and
¥Object-based technologies to allow component reuse in different
products and on different platforms.
COMMERCIAL TECHNOLOGY FOR DOD
It is current DOD policy to use commercial off-the-shelf software
whenever it meets DOD requirements.  The DOD joint standards are

designed as open systems architectures that support commercial off-the-

shelf software and tools. The commercial sector has been very successful

in developing two- and three-dimensional visualization software and in

creating virtual reality applications.  Such tools are more affordably and

efficiently created by industry and can be maintained at low cost by a

broad customer base.
Under a collaborative M&S marketplace concept, industry could
build commercial and entertainment simulations based on DOD frame-

works and reusable components and supplement them with advanced

visualization technology and animation.  DOD could employ these com-

mercial products as needed to meet individual organizational require-

ments.  Broad DOD and military service requirements could be satisfied

by core joint M&S and supplemented by multiple commercial tools and

capabilities from the collaborative M&S marketplace.  DOD has insuffi-

cient resources to purchase DOD-wide licenses for the multiplicity of

unique and individual products required for all DOD and service organi-

zations.  Instead, the collaborative M&S marketplace becomes a new out-

let for commercial application developers where the DOD field organiza-

tions buy the exact product they need.  Companies will have a new arena

for sales of commercial products (tools and eventually even model parts)

compatible with DOD joint standards.  The best of DOD and commercial

technology would be available to both sectors.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D157JACQUELYN FORD MORIE
The Military and Entertainment:
Historical Approaches and Common Ground
The military and the entertainment industries have come to their re-
spective uses of technology from very different directions and motiva-
tions.  The military has typically started with an existing need:  for train-

ing people how to fly an airplane, for example, or for better

communications.  The military has then been extremely successful in cre-

ating the technology that will meet those needs
Ñthus producing the bet-
ter-trained, or better-informed, individual.  The creation of a technology

is driven by need.  The entertainment industry, on the other hand, has

typically started with existing technology but has been very good at cre-

ating a need within the audience that will bring the people in
Ñto the
arcade, the theme park, or other venue.  The need, be it for an experience

that continues the story of a popular film or a way to move people around
a park, comes after the technology that supports it.
It is immediately apparent that there is a great deal of common
ground in these two approaches.  The military and entertainment indus-

tries have been complementary for longer than one might realize.  There

is a sign on an airplane simulator invented by Edwin Link in 1930 at the

U.S. Air Force Armament Museum in Pensacola, Florida, that states that

it was originally designed as an entertainment device.  This 
ÒBlue Box
Ówas sold to amusement parks until 1934, when Link, a pilot himself, met

with the Army Air Corp to sell the Corp on the concept of pilot training

with his device.  The rest is history.  The key here is that people enjoy

interesting and satisfying experiences, whether for job enhancement or

personal enrichment.  For the military, the experiences provided by the

technology were directly applicable to better performance in the mission

of the job.  They worked because they were interesting and pleasurable,

as well as realistic, ways of learning the task at hand.  For entertainment

audiences, the motivation is more self-centered and aimed at enhancing

one
Õs personal time.  These 
Òcivilian
Ó experiences are motivated by sev-
eral desires:  thrill seeking, escape from one
Õs everyday world, social
interaction, or self-betterment (physical or mental).
What the military did in accepting Edwin Link
Õs idea to use his en-
tertainment device as a trainer has been echoed in more recent times by

the appropriation of military technology by the entertainment industry.

The common ground is an invention or an idea that lends itself to multi-

ple uses.  Where do these ideas comes from? Many of them come from a

fertile environment for thinking and creating.  For years the military has
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158APPENDIX Dutilized just this kind of environment within the academic walls of uni-
versity research labs to help develop some of its more cutting-edge ideas.

By investing in these groups, the military has allowed ideas to ferment in

diverse locations with heterogeneous teams of people.  Over the decades,

it has received a very nice return on its investments.  Until recently, how-

ever, very few entertainment companies had taken advantage of the po-

tential of these same research settings.
In 1991 I proposed to my research laboratory, the Institute for Simu-
lation and Training (IST) at the University of Central Florida, a new ini-

tiative designed to bring together entertainment companies with what I

saw as the related research we were doing for the government in virtual

reality technology.  Working with a theme park design professional, Chris
Stapleton, as my partner to determine areas of common interest, we set

about to bring the entertainment industry to a working familiarity with

the latest in digital research, in a project we dubbed 
ÒOperation Enter-
tainment.
Ó  Dozens of entertainment professionals came to IST over the
next three years; we brought them in for endless demonstrations of what

we were doing and intense discussions of how the work could apply to

their profession.  While we were never able to convince them to invest

money in our laboratory, there were many seeds planted and several

successes.  One was when we advised Doug Trumbull on computer tech-

nology and connected him with an Orlando business from which he pur-

chased the equipment to start up his company to produce the Luxor

project.  The second was in the creation of 
ÒToy Scouts,
Ó which are dis-
cussed in the following paragraph.  Many of the ideas developed through
the history of Operation Entertainment have pointed the way to where

the entertainment industry might go if it were to invest in the research

labs that are already out there.  Japanese companies have been doing so

with the largest labs and the entertainment giants are starting to follow

suit. There are many more labs out there as well that could prove ex-

tremely useful as the technology develops, and since many of them are

already involved in military research as well, there is a great potential to

maximize this research so that it benefits both groups.  This is truly the

best and most promising common ground.  But exactly how can this type

of collaboration be accomplished? Entertainment companies certainly
don
Õt have the dollars to invest in research the way the government does.
This is, for the most part, true, but there are new ways we can think

about collaboration and mutual discoveries.
One example is embodied in my work with a group at the Institute
for Simulation and Training
Õs Visual Research Laboratory that we called
the 
ÒToy Scouts.
Ó  This was a group of undergraduate computer science
and art students who met on Friday nights to see what they could do

with the treasure chest of military 
Òtoys
Ó that existed in our research
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D159laboratory.  Guided by volunteer researchers in the lab, and with the
outside advice of some local entertainment experts who would periodi-

cally visit, the students developed truly innovative full-body immersive

games using virtual reality technology.  One of the games was called

ÒNose Ball.
Ó  In Nose Ball you used your nose as the paddle that con-
trolled the ball in a three-dimensional breakout game.  Because it was in

the center of your stereoscopic vision, it was a perfect aiming device.

Nose Ball was also a full-body physical workout.  In the four years of the

Scout activity, approximately a dozen new full-body immersive games

were developed, with many clever and innovative ways to interface with

the technology.  These students, with their raw energy and fresh ap-

proaches, came up with ideas that might not have occurred to the more

seasoned professional.  The students benefited educationally from the

expertise of the researchers they worked next to, and the researchers were
often able to look at things with fresh eyes because of their close proxim-

ity to the Scouts.   The entertainment industry was able to get new ideas

from this work, and it became a wonderfully synergistic approach and

experience to all involved.
The military has long partnered with the academic research commu-
nity as an integral part of the discovery and implementation process for

bringing new technology and techniques to a state of usefulness.  The

above example of the Toy Scouts is only one suggestion of how the mili-

tary and entertainment industries can find common ground in academic

research laboratories.  The entertainment industry could sponsor such

groups around the country at military research laboratories, and both

groups could reap the rewards. No doubt there are many more ways that

can be imagined; if only a fraction of them are implemented, the benefits

might amaze us all.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160APPENDIX DJACQUELYN FORD MORIE
The Evolution of Entertainment:  Who
Õs in Charge?
In the entertainment realm the audience is starting to become more
and more sophisticated.  Reversing a decades-old decline that has contin-
ually devolved an audience into ever-more-passive beings, today
Õs audi-
ences are eager and hungry for more direct participation.  Fueled partly

by home video games, and partly by the Internet, participants want more

and more control over the experiences they are being offered.  Video

games appeal because the player is in control; one achieves a sense of

satisfaction by reaching ever higher levels at one
Õs own pace.  The Inter-
net is engaging in large part because it empowers the user to be a pro-

ducer as well as a consumer.  The entertainment industry, by contrast,

driven as it is by economics of throughput and ticket prices, wants nei-

ther producers or controllers as its perfect audience.  A passive audience

allows for the most control over the numbers and timing of the attrac-

tions.  However, the result of this is boredom:  while the attractions grow

ever-more grandiose and able to accommodate ever-larger crowds, the

audience tires quickly and does not come back for repeated plays.  The

people do not feel themselves an active part of the experience.  The audi-

ence has the ultimate control
Ñit speaks with its time and its wallet.  The
entertainment industry will find it more difficult to continue in the old

proven formulas of canned events that an audience is driven, flown,

walked, or bumped through.
The next decade will see a trend toward what audiences demand
Ñmore control and empowerment.  This will happen in several ways.  The

first is through more individual and unique play experiences, the second

through more team play experiences, and the third through more specta-

tor experiences.  A few words on each are in order.
INDIVIDUAL PLAY EXPERIENCES
Individual play experiences appeal to our need for a self-directed
experience, even if done in a social setting.  They need to progress be-

yond individual home or arcade video games and extend the level of

interactivity far beyond simple repetitious button punching.
This area was one I worked in for several years at the Institute for
Simulation and Training
Õs Visual Research Laboratory with a group we
called the 
ÒToy Scouts.
Ó  This was a group of undergraduate computer
science and art students who met on Friday nights to see what they could

do with the treasure chest of military 
Òtoys
Ó that existed in our research
laboratory.  Guided by volunteer researchers at the lab and with the outside
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D161advice of some local entertainment experts, these students developed truly
innovative full-body immersive games using virtual reality technology.  One
example was a game called 
ÒNose Ball.
Ó  In Nose Ball you used your nose
as the paddle that controlled the ball in a three-dimensional breakout game.

Because it was in the center of your stereoscopic vision, it was a perfect

aiming device.  Nose Ball was also a full-body physical workout.  In the

four years of the Scout activity, approximately a dozen new full-body im-

mersive games were developed.  It was far cry from the couch potato men-

tality we might have expected from the video game and TV generation.  In

fact, this is an innovative way to combine sports and simulated experienc-

es
Ña wonderful athletic hybrid.  Think of going to some future digital gym
for a Nose Ball workout!
While immensely popular with the audiences who experienced them,
the drawback to these games for the entertainment industry is econom-

ics.  The games were so enjoyable that the typical experience was 10 to 15

minutes long.  Add to that the suiting up time and lead-in of how to play,

and there just couldn
Õt be enough return on an investment to make a
profit.  For this to evolve, the technology needs to be cheaper and easier

to use, but it also requires a new way of thinking about technology as

something active, vibrant, and participatory, with innovative interfaces

that extend interactivity far beyond simple button pushing.
TEAM PLAY EXPERIENCES
A second big challenge for entertainment companies today is how to
make computer interactivity play to a group larger than just a few people

at a time.  The military solved this problem years ago with SIMNET.  As

the grandfather of this area, SIMNET provided not so much prescribed

scenarios but a common ground for participants to work together toward

a goal.  We have seen only a handful of successes in the entertainment

community so far, and these involve fairly small-sized audiences
Ñtypi-
cally 12 to perhaps 100 people.
There is definite need to continue to develop experiences in thisrealm. These types of activities fulfill our need as social beings to work

together and communicate with one another in a group situation.  This is

one of the reasons why Internet chat groups are so popular.  The best and

most successful group experience to date, especially in terms of the larger

audience, is Loren Carpenter
Õs 1991 interactive piece shown at SIG-
GRAPH in Las Vegas (and again at SIGGRAPH 1994 in Orlando).
LorenÕs ÒgameÓ not only allowed for 3,000 to 5,000 simultaneousplayers to control a 
Òpong
Ó game or a flight simulator, but it did so while
building a level of group excitement and involvement that has rarely

been seen in our current digital entertainments.  A surprising outcome of
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162APPENDIX Dthis game was that the audience as a whole did not perform at  an aver-
age level, as might be expected, but at a much higher collective perfor-

mance level. What heightened the level of the collective fervor was that

the individual audience members could immediately sense their influ-

ence on the outcome.  More work needs to be done at this level of team

play.SPECTATOR EXPERIENCES
An obvious extension to the realm of team play is that of spectator
play.  Not everyone involved with digital entertainment will want to be a

direct participant.  Sometimes people enjoy themselves when they are

engaged as a spectator.  Being a spectator is not necessarily about being

passive; it is about being a participant with anonymity within a crowd.

This provides some people a less threatening forum in which to express

themselves.  Look at football or other team sports as the best example:

only a small percentage of the participants actually play.  The bulk of the

industry (as well as the money to pay the players) is built around the

fans.  There is a potentially huge market to be developed for providing a

substantial and rewarding spectator experience in the digital entertain-

ment realm.  So far no one is exploring this avenue.
These types of experiences require a new collaboration of entertain-
ment with its audience.  The military, in this respect, has been most re-

sponsive to its audienceÑnot only the individual player but also thegroup dynamics that it served to train or connect.  The thing to remember

is that technology itself will not sell anything beyond a momentary nov-

elty.  It is the larger experience that will spell success or failure, and it is

in giving the audience what it desires that the most successes will be

found.  It is up to us to find the ways to do this.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D163JEFFREY POTTER
Our segment of the computer graphics market extends from the plug-in card for the home personal computer all the way up to the high-pow-
ered workstation graphics accelerator for engineering industrial use.  We

expect to see the natural increase in renderer horsepower and on-line

storage capabilities that the computer industry has become accustomed

to.  Every 12 to 18 months, the processing sees about a twofold increase

in performance, with storage capacities moving at nearly the same pace.

Simultaneously, we expect to see features once reserved only for the ex-

pensive workstation market to gradually filter down and become avail-

able to the home computer user.  These features include high-quality

antialiasing, acceleration of both geometry and display processing, and

advanced texturing capabilities.  Simultaneously, we expect to see new

exotic ways in which three-dimensional (3D) computer graphics can be

applied to the common tasks done in a 2D world today.  Remember, not

too long ago we were using 24-line, 80-character, alphanumeric-only dis-

plays to do our word processing and spreadsheets.  With the advent of

inexpensive 3D graphics, ordinary 2D graphics might seem quaint and

backwards in just a few more years.
Like any product that undergoes evolutionary change, computer
graphics products will react to developers
Õ needs.  Operations that be-
come the most commonly used routines performed by the host central

processing unit (CPU) in software will eventually migrate to hardware.

The host CPU is then able to control rendering at a higher level, and

developers can start thinking up the next big processor-intensive algo-

rithm.  We do not see a fixed set of features being used to separate the

personal computer (PC) market from the workstation market.  The line

between personal computer graphics and workstation graphics will be

more rooted in price points, not capabilities.  That is to say, what we

consider to be workstation-quality graphics today will be on every PC

owner
Õs desktop in a couple of years.  Of course, what will be on the
workstation at that time will be limited only by our imagination today.
The enabling technological advances are primarily what has driven
the computing industry so far:
¥Semiconductor process and geometry
Ñthe push to fit ever more
gates onto reasonably priced pieces of silicon while keeping thermal and

mechanical problems under control. This matters to both the 
Ònumber
crunching
Ó hardware and the random access memory.
¥Memory bandwidth
Ñdeveloping newer higher-bandwidth mem-
ory architectures that adapt readily to the 3D graphics paradigm.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164APPENDIX D¥Interface standards
Ñsuch as the advanced graphics port, allow-
ing the processors and custom-rendering hardware the capability to take
advantage of new higher-bandwidth memory.
¥New algorithm development
Ñespecially in areas such as image
compression to further enhance the apparent processing speed of a system.
The research challenges are to invent the next 
Òbig thing
Ó in comput-er graphics.  Our Compu-Scene IV product practically stole the market in
high-end military flight simulation and training in 1984 when we intro-
duced photographic-quality texturing to real-time graphics.  Research
and development must strike a happy medium between finding the next
gee-whiz feature that engineering can dream up and the marketable im-
provements that translate into increased sales.In our experience, one market drives the other, and occasionally devel-
opments and feature sets come full circle.  U.S. Department of Defense

(DOD) applications concentrate on real-world accuracy and training effec-

tiveness.  Entertainment applications want the 
Òlook and feel
Ó of the high-
powered military simulations but at consumer price points.  So the prod-

ucts for the entertainment market are designed with carefully chosen

compromises based on engineering/marketing research and user feedback.

These commercial products then sometimes catch the interest of military

customers, who realize that some lower-fidelity systems (such as part-task

trainers) can deliver effective training with these compromises.
The drive to create interactive entertainment over the Internet is a
prime example of complementary efforts.  The lessons learned by the

defense industry suppliers involved in the Distributed Interactive Simu-

lation standard can be put to good use by the entertainment community.
We have had a close working relationship with Sega Enterprises, Ltd.,developing the graphics hardware systems for the Model 2 and Model 3

arcade systems.  This drove us to miniaturize our image generator archi-

tecture and to develop new algorithms for such features as antialiasing.

We have used this cross-pollination of ideas to enhance our product line,

most notably the R3D/100 chop set and R3D/PRO-1000 system.  The

R3D/PRO-1000 system is then able to serve markets that previously re-

quired expensive workstation-based systems at lower cost.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D165DAVID R. PRATT
Military Entertainment?
The Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) is the flagship program of the
next generation of constructive models.  JSIMS is a single, seamlessly
integrated simulation environment that includes a core infrastructure and
mission space objects, both maintained in a common repository.  These

can be composed to create a simulation capability to support joint or

service training, rehearsal, or education objectives.  JSIMS must facilitate

Joint Service training, significantly reduce exercise support resources, and
allow user interactions via real-world command, control, communica-

tion, computing, and intelligence (C
4I) systems.  The final system will
support the ability to resolve down to the platform level the develop-

ment of doctrine and tactics, mission rehearsal, linkages with other mod-

els (e.g., analytical, live, virtual), and a wide range of military operations.
As outlined above, the modeling and simulation (M&S) goals
of JSIMS are undoubtedly bold and ambitious.  Early on, service- and

agency-specific programs were identified to be part of  the overall JSIMS

program.  Based on the three pillars of the Defense Modeling and Simu-

lation Office
Õs common technical framework (conceptual model of the
mission space (CMMS), High-level Architecture (HLA), and data stan-

dards) along with technology infusion provided by Defense Advanced

Research Projects Agency programs (such as the Synthetic Theater of War
and Advanced Simulation Technology Thrust), JSIMS represents the first

true U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) community-wide M&S develop-

mental effort.  The question is whether JSIMS can possibly leverage off of

M&S efforts from outside DOD, in particular those from the entertain-

ment industry.  Foremost, the goals for a successful military simulation

and an entertainment simulation are markedly different.  In entertain-

ment the driving factors are excitement and fun.  Users must want to

spend their money to use it again and again (either at home or at an

entertainment center) and hopefully be willing to tell others about it.

Unrealistically dangerous situations, exaggerated hazardous environ-

ments, and  multiple lives and heroics are acceptable, even desirable, to

increase the thrill factor.  On the other hand, defense simulations over-

whelmingly stress  realistic environments and engagement situations.
The interactions are quite serious in nature, can crucially depend on ter-

rain features or other environmental phenomena, and generally rely on

the ability to coordinate jointly with other players.  The value of  these

defense simulations is measured in terms of training and insights re-

vealed.  A successful military simulator could be deemed boring and

therefore useless in terms of entertainment.  Similarly, a successful enter-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166APPENDIX Dtainment simulator could be deemed unrealistic and therefore useless in
terms of military training.  However, I believe there exists a potential for

DOD and the entertainment industry to leverage off each other
Õs M&S
efforts provided there is an understanding of how the two fundamental-

ly differ and what each strives to do best.
From an operational point of view, there are three hard technological
challenges facing JSIMS: synthetic environment (SE), computer-generat-

ed forces (CGFs), and resource reduction.  To gain a level of confidence in

the outcome of defense models, the models must realistically and consis-

tently represent all of the battlespace in the SE.  Tactically significant

interactions with the SE, such as rain affecting mobility and line of sight,

cross-environment interactions so that objects from the air domain can

engage objects from the land domain seamlessly, must be simulated real-

istically across multiple types of platforms with different underlying ter-

rain representations.  CGF behaviors of entities in the simulation need to

be flexible and rapidly configurable by end users, and the generated be-

haviors must continue to evolve through the experience gained as part of

the exercises much like humans do in battle.  Resources (in terms of time,

equipment, and personnel) that currently drive training schedules must

be reduced from their current levels.  It simply takes too much to set up a

simulation exercise.  The goal is 96 hours versus the current six months.
The large-scale joint service nature and complexity of JSIMS general-
ly preclude it from taking advantage of using much of the SE framework

developed by the entertainment industry so far.  However, efforts in the

development of user interfaces, use of avatars, and artificial intelligence

are of potential interest.  User interface development is largely driven by

the entertainment industry already as it is the primary means by which

its customers experience the desired thrills.  The defense training com-

munity could  benefit from immersive user interfaces that permit more

realistic interactions with the SE.  Also of interest are more natural inter-

faces to effectively manipulate large numbers of CGFs or some aspect of

the SE, as are the use of avatars to convey information.  M&S-driven

computer technology advancements that result in the availability of

cheaper hardware to do complex computations efficiently, increased per-

sonnel expertise, and improved user interfaces could contribute to a sig-

nificant reduction of resources required to conduct a simulation exercise.

Artificial intelligence in CGFs used to populate environments of both

defense and entertainment simulations can likely be leveraged provided

that they can be flexibly programmed to carry out a variety of tasks and

can exhibit advanced behaviors such as the capability to learn.  This is the

current challenge facing the CGF community within DOD today, and I

pose it to the entertainment industry as well in hopes that we may be

able to work together on this difficult problem.  I have not been able to
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D167find a technical reason why the defense and the entertainment M&S com-
munities cannot leverage off each other
Õs efforts.  A cross-pollination of
ideas between the two appears fruitful provided that their differing M&S

goals are not adversely compromised.  In general, negative military train-

ing, which could result from lack of simulation fidelity or ambiguity in a

user interface, is considered to be worse than no training at all.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168APPENDIX DALEX SEIDEN
Electronic Storytelling and Human Immersion
The past half-decade has seen a renaissance in digital effects in mo-
tion pictures.  Correspondingly, the use of certain 
Òtraditional
Ó effects
technologies, such as compositing with optical printers, has  diminished
greatly.  Writers and directors have been given a new and powerful  set

of tools to realize their visions.  New techniques have made the impossi-

ble possible and the prohibitively expensive more affordable.  Addition-

ally, a tremendous amount of effects work is in the 
Òinvisible
Ó category:
wire and rig removals, sky and background enhancements, and so on.
Box office success fuels much in the world of filmmaking.  (I am not
so cynical as to say it is the only force in operation.)  The tremendous

returns on 
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
 and 
Jurassic Park
 exploded studio
interest in visual effects and the facilities that create them.  Many studios

have made substantial investments in their own effects units.  Currently,

films such as 
Twister
 and 
Independence Day
 reinforce this trend.  The de-
mand for visual effects has never  been as high as it is today, and it will

continue to grow for the next few years.  After leveling off, there will

doubtless be a shakeout in the number of facilities providing these ser-

vices; in some ways this may have already begun.
Visual effects and simulation computer graphics in the visual effects
world have very little to do with 
Òsimulation,
Ó as the term is commonly
used in the computing community.  The broadest definition of a simula-

tion is any synthetic or counterfeit creation.  However, most in this audi-

ence would consider  a simulation as being a mathematical or algorith-

mic model, combined with a set of initial conditions, that allows

prediction and visualization as time unfolds.  This generalized model

allows easy manipulation of the initial conditions and parameters, such

that many possibilities can  be explored.
Computer graphics in visual effects has more to do with what is
euphemistically called ÒhybridÓ or ÒempiricalÓ techniques, and more can-didly called 
Ògrotesque hacks.
Ó  The dinosaurs of 
Jurassic Park
 were not
Òsimulated
Ó any more than pre-World War II Los Angeles was 
Òsimulat-
ed
Ó for 
Chinatown. 
 Certainly, any shot in the latter film has a rich sense
of place and time:  the office of private investigator Jake Gittes is power-

fully evoked, and the audience imagines the rest of that world.  But turn

the camera 30 degrees and you
Õll see a bunch of C-stands and some grips.
Changing views requires substantial time
Ñthough the illusion of a com-
plete and continuous world still exists.  Similarly, changing the action of

a synthetic creature, such as a dinosaur, requires extensive rework.  No

single generalized conceptual model exists for those dinosaurs and their
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D169important visual properties, such as their gait cycles, the movement of
flesh over bones, or the texture of their saurian hides.  Often, a precise

simulation would not only be more complicated but would also be aes-

thetically undesirable; for example, the scale of dinosaurs in 
Jurassic Park
changes dramatically from shot to shot and sequence to sequence.
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES AND RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Turnkey animation systems have advanced greatly in the past sever-
al years.  Such advancements include flexible inverse kinematics that

make creature animation practical, particle system front ends that allow

complicated dynamic effects, and the big strides in software on Macintosh
and personal computer-compatible systems.  Nevertheless, software is

the single largest area where attention should be focused.  Animators

and technical directors face daunting challenges as shots become more

and more complicated.  Techniques must be developed that allow more

facile management of this increasing complexity.  Visual programming,

to name just one possible solution, has been proposed as a method of

allowing people to work at higher levels of abstraction without sacrific-

ing precise control; other ideas will hopefully emerge as well.  Ask the

production manager of any effects studio and he or she will tell you the

biggest problem is the shortage of skilled animators and technical direc-

tors.  As such, training and education will be a huge issue for the next

several years.
Current renderers lack good simulation of area light sources and dif-
fuse-diffuse interactions.  This is critical for matching live-action photogra-

phy, especially for daylight exteriors.  Current solutions rely on difficult,

poor-looking substitutes.  I expect to see radiosity-based techniques become

more common.  Motion blur and programmable shading are necessary.

Some researchers and industry luminaries have talked with great excite-

ment about the potential for photo-realistic artificial actors.  This will cer-

tainly see some application, but the interest in a revived Marilyn Monroe or

Elvis is perhaps overrated.  Hardware will continue its inevitable increase

in performance and will be matched step for step by growing computing

demands.  In the  long run, frame-rendering times never fall: my average

frame time in 1985 was 20 minutes per TV-res frame; now it
Õs around 30
minutes.  The vast amounts of data contained in film-res images place great

strain on networks; increasing speed and reliability will help speed produc-

tion.  The continuing development of lossless compression techniques also

helps.  Hopefully, display technologies will develop that can achieve the

quality of film, especially more dynamic range and wider color gamuts.

Affordable high-resolution real-time playback devices, such as high-defini-

tion television, may be part of the solution.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170APPENDIX DLINEAR AND NONLINEAR STORYTELLING
It is important not to lose sight of the goal of movies or any entertain-
ment:  to expand and enrich our lives, to extend our experiences beyond
those we have lived through ourselves, to illuminate and explain the

experiences that we have lived, and to do all of this in a way that is

engaging and compelling.  Any art, particularly film, succeeds when the

audience forgets itself and is transported into another world. Visual ef-

fects must always serve the story.  I say this even though I am fully aware

that recent effects-laden box office extravaganzas have been disturbingly

lacking in this area.  Nevertheless, I don
Õt think many people outside the
industry would pay $7.50 to sit through the effects reels (an effects reel is

an edited piece of film showing only the shots that have visual effects

and omitting the rest of the film) of any of these movies, stunning techni-

cal and creative achievements though they might be.  In any  event, many

effects-oriented movies fail both commercially and aesthetically.
The Web, CD-ROM, virtual reality, and other multimedia techniques
have been touted as ways to transcend the limits of linear storytelling, to

give the audience a richer participation in an imaginary world.  I will risk

alienating many at this workshop by staking out what I expect to be

some unpopular ground: I
Õve never seen a CD-ROM that moved me the
way a powerful film has.  I
Õve never visited a Web page with great emo-
tional impact.  I contend that linear narrative is the fundamental art form

of humankind:  the novel, the play, the film, even the orally told joke or

story
Ñthese  are the forms that define our cultural experience.  Although
Òinteractive
Ó and 
Ònonlinear
Ó forms exist, they have never been para-
mount in our consciousness.  Remember when, around the campfire dur-

ing summer camp, one person would begin a story, tell it for a few min-

utes, and then another person would take over, developing the story in

their own direction?  Similar forms exist in improvisational theater games.
And although these techniques can be amusing in small doses, I would

argue that they are the exception that proves the  rule:  nonlinear story-

telling forms can exist, but they will never supplant the complete control

of the linear storyteller.  Now, any new medium
Ñfilm, radio, and televi-
sion are good examples
Ñhas its curmudgeonly detractors.  The infant
film industry received similar criticism from those who argued that the-

ater would always be the dominant medium.  The critics lacked the vi-

sion of what film could and would become, as the language of film devel-

oped.  Perhaps I, too, lack such vision and in 10 or 20 years will be eating

my words.  Will the world of interactive nonlinear entertainment grow?

Yes, certainly it will.  Will exciting and emotionally powerful images be

created  in these formats?  Yes, there are too many talented people and

too much money being sent in that direction for nothing to happen.  And
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D171certainly the Web will become the preeminent forum for the exchange of
commercial and scientific information; its significance will exceed that of

the cellular phone, the automated teller machine, the fax machine, and

the Home Shopping Network combined.  This is not a trivial develop-

ment.  Whether storytelling itself will be fundamentally changed  de-

pends on a paradigm shift that I would contend is much larger than for

other emerging media.  To fully evaluate the likelihood and meaning of

such as shift requires a careful distinction between what we think of now

as a 
Òstory
Ó and what we consider a 
Ògame
Ó or 
Òenvironment.
Ó  A full
appraisal of the differences between the cognitive processes involved is

beyond the scope of this paper and is an excellent subject for further

research.Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172APPENDIX DSTEVEN SEIDENSTICKER
Distributed Simulation:  A View from the Future
The battle date is August 17, 1943.  I am the ball turret gunner of
Luscious Lady, a brand new B-17F of the 427th squadron, 303rd Bom-
bardment Group, of the Eighth Air Force.  Our takeoff from Molesworth

was without incident, but as soon as we were off the ground the pilot

asked me to check the wheels.  He had an indication that the left main

gear had not retracted fully.  I hopped into the ball and spun it until I had

a good view of the wheel.  It looked OK.  We chalked it up to a bad

indicator in the cockpit.  Although the ball with its twin 50s is primarily

intended to protect a B-17 from enemy fighters approaching from below,

the view from beneath the aircraft comes in handy for other chores. We

climb out and begin a long lazy circle. I keep tabs on and report other

squadron aircraft as they join our formation.
We are on our second mission and our first over Germany.  Our first
mission was to bomb a Luftwaffe airfield near Paris.  The target was

partly obscured by weather.  Opposition was light.  A few Me-109s came

up to meet us.  They were not particularly aggressive or well coordinat-

ed.  Nevertheless, we lost one of our squadron. I saw Old Ironsides get

most of her rudder shot off.  The pilot was obviously losing control and

chose to abandon his ship.  I saw 10 good chutes.  The debriefing team

called the mission a 
Òmilk run.
Ó  The missions would become much
tougher as we gained more experience.  We were happy to get this far.
My pilot and copilot are in Milwaukee.  The navigator/bombardier is
in Montreal. Other crew members are in Seattle, San Jose, Denver, and Green
Bay.  We cannot see or touch each other, but we communicate via what

appears to be a B-17
Õs standard intercom.  In fact, we are part of a wide-area
high-speed data network that connects all crew stations of all aircraft, both

friendly and hostile.  I don
Õt know the total number of nodes on this net-
work, but it must be in the thousands.  The number of spectators who can

tap into the net is in the millions.  In addition to our voices, this network

carries all the data that our individual crew station simulators need to show

other aircraft the terrain over which we fly, the weather, and other elements

of our environment.  To participate in these missions each of us simply dials

into the network at the time scheduled for the mission, gets the standard

crew briefing on our screens, and waits for our turn to take off.  The pilots,

bombardiers, and navigators get a detailed briefing on the target and ex-

pected weather.  The rest of the crew gets briefed on expected opposition.

The briefings are, of course, the same as (or as close as possible to) the

original briefings given to the original crews.  Like in the original briefings,

we can ask questions and get answers.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D173Not all the crew stations on Luscious Lady are manned by humans.
The waist gunners and the radio operator are computer-generated enti-
ties.  They do their jobs reasonably well.  They even respond to us when

we talk to them over the intercom.  However, if the conversation strays

from simple orders or reports they quickly become confused and start

spouting gibberish.  Some of the other friendly aircraft on the mission

and some of the opposing Luftwaffe fighters have no human crews at all.

But it
Õs getting harder to tell who is human and who is computer-gener-
ated, because the programmers keep tweaking their behavior algorithms.

But my personal feeling is that they will never get to the point where

these simulations are totally indistinguishable from real people.  I hope

they don
Õt.
Over the Channel the pilot gives us the order to test our guns.  This is
a ritual that ensures that the guns are working and marks the real begin-

ning of the mission for us gunners.  From here we are in harm
Õs way.  I
cock both guns, point to a clear area, and let loose with a short burst.  The

tracers arc away gracefully.  I have managed not to hit anyone else in the

formation.  To do so is considered very bad form.  It also requires the

hapless shooter to buy dinner for the shootee
Õs crew at our next annual
convention.  Of course, the computers that run this whole operation keep

track of everything, so there is no arguing or hiding.  The target today is

the Me-109 plant in Regensburg.  We know that the Luftwaffe was out in

force that day.  The Eighth Air Force lost 24 B-17s out of a force of 147.

Shortly after we cross the French coast the nose gunner shouts 
Òfour 109s
at 12 o
Õclock low.
Ó  The control yoke feels comfortable in my hands as I
spin the turret forward.  They are coming at our formation four abreast

from dead ahead.  The winking lights on the leading edge of their wings

show that they are firing.  I mash the right pedal hard to tell the lead

computing gun sight to use maximum range.  The left pedal goes to the

third notch to input the wing span of an Me-109.  I line the sight
Õs pipper
on the number two plane and fire short bursts, trying to adjust the range

as they close.  My shots appear low.  Just about everyone in our forma-

tion is firing.  A puff of smoke bursts from the number three fighter.  It

continues to smoke as their formation passes right through ours.
This line abreast head-on attack was developed by the Luftwaffe in
early 1943.  It took a lot of courage and discipline on the part of the

German pilots, but it was very effective.  The idea was not only to get the

best shots possible but also to intimidate the bomber pilots and break up

the formation.  It was probably the greatest game of chicken ever and it

frequently ended in collision.  The right waist gunner reports another

formation at the four o
Õclock level.  But they are out of our range and
overtaking us on a parallel course, no doubt moving up for another head-

on pass through the bomber stream.  I can see their yellow cowlings and
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174APPENDIX Dknow that they belong to JG 26, the 
ÒAbbeville Kids,
Ó one of the best
Luftwaffe fighter wings.
The attacks continue sporadically until we are about 30 miles from
the target.  At that point we start seeing the dreaded flak.  The small
black clouds bloom innocently in the distance, but we know that as the

ground gunners adjust the aim of their 88s, the bursts will be right around
us.  There is little evasive action that a formation of B-17s can take.  We

are near the IP (initial point) that the pilot must fly over if we are to get

our bombs anywhere near the target.  At that point, the bombardier takes

over and actually flies the plane to the bomb release point, using autopi-

lot controls on the famous Norden bomb sight, probably one of the most

famous but overrated technical developments of World War II.  The flak

rounds get closer.
The concussion from one of them is louder than the fifties going off
next to my ears.  The pilot reports that number four engine is starting to

vibrate and that the manifold pressure is dropping.  Bad news.  If it fails

we will have to drop out of the formation.  Like the weak separated from

the herd, we will be on our own.  We may have to fight packs of fighters

as we try for the coast and the protection of friendly Spitfires.  Most who

have been through this say that it can be the most exciting part of an

afternoon of simulation, but the B-17 seldom survives.  Those that do get

an award at the next convention and, of course, their battle with the

fighters is replayed on the large screen.
We finally reach the target, the bombardier hits the pickle switch,
and I watch the bombs fall away.  I loose sight of them after a few sec-

onds, but shortly thereafter see a string of explosions on the ground.  The

bombs land in a rail yard just east of the target complex.  But that
Õs closer
than the original crew came in 1943.
The flight back was challenging.  For two hours we endured more
flak and almost constant fighter harassment.  Our pilot managed to coax

enough power out of the number four engine to maintain our position in

the formation.  The rest of the formation was not so lucky.  Stric Nine

took an 88-mm round in the right wing root and the whole wing came

off.  There were no chutes. Wallaroo lost an engine and had to drop back,

but we were close to the coast and a flight of P-47s escorted her back.

Once we got over the Channel I turned over my role to an automatic ball

turret simulation and had a quick dinner in the kitchen with my wife.  I

doubt that the rest of my crew even noticed I was gone.  I rejoined the

simulation for the debriefing.  The colonel told us that we had done rea-

sonably well for a second mission crew.
My ball turret is a medium-priced model from RealSim Inc., one of
the rising companies in this field.  It provides a lot of fidelity for the price

and has a lot of update options.  I
Õm very happy with it.  The ball spins
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D175and rotates vertically much the way the original did and takes up less
than half of my garage.  The visual scenes are presented on panels built

right into the ball.  Sound and vibration are provided by some large but

ordinary speakers.  RealSim sells the basic turret dirt cheap but knows

how sim-heads get hooked on fidelity, and so they offer a large range of

add-ons that can become real expensive.  Some of my colleagues have

mounted their units on electrically driven motion platforms.  I donÕt knowif that is worth the extra cost.  Maybe next year.  Many other simulated

crew stations are built around virtual reality goggles.  Those are a lot less

expensive but work quite well.  One enthusiastic crew has built a whole

B-17 fuselage in a warehouse.
As in most simulations, visual scenes provide the dominant cues.
The simulation industry long ago reached its holy grail of creating visual

images that are indistinguishable from the real thing.  The processing

power needed to create them is so cheap that the image generators are no

longer a cost factor in most simulators.  Databases that represent the

terrain of any portion of the earth are readily available at any resolution

desired.  Specialty 
Òperiod
Ó databases (Dunkirk or Waterloo for instance)
for groundpounders are becoming available but are very expensive.
The key factor that made this kind of group simulation possible was
the development of the DIS (distributed interactive simulation) standards

about 25 years ago.  Once these standards were in place, the designers

and builders of simulator components didn
Õt have to spend any more
time thinking about linking them together than does the designer of a

railroad car need to worry about how to couple his car to a train. The DIS

standards allowed the simulation industry to concentrate on functional-

ity, performance, and cost reduction.
My wife used to ask me why I spend so much time and money on
this.  There are a number of reasons.  I, like most middle-aged guys, have

often fantasized about going into battle to test my wits and skill with a

comparably equipped enemy.  In this fantasy I support my comrades and

in turn depend on their support.  I yearn to experience the heat of battle,

victory over my adversary, or a narrow escape from the reach of his

weapons.  However, I have no desire to shed any of my blood.
I also love history, great battles in particular.  I know of no greater
battle than that between the U.S. Eighth Air Force and the German Luft-

waffe in 1943 and 1944.  The leaders of the American forces felt that they

could win the war with heavy bombing of German military and industri-

al targets.  To be accurate this had to be done in daylight.  Escort fighters

of the day did not have sufficient range to cover the bombers.  The bomb-

ers had to depend on their own defensive weapons.
Participation in these re-created battles is available at a number of
levels.  I started as a spectator.  The magic carpet mode of my computer
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176APPENDIX Dlet me observe operations from any point in space.  It also let me attach
myself to any aircraft in the battle and listen to the radio and intercom

traffic for that aircraft.  Running commentary is available from experts.

Previews and schedules of upcoming battles are carried by the major

sports pages.  Reports of completed battles also are carried.  These tend

to dwell on the personalities involved and the shoot-em-up aspects.  How
close the reenactment came to the original battle seems to be getting lost.
After watching several of the major raids, I was hooked and wanted
to play an active role.  My first desire was to be a Luftwaffe pilot, but the

requirement for fluency in German eliminated that.  Rumors are that an

English-speaking Luftwaffe wing is forming.  My second choice was to

sit in the cockpit of a B-17.  But, like the original aircrews, I needed train-

ing.  The training course for all pilot positions is long and demanding. I

opted for the less ambitious role of gunner.  Fortunately, the simulator

technology that I own trains me more efficiently and quickly than did

similar training programs in 1943.  After a few intense weekends, I passed
the qualification tests and was assigned to my present crew.  We are not

the most proficient crew on today
Õs raid, but neither were the new crews
in 1943.
As I become more serious in this avocation, I wonder where it is
going.  Some social commentators are starting to decry the 
Òglorification
of war.
Ó  Others counter with statements about 
Òharmless outlets of male
aggression,
Ó despite the fact that at last year
Õs convention the Best B-17
Crew Award went to an all-female crew.  Some critics are worried that

the super-realistic simulation available today is going to replace drugs as

the national addiction.  Who knows!  The raid on the ball-bearing facto-

ries in Schweinfurt is scheduled for next week.  It was the bloodiest for

the Eighth Air Force.  I think my crew and I are good enough and lucky

enough to survive.  I can hardly wait to find out.
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D177JACK THORPE
Research Needs for Synthetic Environments
PURPOSE
This paper introduces one approach for thinking about the technical
challenges of constructing synthetic environments and some of the relat-
ed research issues.  The paper is designed to stimulate discussion, not to

be a comprehensive treatise on the topic.
DISCUSSION
Simulation, virtual reality, gaming, and film share the common ob-
jective of creating a believable artificial world for participants.  In this

context, believability is less about the specific content of the environment

and more about the perception that there exists a world that participants

can port themselves into and be active in
Ñthat is, exert behavior of some
sort.
In film, this is vicarious.  In simulation, virtual reality, and gaming it
tends to be active, even allowing participants to choose the form for port-

ing into the environment:  either as an occupant of a vehicle moving

through the environment, as a puppet (proxy) of him or herself that he or

she controls from an observation station, or as a fully immersed human.

The iconic representation or avatar can assume whatever form is appro-

priate for the environment.
When the participant is an audience member in a single venue and is
neither required to interact overtly with other audience members in the

same venue or other connected venues, the issues of large-scale interac-

tivity and distributed locations are minimal.  On the other hand, when

tens or hundreds of remotely located participants are ported into the

same world and begin to interact freely (and unpredictably), as demon-

strated in recent advances in distributed interactive simulation, not only

are the environments more interesting but the technical challenges are

also more difficult.  It is likely that these will also be the next-generation

commercial application for this technology, and so addressing technical

issues is timely.
To design and build these more complex worlds, the following major
tasks have been found to be useful classifications of the work needed to

be done and the tools required to perform this work, thus leading to the

research and development needed to construct the tools.  For each of

these tasks a few of the research issues are identified, but this is far from

a comprehensive treatment:
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178APPENDIX D¥Efficient fabrication of the synthetic environment;
¥Design and manufacture of affordable porting devices that allow
humans to enter and/or interface with these environments;
¥Design and management of a worldwide simulation Internet to
connect these porting devices in real time;
¥Development of computational proxies (algorithms) that accurate-
ly mimic the behavior of humans unable to be present;
¥Staffing, organization, and management of realistic, validated sen-
tient opponents  (or other agents), networked based, for augmenting the
world; and
¥Development of innovative applications and methodologies forexploiting this unique capability.
Efficient Fabrication of the Synthetic Environment
Artificial worlds are usually three-dimensional spaces whose featuresare sensed by the participants in multiple modes, almost always visual

but possibly auditory, tactile, whole-body motion, infrared, radar, or via

a full range of notional sensor or information cues.  For each of these

modes of interaction, the attributes can be specified in a prebuilt data-

base ahead of time, or calculated in real time, or both.
The challenge is to construct interesting three-dimensional environ-
ments efficiently.  Cost rises as a function of the size of the space (in some

military simulations it can be thousands of square miles of topography),

resolution, detail (precision cues needed for interaction), dynamic fea-

tures (objects that can interact with participants, like doors that can open

or buildings that can be razed), and several other factors.  As a general

observation, the tools needed to efficiently construct large complex envi-

ronments are lacking, a particularly serious shortfall when fine-tuning

environments for specific goals of a simulation or game.  Toolsets are

quirky and primitive, require substantial training to master, and often

prohibit the environment architect from including all of the attributes

desired.  This is a serious problem, one that seems to get relatively little

attention.  It is an area that needs continual research and development

focus.Design and Manufacture of Affordable
Porting Devices that Allow Humans to Enter and/or
Interface with These Environments
The manner in which the human enters the synthetic environment
continues to undergo rapid change.  Flight simulators are a good exam-

ple.  Twenty years ago a sophisticated flight simulator cost $20 million to
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D179$40 million.  Ten years ago technology allowed costs to drop by a factor
of 100.  Today there has been another one or two orders of magnitude

decrease.  Further, each new generation is more capable than its more

costly predecessor.  This drop in cost, with an increase in the richness of

the participant
Õs ability to interact with the environment and other peo-
ple and agents similarly ported there, is especially important as large-

scale simulations are constructed
Ñthat is, those that might have 50 or
more participants (some military simulations have thousands of partici-

pants).  The cost per participant (cost per seat) can be a limiting factor no

matter how rich the interface.
The research issues include the design methodology that leads to
good functional specifications for the simulation or game (the work

on selective fidelity by Bob Jacobs at Illusion Inc. is relevant), the

design and fabrication approaches for full-enclosure simulators (ve-

hicles) and caves (individuals), the porting facade at the desktop

workstation (partly manifested by the graphical user interface), and

other means of entering the environment, such as while mobile via a

wireless personal digital assistant.
Design and Management of a Worldwide Simulation
Internet to Connect These Porting Devices in Real Time
Small-scale as well as large-scale distributed interactive environmentshave baseline requirements for latency, which is compounded when a

requirement to worldwide entry into environments is added.  Latency is

influenced by the type of interaction a participant is involved with in the

specific synthetic environment.  The requirement is that the perception of

Òreal timeness
Ó is not violated, that is, that participants do not perceive a
rift in the time domain (a stutter, momentary freeze, or unnatural delay

in consequence of some action that should be a seamless interaction).

Because this is a perceptual issue, it is dependent on the nature of the

interaction and the participant
Õs expectations.
This becomes a technology issue as the number of independently
behaving participants grows, the number of remote sites increases, and

the diversity of the types of interactions coming from these sites and

participants grows.  It has been demonstrated that unfiltered broadcast-

ing of interaction messages (
ÒI am here doing this to you
Ó) quickly satu-
rates the ability of every participant to sort through all the incoming

messages, the majority of which are irrelevant to a specific participant.

The functionality needed in this type of large interactive network is akin

to dynamically reconfigurable multicasting, as yet unavailable as a net-

work service.
It could turn out that as the Internet expands it will provide the ded-
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180APPENDIX Dicated protected speed and addressing for these types of interactions, but
this is not the case to date, and dedicated networks have had to be in-

stalled to support large exercises.  Further, it is conceivable that the appe-

tite of the simulation or game designer for more complex and interactive

environments will outpace the near-term flexibility and capacity of net-

work providers.  Networks are going to have to be smarter, a continuing

research issue.
Development of Computational Proxies
(Algorithms) That Accurately Mimic the Behavior of
Humans Unable to Be Present
Late 1980s experimentation with distributed interactive simulations
resulted in the constant pressure to grow the environments in the num-

bers of participants, but there were never enough porting devices or peo-

ple to man them to satisfy this growth.  Since these environments began

as behaviorally rich human-on-human/force-on-force experiences, play-

ers demanded that any additional agents brought on via computer algo-

rithm have all the characteristic behaviors of intelligent beings, that is,

that they passed the Turing test and would be indistinguishable from

real humans
Ña tall order.
This resulted in a series of developments of semiautomated and fully
automated forces capable of behaving as humans and interacting along-

side or against other humans ported into the simulation.  These develop-

ments have met with mixed success.  In some cases computer algorithms

have been constructed that are excellent mimics of actual individuals and

teams, particularly in vehicles, but in other cases the problem is more

difficult, especially in areas of mimicking cognition as in decision mak-

ing.  Nonetheless, the commercial application as well as the defense ap-

plication of large-scale interactive environments will require large-scale

synthetic forces behaving correctly.  Given that understanding, predict-

ing, and 
Ògenerating
Ó human behavior transcends simulation and gam-
ing, this will continue to be a major research area.
Staffing, Organization, and Management of Realistic,
Validated Sentient Opponents (or Other Agents),
Networked Based, for Augmenting the World
Where environments require teams of people acting in concert to
augment the synthetic environment for participants, for example, teams

of well-trained and commanded competitors, the opportunity presents

itself for the establishment of network-based teams.  These could be wide-
ly remoted themselves, even though they would be perceived as being
Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and DefenseCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D181ported into the synthetic environment at a single location.  The challenge
of establishing these teams is less technical and more organizational, typ-

ical of military operations, except in the case where these teams are re-

quired to faithfully portray forces of different backgrounds, languages,

and value systems.  Technology can assist with real-time language gener-

ation and translation.  Behaving as someone from a different culture is

more difficult.
Development of Innovative Applications and
Methodologies for Exploiting This Unique Capability
The capabilities created through the design and instantiation of a
synthetic environment can be unprecedented, making conventional ap-

plications and methodologies obsolete.  This task recognizes that research
is needed on how to characterize these new capabilities and systematical-

ly exploit them.
