DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/5904Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction andArchitect-Engineer Services: Implementing the FederalAcquisition Streamlining Act60 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05932-9 | DOI 10.17226/5904Federal Facilities Council, Standing Committee on Procurement and Contracting,National Research CouncilElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Commercefor the Procurement ofConstruction andArchitect-EngineerServicesImplementing the Federal Acquisition Streamlining
Act Conference Summary
Federal Facilities Council Standing Committee on Procurement and
ContractingTechnical Report #134
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, DC 1997
iElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICEThe Federal Facilities Council (FFC) (formerly the Federal Construction
Council) is a continuing activity of the Board on Infrastructure and the

Constructed Environment (BICE) of the National Research Council (NRC). The

purpose of the FFC is to promote continuing cooperation among the sponsoring

federal agencies, and between the agencies and others in the building
community, to advance building science and technology, especially for the
design, construction, acquisition, evaluation, and operation of federal facilities.

The following agencies currently sponsor the FFC:
Department of the Air Force, Air National Guard
Department of the Air Force, Office of the Civil Engineer

Department of the Army, Corps of Engineers
Department of Energy, Office of Associate Deputy Secretary of Field
ManagementDepartment of the Navy, Naval Facilities Engineering Command
Department of State, Office of Foreign Buildings Operations
Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Facilities Management

Food and Drug Administration
General Services Administration, Public Buildings Service
Indian Health Service
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Facilities Engineering Division

National Institutes of Health
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Building and Fire Research
LaboratoryNational Endowment for the Arts, Design Arts Program
National Science FoundationSmithsonian Institution, Office of Facilities Services

U.S. Information Agency, International Broadcasting Bureau
U.S. Postal Service, Facilities Department
U.S. Public Health Service, Office of Management
As part of its activities, the FFC periodically publishes reports that have been
prepared by committees of government employees. Since these committees are

not appointed by the NRC, they do not make recommendations, and their reports

are considered FFC publications rather than NRC publications.
For further information on the FFC program or FFC reports, please write to:
Director, Federal Facilities Council, Board on Infrastructure and the Constructed

Environment, 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418, or

visit us on the Internet at 
http://www2.nas.edu/ffc.iiElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL FACILITIES COUNCIL STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING
ChairJoyce Runyan
, Acquisition Policy Division, Naval Facilities Engineering
CommandMembersRonald Adam
, Office of Facilities Management, Department of Veterans Affairs
Wade Belcher
, Public Buildings Service, General Services Administration
Lewis Butt
, Maintenance and Repair Division, International Broadcasting Bureau
Donald W. Dormstetter
, Office of Design and Construction, Smithsonian
InstitutionJon Erikson, Network Engineering, International Broadcasting Bureau
Donald Evick
, Engineering Management Branch, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Catherine Fairlie
, Installation Restoration Program Branch, Air National Guard
Robert Fraga, Major Facilities Purchasing, U.S. Postal Service
Chris Guevin, Military Construction, Department of the Air Force
Gary Heidle, Acquisition Policy Division, Air National Guard
Bob Henry
, Division of Engineering Services, National Institutes of Health
Tom Kasper, Acquisition Policy Division, Air National Guard
Deanna Bentz Murphy
, Environmental Management Division, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Walt Norko, Construction Policy Branch, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Brent Peavler
, Acquisition Division, International Broadcasting Bureau
Tim Ruckle, Management Information Division, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
iiiElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Donna Smigel
, Engineering Management Branch, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Frank Sullivan
, Office of Facilities Management, Department of Veterans
AffairsJoyce Sweasy
, Office of Procurement Management, National Institutes of Health
William Timperley
, Contracts Policy Division, Naval Facilities Engineering
CommandDan Troyan, Office of the Principal Assistant for Contracting, U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Leroy Wallin, Acquisitions Department, U.S. Department of State
Gerald Zaffos, Public Buildings Service, General Services Administration
Program Committee Liaison Member
Roger Bell
, Facilities Division, Air National Guard
Nonfederal Liaison MembersJeffrey Beard, Design-Build Institute of America
Stuart Binstock, American Institute of Architects
Nick Kolesnikoff, The Associated General Contractors of America
Felix Martinez, American Consulting Engineers Council
Christopher Monek
, The Associated General Contractors of America
Howard Noel, Council on Federal Procurement of Architect-Engineer Services
Brian Pallasch
, American Subcontractors Association, Inc.
Bruce Vogelsinger, National Institute of Building Sciences
Michael Wilson, Associated Builders and Contractors
StaffLynda Stanley
, Director, Federal Facilities Council
Lena Grayson
, Program Assistant, Federal Facilities Council
ivElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceElectronic commerce is a strategic element in achieving cost, time, and
resource savings in the federal procurement of goods and services. To promote
efficiencies in procurement, the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act (FASA)
requires that federal government transform its acquisition system from a

paperwork process to a computer-based system that is readily accessible to

government and private sector users. FASA encourages the purchase of

commercial goods and services, establishes the Federal Acquisition Computer

Network (FACNET), and over time, transforms the procurement system to an

electronic on-line system.
This one-day conference of the Federal Facilities Council focused on the
procurement of construction and architect-engineer services, providing a forum to
exchange information on related recent developments:
Ł   FASA's provisions for electronic commerce, the architecture of
electronic commerce and FACNET, government approaches to
implementation, and the outlook for the future
  Federal agency experiences with electronic commerce and FACNET,
barriers to implementation, alternative computer/electronic systems, and
initiatives underway
  Private sector contractors' perspectives on the advantages and
disadvantages of electronic commerce, barriers to implementation,
methods of overcoming barriers, and future prospects
  The purposes and services of the Electronic Commerce Resource
Centers for small and medium-sized businesses.
JOYCE RUNYAN, CHAIR
COMMITTEE ON PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING
PREFACEvElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  Executive Summary
 1  Electronic Commerce: Implementing FASA
Delores (Dee) Smith, Department of Defense Electronic Commerce
Office 8  Electronic Commerce: Perspectives of Four Federal Agencies
Ron Grover, Naval Facilities Engineering Command
G. Doyle Dodge, General Services Administration

Frank D. (Dan) Troyan, James Justin Taylor, and Ronson Kung,

Army Corps of Engineers

Ken Stepka, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
 16  Electronic Commerce Resource Centers and Value-added Networks
Bosquet (Biscuit) N. Wev, Jr., Fairfax Electronic Commerce

Resource Center 36  Speaker Biographies
 46CONTENTSviiElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSviiiElectronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryElectronic commerce (EC) and electronic data interchange (EDI) represent
one of today's fastest growing areas of business technology.
1 Government has
recognized the potential of such technologies in recent major legislative and
executive actions to reform procurement. The object of these efforts is to convert

federal processes, beginning with acquisition, from labor-and paper-intensive

processes to streamlined electronic exchanges. However, EC/EDI has not been

employed often in the government procurement of construction and architect-

engineer (AE) services. To explore these new applications, the Federal Facilities

Council (FFC), of the National Research Council's Board on Infrastructure and

the Constructed Environment, hosted a one-day symposium in May 1996. This

report presents symposium papers and Summarizes some of the principal themes

and issues of the presentations and of the exchange among participants in the

meeting's final open discussion.
BackgroundThe Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act (FASA) of 1994 was enacted to
make government procurement processes simpler and more cost-effective. Long
agreed to be cumbersome, traditional procurement processes are both expensive

and slow. FASA realized the far-reaching recommendations of two major

studies, which themselves built on many others
Ša Department of Defense
1 "Electronic commerce (EC)" refers to a paperless process, including electronic mail,
electronic bulletin boards, electronic funds transfer, electronic data interchange, and
similar techniques, for accomplishing business transactions. "Electronic data interchange
(EDI)" refers to any technique for electronically transferring and storing formatted
information between computers, using established and published formats and codes, as

authorized by the applicable Federal Information Processing Standards.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(DOD) study of procurement reform, issued by the so-called Section 800 Panel,
2and Vice President Gore's much broader effort to streamline government, the
National Performance Review (NPR).
Among other changes, FASA instituted new Simplified Acquisition
Procedures for smaller government purchases, trying the new procedures partly to

the use of EC/EDI. FASA, together with subsequent changes in the Federal

Acquisition Regulations (FAR), established the Federal Acquisition Computer

Network (FACNET), which is managed by the Defense Information Systems

Agency (DISA) and is specifically designed to carry out government business
using EC/EDI.
While, according to FASA, the new simplified procedures could be used for
any procurement of up to $50,000, they could also be used for procurements of

from $50,000 to $100,000 as well
Šif a government purchasing office was
FACNET-certified by October 1996. The Federal Acquisition Reform Act

(FARA) of 1996 extended this date to December 1999, permitting the use of the
simplified procedures in the meantime for procurements of up to $100,000,
regardless of the office's certification status. FARA also permitted agencies to

experiment with forms of electronic communication other than FACNET in

conducting business.
Symposium Scope
The use of EC/EDI, particularly as envisioned by FASA and FARA, poses
special challenges for both contractors and government in AE and construction

contracting. Problem areas include the time it takes to transmit drawings

electronically; the ways drawings can be secured from unauthorized changes; the

ways to procure AE contracts electronically, given that these contracts have their
own procedures and forms; the difficulties of involving in the FACNET system
the many small contractors who do construction work of under $100,000; as well

as the general difficulties that have been reported in implementing EC/EDI

through FACNET.The FFC symposium was thus designed to exchange information on several
related basic topics:2 The 1991 authorizing legislation for the Department of Defense stipulated that a
government-industry study be conducted on streamlining the department's acquisition
process; the Section 800 Panel authored this study.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   FASA's provisions for electronic commerce, the architecture of
electronic commerce and FACNET, government approaches to

implementation, and possible future developments
   Federal agency experiences with electronic commerce, the availability of
FACNET, barriers to implementation, alternative computer/electronic

systems in use, and related initiatives
   Private sector contractors' perspectives on the advantages and
disadvantages of electronic commerce, barriers to implementation, ways

to circumvent barriers, and future developments
   The services of the Electronic Commerce Resource Centers, which are
sponsored by the Advanced Research Projects Agency and funded by the

Department of Defense, and whose mission is to help small to medium-

sized businesses and government offices establish electronic commerce.
FACNETFollowing on FASA and high-level executive orders, DISA assumed
responsibility for putting the FACNET infrastructure in place. FACNET is based

on the concept of presenting a single government face to industry. While

electronic commerce had already long been used between government and

industry in particular cases, these efforts represented an array of machines,
languages, and practices. To provide a more comprehensive, user-friendly
system, ANSI X12 and UN EDIFACT were established as standards for the

structure, format, and content of FACNET's EDI transactions.
3 Related initiatives
to standardize business practices across federal agencies
Šwhich is the more
difficult problem
Šare ongoing. DISA was also challenged to use commercial,
off-the-shelf systems in developing new infrastructure, to reduce costs and

leverage resources.
Within four months of its charge, DISA implemented an electronic
commerce infrastructure using existing DOD and civilian federal gateways to

effect translation from other languages to ANSI X12. Various capabilities have

since been added, including an encore massively parallel processor, to improve
3 ANSI
Šthe American National Standards Institute
Šis the coordinator and
clearinghouse for national standards in the United States. UN EDIFACT refers to the
United Nations rules for Electronic Data Interchange for Administration, Commerce, and
Transport.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.production capability, and improved communications systems. A variety of
additional developments are envisioned, and special activities are underway in

such areas as developing digital signature hash and encryption.
Transactions over this DISA network with commercial value-added
networks (VANs, the commercial equivalents of federal gateways) have doubled

in the last year, to well over one million transactions per month. While the new

infrastructure has greatly shortened transaction times (delivering 80 percent of

transactions in less than two hours), it has yet to meet the growing demand.
The new infrastructure is scalable
Šmore processors can be added at will.
But even today, it is capable of handling larger engineering files, such as those

required for AE and construction procurements. The questions in this area may be

economic rather than technical. For example, it may not be cost-effective,

particular for contractors, to transmit a public request for quote along with all its

engineering drawings to all potential trading partners.
Both DOD and the Army have pursued the implementation of FACNET. In
DOD alone, approximately 280 acquisition sites have been established in the last

two years. This fast-track implementation approach has yielded both benefits and

problems. Buyers have a broader means of advertising for goods and services,

which encourages more competition, and procurement lead times have been

sharply reduced. Among the problems of the new system, the volume of

transactions overall remains low. Additionally, while selected contracting
functions have been shifted to electronic commerce
Šrequests for quotes and
purchase and delivery orders
Šmany other paperwork processes have not been
adapted or simplified. Extensive outreach efforts to assist contracting offices and

their vendors, for example, in choosing commercial VANs, are being carried out

with the help of the Electronic Commerce Resource Centers (ECRCs).
Beyond these DOD activities focused on contracting, the department is
developing transaction types in many other functional areas; logistics and finance

area transactions will shortly be on-line. DOD plans to proceed with establishing

EC/EDI in areas in keeping with the order of the actual procurement process. A

challenge for the use of electronic commerce in these multiple areas is to ensure

functional business areas are well integrated.
In spite of the challenges, electronic commerce offers great opportunities for
savings in DOD alone. One study found that billions of dollars could be saved by

shifting the department's paperwork procurement processes to the new technology

(90 percent of DoD actions represent less than $100,000). In some cases, EC/EDI

may allow the bypassing of transactions completely
Šdie Defense Commissary
Agency has already eliminated invoicing. However, many
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.obstacles to implementation remain, including the difficulty of making any major
change in any organization in an era of constrained resources and downsizing.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has also pursued FACNET extensively.
Of its 50 automated contracting offices, 45 have interim FACNET certification.

Together with the Tri-Service CADD/GIS Technology Center, the Corps has also

developed its own Corps-wide approach to delivering documents for construction

contracts in an electronic format. These electronic bid sets, which are distributed

both via the Internet and on CD-ROM, include the contract forms, clauses and

conditions of the contract, and related drawings and technical specifications. Five
pilot projects using these bid sets are now in progress. Use of the bid sets should
eliminate some paper processes (including expensive mailing and filing costs),

and enable greater lead times, just-in-time delivery, and efficient use of project

data throughout the project life cycle.
Central Contractor Registration.
 Central Contractor Registration (CCR) is
an EC/EDI initiative inspired by the recommendations of DOD contracting

officers. Previously, contractors were required to register separately with any

individual DOD site to do business at that site. Additionally, they had to update

their registration annually at all the individual sites where they did business. This

registration system was clearly very labor-and paper-intensive on all sides.
The new CCR, which is now operational, is designed to allow a contractor to
register only once annually to do business at any federal site. The development of

the CCR database was supported by interagency cooperation, particularly in the

sharing of software. Major outreach efforts, carried out by the Electronic

Commerce Resource Centers, are now underway to increase CCR registration,

which is still low. While the CCR is closely associated with FACNET, vendors

are encouraged to register with the CCR whether they choose to do business by

FACNET or not.
The CCR is potentially a much more efficient way for vendors to do
business with government. The ability to register through the World Wide Web is

expected soon. State governments are already seeking to use the CCR for their

own procurements and other functions. The repository may be useful in other

environments as well, such as for non-profit organizations.
Alternative Agency Approaches
The Naval Facilities Engineering Command (NAVFAC) encountered
several large barriers in its recent initiation of electronic commerce. While

attempting to implement EDI at its contracting offices within the period of a
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.year, NAVFAC also faced the Department of Defense order to avoid buying or
developing new software systems until the new DOD Standard Procurement

System (SPS) for contracting processes was emplaced
Šan expected wait of
roughly seven years.
To implement its own electronic commerce, then, NAVFAC had to obtain a
waiver from the SPS, a step requiring a thorough economic analysis to justify new

software costs. Another challenge was ensuring that the new software would

work well with all relevant NAVFAC processes. The new software finally

acquired is now being installed.
Additionally, NAVFAC is helping to develop a Navy Internet site, as an
alternative approach to FACNET in advertising contract jobs. It is also

developing its own contract page. A remarkable demonstration of the new

technology's potential is the real-time availability on the Internet of Department

of Labor wage determinations, accessible through such home pages of any

military organization.The General Services Administration (GSA), in its own efforts, has been
concerned foremost with the general goal of providing the information needed on

electronic contracting as easily and inexpensively as possible to around 500,000

people worldwide. Immediately after FACNET was developed, the Internet was

commercialized, followed by the arrival of much improved software, allowing

platform-and application software-independence. A variety of important
acquisition-related material is already available on the Internet, including the FAR
and other policies and regulations. GSA's philosophy is that there is a place for

all these approaches, which the market can best determine.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has developed
an innovative Internet service, the NASA Acquisition Internet Service (NAIS),

instead of using FACNET. NASA's approach was prompted partly by concern

over FACNET costs, especially for small businesses. NAIS is based on World

Wide Web browser technology
Š''click and point'' technology
Šthat, unlike
FACNET, requires very little training. NAIS now provides immediate access to
all NASA acquisitions, synopses, competitive proposals under $25,000, and
requests for proposals (RFPs). It is platform-independent, an important

characteristic in the view of NASA users. Additionally, NASA sites are linked to

other Internet acquisition sites, and will be linked to FACNET shortly. NASA

continually improves NAIS in light of both customer feedback, which is

encouraged via the system's e-mail capability, and commercial market

developments. The Air Force has used some elements of the NASA approach as a

model, and other agencies are looking at it as well.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY6
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Private Sector Initiatives and Requirements
According to private sector representatives, any electronic commerce used in
architect-engineer and construction contracting must handle special

requirements. The type of information that FACNET is designed to handle differs

from architecture and engineering contracts, in that the latter are typically not

repeat transactions, but rather project-unique. FACNET also presents barriers to

many small construction businesses, which would have difficulty supporting the
costs of FACNET training. Many AE and construction procurements are also
largeŠoften for more than $300,000. These procurements are obviously
inappropriate for FACNET. Moreover, these large projects raise their own

problems for electronic commerce, such as the costs, reliability, and ease of

transmitting very large documents. The electronic commerce systems for large

and small projects may therefore need to be considered separately. Additionally,

the transmission of AE and construction documents entails special issues of

logistics, copyright, and liability. Proposal submission would also require a high

level of security.
Private AE and construction firms already use electronic commerce in the
form of e-mail systems and the Internet. Some have their own well-developed

electronic initiatives, for example, in project planning, project management, and

financial systems. Teleconferencing is also commonly used in these industries.

However, while commercial electronic commerce is already integrated in industry

practices, the professional societies, such as the American Institute of Architects
and the Associated General Contractors of America, have not been much
involved to date.
Like many agency representatives, symposium participants from the private
sector emphasized the importance of following and capitalizing on the fast-paced

developments in the commercial world of electronic commerce. Laws and

regulations should be flexible enough to allow this to happen.
Follow-on Activities
Symposium discussion identified several further activities toward
implementing electronic commerce in AE and construction contracting. Industry

leaders, including professional society representatives, might meet, to clarify

their requirements for electronic commerce. In addition to technical questions,

this group might address process issues, such as legal and security concerns.

Agencies with experience in implementing electronic commerce might also meet
to exchange more detailed information about their progress and the barriers they
face in developing systems specifically for AE and construction contracting.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Commerce: Implementing the
Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act
Ms. Delores (Dee) Smith
Department of Defense Electronic Commerce Program
The Electronic Commerce Program has had an eventful beginning in the
Department of Defense (DOD) during the last two years. The experience has been

quite a challenge
Šin engineering, contracting, and business areas
Šfor both the
department and industry.This new electronic commerce infrastructure grew out of a Process Action
Team (PAT) that started in June 1993. DOD has a two-year program paralleling

the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act (FASA) of 1994. The DOD program

goal has been to implement simplified purchases during this time, at 244 sites

that carry out 98 percent of simplified procurements. Initially, these purchases

were defined as up to $25,000. However, during implementation, the Deputy

Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition Reform worked with the Office of

Federal Procurement Policy to have legislation raise the threshold, up to

$100,000, for simplified purchases by electronic commerce. This is a rare event:

legislation being written in cooperation with a department division, and executed

at the same time.Cooperation among the program's direct participants was also high.
Together they established not only the interim electronic commerce capability

called for by FASA
Šthe Federal Acquisition Computer Network (FACNET)
Šbut also had the infrastructure in place with sites beginning to deploy. Within the

department alone today, 286 sites are up and operating.
While there have been many program initiatives, however, the current
volume of ANSI X12 transactions is still low. The delay has been attributed
especially to infrastructure problems. However, there have been many other

problems as well, which are currently being resolved just as the infrastructure

issues have been. This next year is likely to be a very aggressive program year

for the department, as well as for the 37 participating federal agencies' sites.
The other problems in implementing electronic commerce derive from the
general paradigm shift, the move from paperwork to electronic commerce. To
date, the new system offers little new from the operational viewpoint of DOD

contracting officers. They do not have an advantageous method of execution
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
8Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.yet; the principal difference for them so far is simply the nature of their
connection with industry in requests for quotes, purchase orders, and delivery

orders.The problem for the buy in itself, and for the acceptance of the new
approach, is that additional accompanying processes have not been improved or

electronically adapted to date. In other words, when contracting officers execute

an EC/EDI award, they must also send papers to the Defense Finance Accounting

Service (DFAS), contract administration, and still other offices. Currently, then,

contracting officers simply have a broader means to advertise information for
goods and services.However, they also have the opportunity to reduce procurement lead times
significantly. In simplified purchases, we are seeing reduction of 15 to 20 days in

the procurement process. More and more, we are generating an award within 24

hours of closing a solicitation. So we are supporting our business goal, and

supporting the warfighter.
Even under a peacetime or peacekeeping scenario, it is very important that
we respond to our customers quickly
Šprocurement is at the end of the process.
The requisite user of goods and services does not see the tremendous lead time in

front of the procurement officer.
In the last two and one-half years, we have embarked on outreach efforts of
$2.5 million with the Small Business Administration (SBA), training over 1,000

small business centers, 106 procurement technical assistance centers, and 11

Electronic Commerce Resource Centers (ECRCs). All these people have also

joined with us in vigorous educational outreach to industry, and additionally, for
that matter, in helping me personally to understand the technical issues and
internal workings of the relevant activities.
In 1993, the electronic commerce infrastructure that DOD Secretary Perry
specified was one supporting all business areas. The first area addressed was

contracting, because this business area was the first to reduce personnel in

streamlining. A defense management review directive in 1990 eliminated
numerous positions and salaries. To accomplish the old paper pushing process
was impossible, and some type of streamlining had to be done.
Unfortunately, we could not carry out a true business process re-engineering
in the streamlining. I would simply say we paved the cow path in this first effort.
Today, most of DOD sends out engineering technical data whether the
recipient wants them or not. In fact, many of the technical data and aperture card

submissions end up in trash cans.
4 Most of those who receive this
4 Aperture cards are 3" 
× 3" microfilm incorporating technical engineering data.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
9Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information already maintain it in some way. They may need only certain parts of
it for the purposes of the bid. So we will need to determine policies about how

such information is provided in the future.
The ANSI X12 (841) is the transaction set for engineering technical data; its
review by the Standards Management Council (SMC), as well as the Federal

Standards Management Council, is complete.
For the last two years, my office has sponsored funding of the prototype for
engineering technical data that crosses DOD. We just released a $1.6 million

prototype demonstration that will deploy this capacity in the next 9 months to our

DLA sites, which are four large Inventory Control Points (ICP).
Some of that information on those types of documents is coming out very
soon. We will be able to force the envelope again, to determine the cost-

effectiveness, the speed, the service, and the medium through which we will

transfer engineering data in the future.
Another big issue affecting the buyer at the moment is our downsizing and
right-sizing. Many are afraid for their jobs. Bases will be closing, in keeping with

the Base Closure and Realignment Act. This kind of environment in many ways

subverts an aggressive approach to putting electronic commerce in place.
To be sure that buyers' requirements are satisfied, I have visited most of the
286 sites for feedback on the quality of the information they received both in

their in-house administered training and through all the outreach activities. This
feedback, now arriving, indicates that a good number of people were not able to
attend; and many want further information. In short, while electronic commerce/

electronic data interchange (EC/EDI) may not sound that difficult, it has been

quite hard to execute and demonstrate adequately.
For these reasons, we have numerous outreach efforts underway, including
through all the educational capabilities that we have
Šuniversities, Defense
Acquisition University, Defense System Management College (DSMC), other
institutionalized training and materials, and even an 800 number, for

procurement people and others. Educational outreach is certainly very important,

including activities like this conference. We try to support as many as we can.
I currently spend all day answering the telephone, sending out anything from
bits of information in response to specific requests, to an overall general view.
We have fact sheets and we have full handbooks available to the public, either
through our 1-800-EDI-3414 hotline or World Wide Web site.
If you ask industry about the new system today, you hear a wide variety of
opinions. It is surprising that not more of them are negative, given the thousands
of transactions and processes that have been involved, and the pressure to

establish the system. We are hearing many success stories. Last
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
10Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.week, we heard about 25 from the Burlington area of Washington State alone,
from small businesses of 1 to 500 people, who through working with the

Procurement Technical Assistance Center (PTAC) and Electronic Commerce

Resource Centers (ECRC) have recouped their investment, documenting up to

500 percent savings in basic business areas.
Most businesses today are computer-equipped and ready to participate. In
fact, even six or more years ago, small businesses serving the Air Force had

startlingly high computing power. These organizations are not bureaucratically

encumbered in changing their legacy systems. They can move relatively swiftly.

Our value-added networks facilitate the industry side of that EC/EDI as well.
We also work with the Computer Aided Logistic System (CALS) Industry
Steering Group (ISG), for prime contractors. We are very interested in these

organizations' requirements for EC/EDI, and in their requirements for their

subcontractors and sub-tiers. A meeting today in Los Angeles is addressing this

issue, so that we can all work better as a team. At least within DOD, 60 percent

of our purchases are actually through large contractors, so this type of teaming

with contractors at all levels
Šnot just with small businesses
Šis important.We are very proud of our development of the Central Contractor
Registration (CCR). The PAT, in its 60-day study, did not specify this capability,

but only recommended its use. Our top contracting officers came up with ideas

that they felt would be particularly helpful to them in streamlining acquisition.

CCR was one of them.
DOD form 129 is only one part of the transaction set 838. Actually, we have
already replaced about three or four other forms with the 838 transaction.

Nevertheless, if you were doing business with 10 DOD sites, you had to fill out

10 DOD forms 129 separately as well as submit them separately to those sites.

Moreover, this would have to be done annually, updating 10 separate

certifications and representations. I once worked in an office that collected such

information, and buyers were always in and out, trying to find out whether a

contractor was registered.
I can assure you that this arrangement has not changed today. It is a very
paper-intensive process, extremely expensive for contractors to keep updated, and

a tremendous problem if you want to do business with much more than one DOD

site.CCR gives us the capability of registering once to capture the information
for all potential DOD and federal buyers. Annual updating is also done just once.
In addition, CCR is not just for those who are doing EC/EDI; our intent is to
cover all DOD registration. It would certainly facilitate our work if contractors

registered with CCR, even if they are not EC/EDI compliant yet.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
11Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) do in fact state that a contracting
officer is not required to provide a solicitation to anyone who is not CCR-

registered. However, such refusal is often not made, as I hope it never has to be.

Our primary concern is simply to get the CCR fully operational and populated.
At least, after numerous challenges, it is now operational. We still do not
have some of the features that we want in on-line capability. For example, we

want to have World Wide Web capability to register in October 1996.
This software was released just three weeks ago to our ECRCs. Also, about
18 months ago we began looking at every data repository across all federal

agencies. After a year of analysis, we found 208,000 contractors doing business

with DOD and the federal agencies who have been active with us in the last two

years.I sent letters to these contractors, informing them of the CCR, the outreach
efforts, and ways to obtain more information, and asking them to register with the

CCR. We are now receiving 38,000 faxes and over 750 phone calls per week.

Some 18,000 have received information brochures and are queued for assistance

to register. The 18,000 who are queued are interested in EC/EDI, as well as

registration.There are still other repositories that we are trying to add to the system. We
will be converting one Air Force system that has remained outside our

infrastructureŠthe Government Acquisition Through Electronic Commerce
(GATEC) system at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, which has 4,000 record

filesŠand it will be running on FACNET within the next 45 days. Again, the
ECRCs are helping us to populate the CCR with this information.
CCR applications are also being considered in areas other than contracting.
California and eight other states are very actively seeking to use this repository

for state procurements, and for sourcing of documents and other functions. The

CCR may well be used not only federally, but in other environments where it

appears to be useful. The one critical issue is that the CCR's integrity be

maintained.The PAT also briefly covered the issue of past performance, but offered no
recommendations given its limited timeframe. In July of 1996, the Under

Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, Dr. Kaminski, mandated

that past performance be used in making acquisition procurements. I believe on

source selections of procurements it is in excess of $1 million. There is currently

no one past performance system in DOD. In the last two years, we have been
analyzing the current seven contract writing systems to see what capabilities DOD
and the federal agencies have to assess past performance. The Arthur D. Little

Company will be issuing a related business case study, to be delivered to us at the

end of May 1996. We have a $1.6 million contract requirement to
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
12Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.prototype and demonstrate this report's recommended actions for the Secretary of
Defense within the next 12 months. The area of contractor performance, then,

represents potentially additional data elements for the CCR, or at least a data

pool of some sort, so that we can better analyze and manage this parameter.
Another activity is PASS, supported by the SBA. PASS was originally slated
to lose all of its funding last month, though it was subsequently funded for some

time. Because of concerns about the disappearance of this process, the Office of

Federal Procurement Policy asked our office to see if we could manage the PASS

data as well as the CCR
Šand not only the PASS data points, which represent
perhaps less than 10 percent of the quantity of information already in the CCR,
but other PASS functionality. We therefore have an ongoing analysis of this area.
Additionally, we have over 15 other ongoing projects and prototypes in all
business areas, such as contracting, logistics and transportation, that have been

active for anywhere from 4 to 6 months. We will be adapting all types of

instruments, including 18 different contractual instruments. We need a lot of
business process re-engineering.
Ultimately, our goal is to eliminate the paper process for our buyers,
facilitating their development of smarter contracting instruments. The new system

should allow them to process administrative details efficiently, permitting

industry and the contracting officer both to develop more innovative contractual

instruments, streamlining the current high volume of procurement. Electronic
cataloguing of goods and services, for example, is one new idea.
My three-year assignment is up in June 1997. By then we should have the
sites operational, but we may not have the volume of transactions hoped for

because of the difficulties. However, we continue to promote EC/EDI

aggressively, at least on the DOD side, with the services and agencies. The

electronic commerce processing nodes that other speakers will report on today
may in fact help allow us a success story.
At the same time, we have the challenge of getting much greater registration
in the CCR
Š3,500 registrants is not very many. Still, there is significant action in
these areas, and we may well accomplish much in the next 12 months in

contracting alone.Project results in the other functional areas are also exciting, particularly
because, when different business areas begin sharing information, the synergy

has tremendous value. There are activities in financial transfer capability and

engineering technical data. We just funded what we call "EDI Afloat." All Navy
ships will have translators (a total of 330 translators, one for each ship), which
will transmit requirements back and forth via satellite in the next 18 months,

primarily for the procurement of goods and services. This
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
13Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.should greatly reduce administrative lead time, and speed up the process for both
the Navy and the industries involved.
Another area that is already on-line is within the Defense Commissary
Agency. They have been up and on-line with ANSI X12 for the last 12 months

and have done some business process re-engineering in eliminating the invoicing

process. There are real opportunities to bypass transactions completely. An

interesting sideline to this case is that, while there was concern originally about

industry partners who did not use ANSI X12, most were found to be moving to

this standard
Šin fact, today they are moving aggressively to the more
internationally oriented UN EDIFACT standard.
Another large return on our investment for us within DOD will be the
material safety data sheets. A variety of information is available in this area.

Ongoing projects are looking at three different phases of material safety data

sheets, in what is essentially a proof-of-concept, prototype demonstration within

the business areas of our interest. Once these projects have been completely

demonstrated and briefed, through all services and agencies and the Office of the

Secretary of Defense, requirements will be provided to the Slidell EC node for a

proof-of-concept test on the infrastructure itself.
5 If all goes well, the information
will then be provided to appropriate sites for deployment. Material data sheets do
not relate to EC in any way. This document is just another business form being

transmitted by EC/EDI in a transaction set eliminating the paper document and

providing an opportunity to import data once in any system via EC/EDI and use

it multiple times without rekeying.
In all these major activities underway, we work very closely with the D7
section of the Defense Information Systems Agency, our counterpart within the

DISA infrastructure who helps define functional users' requirements with the

functional user and my office. I am an constituent of the Office of the Secretary

of Defense, with the role of facilitating oversight and review of all functional

areas. I do have dollars for prototyping demonstration, as well as deployment, and

can obtain out-year funding for the requirements of the services and agencies
once a package is put together for preparation.
Dr. Michael Mestrovich is the deputy director of D7 and his office works
very actively with us in those areas, with the goal of providing a full package to a

systems engineer, to be sized not only for today, but for the future requirements

of the capability.
5 Slidell, Louisiana, is our third electronic commerce procuring node and will support
prototypes. The other two nodes are in Columbus, Ohio, and Ogden, Utah.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
14Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In short, this is where DOD is going. We seem to have a good and forceful
plan. We now have, for the first time, a DOD draft strategic plan on electronic

commerce, which is currently circulating within the department. A DOD directive

also institutionalizes roles and responsibilities by office; there have been some

problems in this area over the last three years. Those federal agencies who work

with us are certainly aware of the problems in trying to figure out who is
responsible and accountable for what. These issues are best defined among
ourselves. In general, I do believe we are well on the road to success.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
15Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ELECTRONIC COMMERCE EXPERIENCE IN THE
NAVAL FACILITIES ENGINEERING COMMAND
Commander Ron GroverNaval Facilities Engineering Command

The Naval Facilities Engineering Command (NAVFAC) performs many
services for the Navy, including contracts for construction, environmental

services, and public works services. When I arrived at NAVFAC almost a year

ago, my first job was to see that electronic commerce (EC) was implemented at

all our contracting offices within one year. Today, I will relate some of the

barriers we faced in implementing electronic commerce, in the hope that this
experience is useful to others. I will also describe some new initiatives underway.
Barriers to Implementation
The first barrier to implementation was the standard procurement system
(SPS). The goal of the SPS is to standardize all the contract business practices

throughout the Department of Defense (DOD). All DOD agencies are to use the

same procurement software, which is now in development. We were directed to

avoid reinventing the wheel
Šwe were not to buy, develop, or expand our
automation systems or the contracting process. At the time this freeze on buying
and development occurred, many of our offices were not adequately automated.

However, it is impossible to implement EC when an office is not automated.
The SPS is now at the proposal review stage, and another amendment
requiring the contractors to change and resubmit their proposals will be sent out

soon. If this amendment has a fast turnaround, the best result is likely to be a

''flyoff'' award in August or September 1996. In such a flyoff, the software of two

competing contractors will be tested at several locations, and then just one will

finally be selected. The chosen software will then be installed at all DOD
contracting offices, over a five-year period. Again, over the roughly seven-year
process, we are not to buy, expand, or develop any software. Since most of our

offices did not have any procurement software, this freeze forestalled our EC

implementation.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
16Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A second barrier to implementation was a Navy-initiated moratorium on any
new certifications for the federal acquisition computer network, known as

FACNET. Only one of NAVFAC's sites had achieved interim certification before

the moratorium was enacted at the end of August 1995. Four other sites did buy

and demonstrate automation capabilities. They are ready to operate as soon as the

Navy moratorium is lifted.
The Navy established the moratorium because some problems were observed
in this electronic commerce infrastructure that the Defense Information Systems

Agency (DISA) was establishing. In particular, information was lost in the

system; for example, some solicitations did not reach potential trading partners.

NAVFAC itself has not experienced many problems with its one FACNET site,

but some of our Navy counterparts want DISA to continue to improve, and they
wanted to send a message to higher levels indicating that. Another problem with
FACNET brings to mind one of the Dilbert cartoon strips. In it, Dilbert defines

"total quality management" as "a complex process whereby you transfer your

funds to consultants." Agencies and contractors are really fearful about the

ultimate costs of FACNET. Many feel they will simply be transferring their

money to value-added networks (VANs) or DISA. Currently, there is no charge to

government agencies for the FACNET infrastructure, but they are concerned that

DISA will have to recoup its costs in the future through fees. Many agencies are

therefore reluctant to commit themselves to FACNET. Moreover, since few

agencies or contracting activities are now using FACNET, contractors obtain

little benefit by paying a VAN to use the FACNET.
Overcoming Barriers to Implementation
To proceed with implementation of electronic commerce, the first step was
obtaining a waiver from the SPS. The waiver was approved because we were able

to provide an economic analysis which showed that all of the costs of a particular

software would be recouped well before the SPS arrives. We evaluated relevant

off-the-shelf software and found that, while no one software package would be

perfect for a government agency, some of the available software is adequate for

the job.Another major step was ensuring that all the needed interfaces would be
established among our NAVFAC automation systems, such as our financial

system. It is not easy to get our different commands and departments to agree on

how they will communicate, or to establish standard business practices. Yet this

is one of the critical considerations in identifying an automation system: making

sure it will work with the different processes involved.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
17Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVFAC InitiativesCurrently, NAVFAC is installing some of the chosen off-the-shelf software
at a few sites. First, this effort will automate our contract processes, improving

the quality of our products and increasing our productivity. Second, it will enable

us to implement EC when the FACNET moratorium is lifted.
We are also helping the Navy design an Internet site, as an alternative
approach to advertising contract jobs. The Navy is developing a home page where

contract jobs will be listed, along with brief descriptions. Hyperlinks will allow

readers to click on the name of a job to get a complete job synopsis. The site will

also have built-in search features.
DOD is linking all its acquisition home pages into one system, the
Acquisition Reform Net. Once developed, it will be accessible via search

functions. Our NAVFAC contract home page should be ready by November

1996.Another DOD success in electronic commerce also illustrates the incredible
potential of computers. The labor specialists in the military services convinced

the Department of Labor (DOL) to provide current wage determinations via the

Internet. The Service Contract Act and Davis-Bacon Act require every service

and construction contract to have a DOL wage determination. These wage
determinations establish the minimum wage a contractor can pay in every county
of the United States, for every type of work, such as carpenter, electrician, and

janitor. Previously, all wage determination requests had to be mailed into DOL.

DOL would then process them and send the paperwork back, which generally

took one to three months. Now DOL maintains a database that can be accessed

via the Internet on wages for all areas and types of work. The Army is developing a

home page with search features that accesses this database. Any military

organization will be able to go through this Army home page and immediately

download the needed wage determination for their area and by type of service.
This system has not been fully implemented. Some personnel training and
refining of the home pages are still required. Once in operation, it will be a

tremendous boost to the government contracting business. Essentially, a

contracting officer will be able to get a wage determination in ten minutes or less

using the Internet, as opposed to the current one to three months.
There are other possibilities for using the Internet for acquisition that we are
just beginning to explore. Recently someone suggested that the Internet might be

used to give notice of likely future work that is not yet advertised.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
18Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Obviously, such notice would be of great help to the contracting community in its
planning, although there are still legal issues and other factors to consider.
NAVFAC is also working with the Army Corps of Engineers on the
electronic bid set project. Two of the first three contracts to be advertised on an

Army home page will be NAVFAC projects. A contractor will be able to

download all or part of the plans and specifications for these solicitations via the

Internet, instead of ordering a set of specifications through the mail.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
19Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE AT THE GENERAL SERVICES
ADMINISTRATIONG. Doyle Dodge
General Services Administration

In the electronic commerce (EC) program at the General Services
Administration (GSA), we continually look across and coordinate with the major

federal agencies, including interagency activities, seeking a consensus for

processing and disseminating all the information needed for electronic commerce

initiatives. In federal procurement activities, a great deal of information must be

made available as easily and inexpensively as possible to about 500,000 people in
government and industry all over the world. Designing an EC system and network
for the paperless procurement of federal goods and services is a considerable

challenge. We designed the entire concept first, then established interagency

groups and started developing and implementing modules in manageable units.
Two and one-half years ago, the interagency Federal Electronic Commerce
Acquisition Program Management Office was formed. They began working on

the optimal architecture and implementation conventions to route the relevant

information among the people who use it, from the federal agencies to private

sector vendors and back. They created FACNET, and decided to use electronic
data interchange (EDI) transaction sets to disseminate information between
dissimilar computer systems.
During this same time, the Internet became commercialized, making its use
easily and widely available. Also arriving on the scene was important,

interoperable new technology software, allowing computer operating system

independence for Macintosh computers, personal computers, and UNIX
computers, and independent of any specific application software. In other words,
when using this new software, the authors and the users of information can be on

either the same or different types of computers, as in Macintosh to Macintosh,

personal computer to Macintosh, and UNIX to personal computer exchanges,

using either the same or different application software. After authoring the

desired text and graphics in a computer, the information can be transmitted

electronically, with or without EDI transaction sets, and the user can see, store,

and print the text and graphics information exactly as it was authored.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
20Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This capability is significant for those using text, forms, and graphics, and in
the architect-engineering, construction, and other industries. All the architectural

drawings, floor plans, and other information produced on computers today can be

simply and easily processed by the author through this new technology software.

The processed information can then be disseminated electronically on CD-ROM,

floppy disks, e-mail, or the Internet. Users at the receiving end, applying the free
reader software supplied by the software manufacturer, can see, store, and print
the information as an exact copy.
With these new technologies and advanced telecommunications methods,
and making use of the talent we have in many different agencies, we are able to

put together a better program for faster, less expensive, and more accurate federal

procurement using a paperless method. In today's world of diminished budgets,

interagency cooperation is easier to establish. Many agencies are providing

working group help from the users and the technicians. How do the users want to

see and use the information? How do the contractors want to see and use it? The
lawyers? And so forth. The technical support staff from the participating agencies
listen to the opinions, consider the options, and reach a consensus on how one

system should operate across the government, to present a "single face" to the

users.GSA brings that consensus into being by coordinating interagency activities.
GSA and the other major procuring agencies have many conceptual, user

understanding, technical, and computer equipment resources and operating

methods that all agencies and vendors need and can share. We believe that these

resources and methods will find their way through the marketplace to the users in

the best manner. The information can be provided either directly through the

Internet and CD-ROM disk, or by downloading the information from the

Internet, putting it into EDI transaction sets, and sending it via FACNET.
There is a place for both Internet and FACNET approaches in providing the
information to the users. We happen to feel that the Internet transmission is much

simpler, easier to use, and less expensive, but the marketplace should be allowed

to determine what approach to use. Federal contracting officers will decide which

approach they want to use and private sector contractors will also. Between these

two users, the decision should become apparent over a short period of time, and

the parties will soon migrate to it.
Fortunately, it is not necessary to develop standards for this program. When a
users' consensus is reached, it does not take us long to get it designed, developed,

and put in place. When using consensus rather than standards, we are able to

work with each other and move quickly to reach the goal of how to provide the

information.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
21Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A number of the government's procurement documents
Špolicies,regulations, procurement letters, and so forth
Šare now on the Internet, and the
Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Federal Travel Regulation (FTR)

are on CD-ROM as well. Internet documents include the FAR, FTR, the Defense

Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS), the Air Force Federal

Acquisition Regulation Supplement (AFFARS), the NASA FAR Supplement, and
the Department of Energy Acquisition Regulation (DEAR).
Major federal procurement agencies are striving to use the Internet to
provide notices of business opportunities, including forecasts of requirements,

synopses, solicitations, and contract awards for subcontracting activities. NASA's

approach of using the Internet for displaying business opportunities is being

followed by other agencies, and there is some consensus that NASA's approach
works well.
Wage determinations and the debarred bidders list are very widely used by
federal contracting officers and by prime contractors. GSA wants to be sure that

this information can be easily accessed through a single face approach, with a

similar format used by all government agencies, one that does not require

formatting or translation changes after transmission. Users rely on a variety of
application software programs, such as WordPerfect 5.1 and 6. 1, Microsoft Word
in various versions, Quark Xpress, and Pagemaker. Some users need to send

graphics, tables, or forms electronically. All this information needs to reach its

destination efficiently, accurately, and in a readable format.
The Interagency Shared Databases Steering Committee agreed to leave the
regulation formats "as authored," and if the FAR Council wants to change the

format later, that will be their responsibility. The regulations will be available in

just two formats: in Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML), which is an ASCII

format; and in Acrobat PDF (Portable Document Format), which is exactly as
authored, and independent of the operating system and application software. This
PDF format is exceptionally good for those who want to transmit graphics or

forms electronically, and want to view, store, and print them on varying computer

platforms.GSA's main goal is to have all the required federal procurement information
accessible on the Internet and CD-ROM, so that it can be obtained quickly and

accurately. It is easy to take the original material, process it through HTML and

PDF software programs, and distribute the resulting files electronically. The

program concept and plan have been initiated in parts at several agencies, but
implementation is far from complete. The FAR, archived back to FAR 90
Œ34, is
available on the Internet at 
http://www.gsa.gov/far/, in both HTML and Acrobat
PDF formats, and the FAR forms are being placed on the Internet as quickly as

possible in PDF.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
22Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Each agency will migrate to handling their FAR Supplements the same way
as the FAR and load them on the server of their choice. An agency can use its

own server, or GSA could probably handle it at a cost much lower than the

agency purchasing a server and software, and hiring a Web master. Currently,

there are hyperlinks from the FAR World Wide Web site to many other Web

sites, including the NASA FAR Supplement, the DFARS, AFFARS, DEAR, and
others. More hyperlinks will be added as soon as additional federal procurement
information is loaded.
These developments and trends in electronic commerce will yield
tremendous benefits for both public and private sectors. Information should be

distributed more accurately and expeditiously. Some users receive FAR changes

in the printed version up to four months after the changes are published in the

Federal Register
. With the Internet, FAR changes could be available within a few
days after publication. Moreover, users will not have to reach for different

documents and manuals, both old and new, to find the information they need
Šitwill all be available electronically.
All government agencies should be able to present a "single face" format to
all users, and users, conversely, should be able to access all the agencies'

information they need from the Internet and CD-ROM. Value-added networks

(VANs) will have access to this information, and their customers' jobs will be

that much easier and less expensive. For these and many more reasons, the system

should improve the return on investment for everyone.
One of the most important parts of implementing EC is involvement of the
system users. This approach incorporates good feedback mechanisms and can be

modified as needed through user experience. GSA and other agencies work with

the private sector, and particularly with the VANs and the training people, to

answer their questions and to meet their needs by system refinement.
As I mentioned before, GSA works by consensus. We try not to set
standards, nor to initiate long-term projects, or involve dozens of people in

decision making because it slows the process. Instead, we identify the 6 to 10

people from various agencies who are most knowledgeable about an issue and

seek their advice and input. Then we all work together to make it happen.
The agencies have shown increasing willingness to share their information,
and their solutions. For example, the software package that GSA chose to convert

WordPerfect 6.1 to HTML resulted in the Environmental Protection Agency

being able to eliminate a lot of time and contractor expense on conversion. The

design and development of loading procurement synopses on the Internet, by the

National Aeronautics and Space Administration, National Institutes of Health,

and other agencies, are refining this important part of federal procurement. This

cooperative approach helps greatly.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
23Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.One of our goals is to eliminate the paper documents sent out. The sooner
the agencies and vendors start retrieving all their information electronically, the

sooner we will be able to stop printing. Everyone will benefit in this regard from

EC.Another high priority is developing a good search engine on the FAR
server, one that will index the FAR and all databases on other servers with related

information. For example, a phrase could be sought in the FAR, in the NASA

FAR Supplements, and in the DEAR, all at the same time. Today's search engines

are sophisticated, listing instances where a phrase occurs and where related
material is as well (even where the selected phrase does not appear). Any listed
instance can then be immediately accessed as desired in the full document.
In summary, I want to state again that the GSA goal of providing all the
information required for complete electronic federal contracting has been

accepted by the major procurement agencies, and the initial functions are now

provided through the Internet. The broader implementation, refinement,
improvement, and addition of related modules can be put in place over the next
several months and the remaining agencies can climb on board for complete

paperless contracting. This concept encompasses the following tasks:
   Author the formats of the information packages.
   Convert each authored document into HTML (for ASCII) and into
Acrobat PDF (for as authored) formats.
   Convert all graphics, engineering drawings, forms, tables, and so forth to
Acrobat PDF for electronic transmission.
   Load the HTML and Acrobat PDF files onto an Internet server.
   Develop hyperlink pointers between each major federal procurement
document or file on all the agencies' Internet servers.
   Establish interagency steering committees, made up of six to ten of the
major procurement agencies, to establish a consensus direction on each

topic and to provide a member to each users' working group and
technical working group.
   Provide the federal procurement information directly via the Internet, or
download it for use via EDI transmission over FACNET.
   Transmit the information each quarter (or some other established time
frame) to the Government Printing Office to be placed on CD-ROM

disks.   Make the federal procurement information available, as described
above, for the 500,000 people in the public and private sectors.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
24Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Eliminate the printing and disseminating of paper copies of all federal
procurement information as soon as reasonably possible.
   Implement a powerful search engine on the FAR server that will index
each operative word in each file of federal procurement information on

the dispersed servers throughout the government. With this capability,

users will be able to find the location of similar information wherever it

is.   Make available the business opportunities, including forecasts,
synopses, and solicitations of government requirements, and the award

of government contracts for subcontracting opportunities.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
25Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS FEDERAL ELECTRONIC
COMMERCE PROGRAM AND ELECTRONIC BID SET TEST
PROJECTDan Troyan, Justin Taylor, and Ronson Kung
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

The Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act (FASA) of 1994, with the
electronic commerce it specifies
Šincluding the Federal Acquisition Computer
Network (FACNET)
Šbrings changes and new advantages to the acquisition
process, in particular for the area of interest here today, engineering and

construction contracting.The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is pursuing several new options in
contracting. Of the Corps' 50 automated contracting offices, 90 percent (45) now

have interim FACNET certification, giving them a small-purchase threshold of

$100,000. This is significant because 90 percent of all annual Corps' purchase

transactions are for less than $100,000, and the electronic commerce method can

readily accomplish these acquisitions.
The $100,000 ceiling, however, does not lend itself specifically to
engineering and construction contracts, which usually start at about $300,000 and

go up. The Corps of Engineers is considering how to fit in small engineering and

construction procurements, when such acquisitions can provide an advantage to

project management, and enhance customer service and support. Prospects for

this kind of electronic commerce include quick procurement of last-minute low-
cost items needed for a construction project or for building maintenance and
repairs.In the world of engineering and construction services today, if you fail to
deliver within budget and on time, you are not doing a good job. Besides saving

time and money directly, electronic commerce also eliminates the business of

stockpiling and ordering for future work needs. Electronic commerce makes it

possible to order something that you might need, but that you did not anticipate in

the original project management plan, and still receive it just-in-time. Electronic

commerce thus provides an even greater edge in delivering within budget and on
timeŠor ahead of time.
Currently, in the early and developmental phase of FACNET use, it is
difficult to communicate on that network. Consequently, better electronic success

can be realized if only basic requests for quotes and award traffic is
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
26Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.exchanged. Off-line from FACNET, between the time of the buyer's request and
making the award to the vendor, related information and specifications may be

exchanged for the transaction using facsimile or CD-ROM. This hybrid electronic

commerce process saves time, money, and effort.
In addition to adopting the Federal and Department of Defense Electronic
Commerce Program with its FACNET System, the Army Corps of Engineers is

conducting a test project of electronic bid sets over the Internet for advertising of

construction contracts. It is expected that, eventually, this Corps project will lead

to a totally paperless engineering and construction design process. In the
meantime, the electronic bid set process itself shows great promise for electronic
advertising by by saving costs, time, and other resources over current paper

methods, and should greatly boost productivity and efficiency. By taking

advantage of today's technology, including use of CD-ROM, the cost of printing

contract documents can be borne by the location creating the demand
Šwhetherthe designer, reviewer, contracting office, contractor, or supplier.
The Electronic Bid Set Project
Originally, several Army Corps of Engineers groups began their own
initiatives in providing electronic bid packages, that is, in putting their documents

for construction contracts into an electronic medium to deliver to the contractor.

In delivering specifications and contract forms and clauses through an electronic

medium, these Corps groups substantially cut their printing and mailing costs.
The Corps' Chief of Engineers endorsed those initiatives, and charged
headquarters staff with developing a Corps-wide approach for consistency of the

electronic bid packages. While the Corps encompasses an extensive network of

40 or so districts, and handles all types of information and initiatives, it did not

want 40 different ways of doing business to confront the contractor. The

headquarters office of the Army Corps of Engineers was charged with finding a

way to do it corporately and smartly.
At the same time, the Tri-Service CADD/GIS Technology Center was
working on a prototype to deliver contract documents or engineering documents

to the contractor. The Tri-Service CADD/GIS Technology Center is a laboratory

that supports joint Army-Navy-Air Force work on computer-aided design and

drafting (CADD) and geographic information systems (GIS) initiatives. The

center is located in Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Initially in our Corps-wide project, we involved all the interested parties in a
working group. The working group met in Mobile, Alabama, early in 1995
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
27Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and identified the members of this committee, representing a number of Corps
program areas: Military Programs Directorate; Information Management

Directorate; Laboratory at Waterways Experiment Station; Civil Works; and

Military Programs Construction. The Corps districts involved are Fort Worth,

Mobile, Omaha, and Sacramento. Also included, because of the Tri-Service

effort, are Air Force and Navy representatives.
One of the working group's first steps was to define an electronic bid set.
The complete development of electronic commerce was not our task. Rather, it

was to come up with a deliverable to a contractor to reduce Corps effort. We

therefore defined an electronic bid set as the contract forms, the clauses and

conditions of that contract, and related drawings and technical specifications.

Originally, then, the project goal was simply to convert these contract bid
documents from print media to an electronic format.
There are a number of good reasons to make this conversion. Technology
and electronic imaging can be more fully exploited, because these documents are

electronically prepared right now. CADD programs are already used to create

drawings, and word-processing and other text applications are used to prepare the

manuscript. Currently, however, these electronic documents
Šfor solicitations,
bids, and construction contracts
Šare converted to print for delivery to the
contractor. This final time-consuming step could be eliminated.
Construction and contracting projects would be more efficient, providing
more lead time, for example, so that better products could be obtained at lower

price, and mitigating bid and contractual protests because the information

delivered would be identical to the information we have. This helps to assure a
fair and competitive environment.
Additionally, the use of electronic data could be optimized through the
project's life cycle. Once data were captured electronically for the solicitation

process, they could be readily transferred to other documents. One electronic file

could be used to retain both pre-award and post-award data. These capabilities

would make the old manual filing systems unnecessary. If one central location
were used to index all the documentation for a project, storage and archiving
could be reduced as well. This approach is compliant with our mandated

electronic commerce initiative.
For implementation of the electronic bid sets, we identified five pilot sites.
We specified the use of commercial, off-the-shelf, conversion/reader software, so

that a contractor can easily view the Corps documents, prepare solicitations, and

send that information back. Our objective was to develop a system that was

simple and user friendly.The first project, advertised on April 29, 1996, will involve the Fort Worth
and Los Angeles Corps districts, in the construction of a dormitory at Edwards
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
28Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Air Force Base. The Fort Worth district is responsible for life-cycle management,
design, and official solicitation for the project. The Los Angeles district is

covering the bid opening, award, and contract administration. Bids will be open

on May 29.In our current process, solicitations are announced through the 
CommerceBusiness Daily (CBD). We will continue to use this approach, but will also make
use of our electronic network. All Corps districts are now electronically

connected to one another internally and to the Internet. They can publish Web

pages and be accessed through the Internet. For this reason, we also have an
announcement on the Internet (the same solicitation seen in the CBD).
Previously, a contractor would visit or phone to request plans and
specifications. This can still be done, but using the Internet, the contractor can

now request the plans and specifications without leaving home. We will also

distribute plans and specifications on CD-ROM.
The electronic bid sets permit transferring many electronic file formats to a
common one. We chose Adobe PDF for the text engine, and we are using

Computer Aided Logistic System (CALS) format, which is a Department of

Defense standard for the raster images of drawings.
The CD-ROM distributed in our first project will contain the entire project
Šall the plans, specifications, and contract documents, including 250 drawings.
Instead of costing $16 per set to mail, it will cost 85 percents, which is a huge
savings in mailing costs alone. The technology yields a 75 percent savings in
project printing and advertising costs.
The procurement process will not be changed from the current approach.
Bids will be submitted in paper form. Bid openings and awards will be made as

before. However, we are looking at the engineering aspects of electronic

commerce for these functions as well.
The estimated price range for the first joint project is $10 to $25 million. We
chose a large project, because a survey of contractors and contracting agents in

the western area found that 80 to 90 percent of them could utilize CD-ROM
technology.We will evaluate the pilot projects against success factors. Procedures will
be modified as required and results will be analyzed to provide guidance and
education so that subsequent projects reflect what we have learned. The Tri-
Service CADD/GIS Center will provide technical assistance, monitor pilot

projects, and make recommendations about the process and standards.
The results of the process will provide implementation guidance for all the
Corps districts in implementing electronic bid sets. We will start with a single

project in every district, probably beginning next year. As districts progress, they
will take on additional projects.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
29Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE AT NASA: PROCUREMENT ON
THE INTERNETKen StepkaNational Aeronautics and Space Administration

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is using the
Internet for procurement of a wide variety of goods and services, including

architect/engineer and construction contracts. I will describe the NASA

Acquisition Internet Service, also known as NAIS (
http://procurement.nasa.gov/ )and the Federal Acquisition Jumpstation (
http://procure.msfc.nasa.gov/fedproc/home.html ).NASA is changing dramatically in the way we do business. The NASA
budget for fiscal year 1997 is roughly $13 billion; approximately 90 percent of

that budget is spent as procurement dollars. While NASA will likely face

challenging budgets over the next several years, substantial portions of these

budgets will still be spent for procurement of goods and services. Our Internet

service allows us to publicize business opportunities to a broad vendor audience
efficiently and economically.
One of NASA's challenges is encouraging our centers to communicate as a
single face to industry. This single face concept is a keystone of the federal

electronic commerce (EC) initiative, and includes primary elements:
   Single means of supplier registration
   Standard transaction formats
   A network for delivering standardized transactions
   Standard government databases allowing agencies to share information.
Together, these elements allow vendors and agencies to conduct business in
a uniform, cost-effective manner.
I should mention that NASA is not currently promoting an Electronic Data
Interchange (EDI) presence. EDI and other EC technologies are being looked at

under an agencywide business process re-engineering initiative. Although the
single face concept can certainly simplify and standardize the process of
conducting business with the federal government, the FACNET approach is

challenging to agencies and businesses. FACNET is not inexpensive to use. Some

of those costs are financial; others take the form of sweat equity, in
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
30Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.terms of specialized training, hardware/software configuration challenges, value-
added networks, and building new business relationships based on these new

business standards. Some FACNET features require quite a bit of training to

operate effectively.At NASA, we are concerned about the customers at both ends of our
business transaction. In the President's memorandum on electronic commerce, (58

Federal Register
 58095, October 28, 1993), a significant goal is to expand the
opportunities for businesses, especially small businesses. For a small business to

use FACNET and become proficient, it has to make an investment of time,
resources, and money. If there is not enough payback from that investment, the
businesses are not going to pursue FACNET until the business case to participate

becomes more favorable. That may explain why the initial surge of participation

and transactions has not materialized. It may over time.
Since the federal government's electronic commerce initiative began in the
fall of 1993, much has changed in computer technology and capabilities. In the

fall of 1993, Netscape did not exist. Today, Netscape is competing head to head

with Microsoft for Internet browser supremacy. The Internet was available, but

browser technology and the enhanced plug-in applications on today's browsers
were on the drawing board somewhere
Šcertainly not available for routine,
productive use.
We see electronic commerce as a tool set. There is such a range of
procurement types, from micro to small purchases, to major procurements, that no

one tool today can handle them all. For example, some procurement initiatives,

such as on-line catalogs, are satisfying the same transactions that EDI goes after.
Many of the procurements that appeared very suitable for EDI transactions three
years ago can now be carried out with significantly less effort by using IMPAC

cards, the government's credit card equivalent
Šthe buyer simply calls up
suppliers, such as CompUSA or Staples, and places an order; and it is delivered

the next day, with the delivery scanned in at the customer's desktop by the

delivery service, such as United Parcel Service or Federal Express. Little training

is required to use the IMPAC card. These quick success initiatives have become

very popular with federal agencies.
If we continue to promote one system for all types of procurements, we will
lose valuable time and endanger our credibility with our vendor community. Our

job as procurement officers is to complete the procurements for the user. We are

going to use the tool that works best at the time. We do not want to invest all
resources into one tool or electronic commerce system.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
31Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NASA Acquisition Internet Service (NAIS)
NASA delivers acquisition documents over the Internet to slash lead times
and paperwork, and to save money. NASA's Internet service, NAIS, provides

immediate access to all NASA synopses and competitive acquisitions over

$25,000. NASA is the first federal agency to use this type of procurement system

agencywide.Although NASA has 10 centers, most small companies probably do business
in a certain geographical area. In the past, a business on the West Coast would

probably focus on the Dryden Flight Research Center or the Ames Research

Center. NAIS now allows a business to access any NASA procurements from a

desktop computer.Why a World Wide Web service? Because it is a commercial marketplace.
Internet technology is exploding, including the tools to use the Internet. The tools

that have emerged in the last few years are what has brought the Internet to the

forefront. The browsers were first, and now there are the plug-ins that work with

the browsers. These tools make the Internet more functional and accessible.
Often when people think of NASA, they think of leading edge technologies.
We are not inventing Internet tools at NASA, but rather using commercial

Internet standards, such as HTML, to develop our procurement processes. In the

NASA Office of Procurement, our strategy is, ''Follow industry's lead
Štwo stepsbehind.'' We want to try technologies, but we do not want to buy into

technologies that will change overnight, or perhaps six months from now. There

is no incentive for us to be the first to use a new technology. We listen to

customer and user feedback on both sides of the procurement transaction. Our

service provides customer feedback forms, where vendors can suggest what they
like and don't like
Šand they respond. We test what is available, and let the
market lead us. As the market determines the best technology or best standard,

then we move in that direction.
One of the more important features of our approach is that it is platform-
independentŠcan work within any computer environment, such as Windows-
based personal computers or Apple Macintosh computers. Customers and NASA

users are often parochial about their computer hardware. Moving to a single

platform within NASA is not realistic. The fact that World Wide Web Internet

access is independent of computer hardware at our end, and also independent for

the user at the other end of the business transaction, is beneficial as these new

technologies emerge in the business environment.
Our approach also allows a business to access information on NASA
procurements from anywhere in the world, from home or office. If you want to
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
32Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.know the latest NASA procurement information, you can log-on through an
Internet provider, or through any commercial on-line provider, such as America

On-Line or Prodigy.
Our strategy also minimizes entry barriers for small businesses. I previously
mentioned the investment in training, the investment in software, and the

investment in value-added networks that are all needed to use an EDI-based

system. If a business has high-volume transactions, then an EDI-based system has

a place. However, in the architect-engineer and construction businesses, how

many procurements are available in a given year for all government? Not
hundreds and thousands, but handfuls. So a highly automated environment may
not be needed to access the required procurement information.
Benefits of NAIS
NASA is significantly reducing procurement lead times and saving money.
In the past, publishing a solicitation
Šwith all the reproduction and assembly and
mailingŠcost about $15 per package. After mailing 400 copies of the
solicitations, NASA might only receive three or four responses. Today, if a

vendor wants to search NASA synopses, he can point to the search button, which

leads to a synopsis search page. By scrolling down, the vendor can choose the

NASA centers for which a search is desired. After choosing a specific NASA
center to search, the vendor can go to a classification code, which mirrors the
codes in the 
Commerce Business Daily
. These include architect and engineering
services. The file can be searched by date. A vendor can also add key words for

the search. In a few moments, depending on modem speed, the results appear.

The search engine is based on shareware.
The search results appear as an abstract of hot links to information on the
procurements of interest at the specific center identified. Since the links are hot, a

vendor can select an item of interest and pull up the synopsis. If it piques her

interest, any available solicitation documents can simply be downloaded to a

computer's hard drive. Another nice feature is that, for the user's response to the

solicitation, these documents can be cut and pasted because they are word-

processed documents. If the vendor's e-mail application is associated with his
browser, and the synopsis sparks his interest, he can e-mail the contracting
officer with any questions directly via the synopsis. Within a day or so, a

response should appear. If a vendor is on a deadline to respond to a bid, it

certainly helps to get the right information. And there is an electronic record as

well. The solicitation documents, when issued, can be found by simply scrolling

down the synopsis.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
33Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Other agencies are looking at NAIS as a business model. Eventually, the
interaction of agencies providing this information on the Internet should lead to a

search capability that covers not just NASA procurements, but all procurements

of a given type across the agencies. By whatever means greater competition

comes about, it means better products and services and lower prices for

government.What to watch for in the coming months? This arena changes so quickly that
we no longer talk in terms of years. NASA has an on-line feedback form that

allows users to key in their opinions about the system. We are using these

opinions as a key to system improvements.
NASA will soon roll out automatic e-mail notification, which offers great
potential. This capability is now working in pilot form, and we hope to have it

fully operational during fiscal year 1997. By filling out an on-line form with an

e-mail address, a user will be able to identify the procurements and NASA

centers for which more information is desired. The service then sends an e-mail
notification when those procurements are posted on the Internet. Thus, a business
will not have to come to NASA, NASA will go to the business with procurement

opportunities. Once again, our goal is to lower the entry barrier and associated

costs for reaching and responding to our procurements.
For proposals, NAIS currently requires a business to send back a paper
document. We are working on an electronic proposal pilot that should be

available in the near future when the interest and technology permits. NASA will

establish a secured server so that we can ensure the security of proposals when

they are submitted.
At the present time, NAIS does not qualify for FACNET certification. We
are working with the Office of Federal Procurement Policy and with Congress to

expand the definition of what types of electronic commerce qualify for FACNET

certification.In searching for architect and engineering construction contracts, NASA has
a page that anyone can access from a desktop personal computer via the Internet

(http://procurement.nasa.gov). This page is a link to all of NASA's business
opportunities by field installation.
These new NASA electronic commerce capabilities were developed without a
specific budget, often by staff in their spare time. The staff saw the need and the

opportunities presented by the tools available. A tribute is owed to those in the

trenches who worked together to develop the system, standardize it agencywide,
and make it available to the business community.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
34Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Federal Acquisition Jumpstation
The Federal Acquisition Jumpstation, an Internet site (
http://procure.msfc.nasa.gov/fedproc/home.html ), provides hot links to all federal
procurement information on the Internet. From this site, a vendor can link to

departments and agencies throughout government, to retrieve acquisition

forecasts, announcements, solicitations, how to guides, small business assistance

information, and federal acquisition regulations. NASA maintains this site, and it
has grown rapidly.
The Jumpstation is updated frequently. This is an Internet address that a
vendor would certainly want to bookmark and check frequently. Through the

Jumpstation, all the agencies listed can be accessed, including the NASA centers.

For example, if you access the Air Force through the Jumpstation, you will find

that their business opportunities search capabilities closely resemble NASA's.
One of our goals in working with other agencies is to link these opportunities
closely so that when the user searches for architect and engineering or

construction contracts, for example, the search can be carried out across the

participating agencies. Several interagency working groups are active in

development, and we are always looking for more participants with new ideas.
From the Jumpstation, the user can also access and, in some cases, search
the FAR and applicable agency supplements. The Jumpstation also links to

commercial resources providing information similar to NASA's. Enter those sites

at your own risk. Some are very good actually, and most are still free, so if you
have the access, go ahead and take a look at them.
Please access NASA's sites often. If there are ways to improve them, please
let us know.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE: IMPLEMENTING THE FEDERAL ACQUISITION
STREAMLINING ACT
35Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Commerce Resource Centers and
Value-Added NetworksBosquet N. Wev, Jr.
Fairfax Electronic Commerce Resource Center (ECRC)
The main subjects I will address are the Electronic Commerce Resource
Centers (ECRCs) and value-added networks (VANs).
The ECRC program is intended to meet the critical need for assisting small
to medium businesses and small government offices in introducing electronic
commerce practices and principles into their business. In short, the mission of the

ECRC network is simply to help businesses and government offices move into

electronic commerce. The ECRC network has 11 centers around the country,
6sponsored and managed currently by the Advanced Research Projects Agency

(ARPA), and as of October 1996, by the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA), and

funded by the Department of Defense (DOD). One of the requirements for the

establishment of an ECRC is to be associated with an institution of higher

learning. Our center, the Fairfax ECRC, was established in 1993 in association

with Dimensions International (the prime contractor and an 8A firm), George

Mason University (GMU), and Iris, Limited Liability Company. Our ECRC

operates as a seamless (or a "virtual") organization and currently have several

doctoral students from GMU who work for us full-time. They operate our lab, and
do most of our enterprise integration and process change work. Our contract has
been extended to 2002.
Each ECRC has a contractually defined area of core functions and
technology expertise. The Fairfax ECRC area of expertise is information

technology. My company, Iris, is the third party in our center, and we are the

experts in CALS. CALS stands for Continuous Acquisition and Lifecycle

Support. The concept originated in DOD in 1985, to take a weapons system and

operate it from birth to death
Šfrom design, to manufacture, to implementation,
to operation, to repair parts, to phase-out
Šusing applied technology. We think of
CALS more generically, as a way to do business.
6 Scranton and Johnstown, Pennsylvania; Cleveland and Dayton, Ohio; Fairfax,
Virginia; Atlanta, Georgia; Palestine, San Antonio, and Orange, Texas; Bremerton,
Washington; and Oakland, California.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS36
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Fairfax ECRC mission is to work with the small to medium-sized
enterprises and government offices in the electronic commerce area, to help them

do business as trading partners through the application of methods and

information technologies that enable process improvements. We do a lot of work

for DOD, but we are starting to work with other federal agencies as well.
First, the ECRC provides consultation and training to the enterprises and
government offices. Second, we develop strategies for business process

improvements; and third, we recommend and help implement enabling

technologies.That order is very important. We have seen and consulted with companies
who have gone out with great pride, bought 10 personal computers, and installed

and networked them all, so that they can very nicely do bad things quicker. We

have to uninstall all of that and look at their business process. It must be changed

to do what they want.
Most of you have heard of the "as is" and the "to-be" ("as is'' being the way a
business process works today, and "to-be" the way it should work to take

advantage of today's technology). We apply these concepts all the time, and it

works. We look at a company and determine the "as is,'' and only then do we help

the company determine the "to be." Once the company is reorganized, then we

assist in installing the technology to suit.
We have an intensive training and education program, and conduct
numerous courses both on-and off-site. We also provide technical support.
Our outreach activities include trade shows, expositions, conferences, and
seminars. The 25 people of the Fairfax center are all involved in outreach. We use

outreach activities to find the companies requiring assistance.
Consultation and technical support is provided as a follow-on service. We
answer many questions by phone, and when necessary, go to the offices of a

company or government agency and work with them at no charge for up to 40

hours. Much work can be accomplished in 40 hours. Beyond those hours, the

ECRCs are permitted to negotiate fee-for-service arrangements.
Subjects we often address are legacy data management and legacy
management conversion. Every time someone writes a check, a piece of legacy

data is created. Legacy data fill offices, file cabinets, computers, storerooms,

boxes, and so on. We teach people how to manage such data in adapting to the

world of electronic commerce.
The ECRC network is a cooperative rather than a competitive network. The
ECRCs regularly call one another for help
Šscanning and conversion help,
automated design help, help in whatever the problem area happens to be. A team

from another ECRC may come in to help find the solution.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS37
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Once we find a company or agency who is interested in our services, we
complete an initial assessment with them. Then there are a number of further

steps in our strategy to work with a company:
   Initial team agreement with the client
   "Tiger Team" formation (such a team is composed of selected personnel
from the client and the ECRC, with the team leader always from the

client)   Planning, high-level and business case analysis
   Final agreement with the client
   Detailed analysis
   Implementation planning
   Implementation.We feel that an 80 percent solution today is better than a 100 percent
solution some day, and much better than no solution at all.
Many people, including those in government offices, are afraid to set-up
electronic commerce for fear they will look foolish. Our suggestion is, let's all do

it together.Even those in remote locations, such as Fort Ritchie in northern Maryland,
have now had vendor conferences, and they are excited about getting involved,

even though they began with little knowledge about electronic data interchange

(EDI).What are the three most important things in real estate? Location, location,
location. The three biggest problems we have today in electronic commerce are

culture, culture, culture. The principal reason people fail to become involved is

that they refuse to stop doing what they have been doing for the last 25 years.
Automating a business is rarely a technology issue, but almost always a cultural
issue.Some businesses would not, in fact, benefit from our technological
improvements, and we help identify these cases as well. If there is not a business

case that points to automation, we do not recommend it.
There has been much discussion about the costs of the Defense Information
Systems Agency (DISA) infrastructure and the difficulty of implementation. But

there are no rose gardens in this field. It is hard. The DISA infrastructure (the

Federal Acquisition Computer Network, FACNET) has had vigorous growing
pains. However, the system is getting better by the day, because responsible
people recognized the problems and are working extremely hard to resolve them.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS38
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.What challenges must be overcome for businesses to work with government
via EDI? Again, culture is the biggest problem. Companies and government

agencies must also demonstrate both management and financial commitment.

Managing legacy data is another major challenge. How many office files must be

converted to digital information?
Standards, such as ANSI [American National Standards Institute] X12 and
UN EDIFACT [United Nations rules for Electronic Data Interchange for

Administration, Commerce and Transport] are still another issue. When you pick

up the telephone, are you surprised by the dial tone? Of course not. It is a

standard around the world. The standards are in place. ANSI X12 is the standard

for EDI.The sharing of information is important. Today the power is neither in the
sword nor the pen, but in information, more specifically, information retrieval and

the sharing of information. Business process and organizational structure are very

important as well.
At the ECRC, we can only achieve our mission if we can demonstrate
measurable success in our client organizations. We work often with small

manufacturing firms, primarily in southwest Virginia and in North Carolina, and

help them change their processes. About 85 percent of those firms will let us

analyze their profits and loss statements. We may review these accounts

monthly, to help the businesses continually improve. Whenever possible, we like
to measure our success by more than mere compliments, however genuine. While
a large number of specific benefits may result from a business's use of electronic

commerce, they all derive from reducing costs, improving quality, and decreasing

time to market. If electronic commerce is well implemented, it can certainly

produce these three results.
Value-Added Networks (VANs)
Value-added networks (VANs) are part of the DISA infrastructure for
electronic commerce. A VAN provides trading partners a common environment

through which to transmit, receive, and store EDI messages. DOD has a

certification program that all VANs must go through; 26 VANs have now been

certified.There are certain qualifications that VANs will have to meet. VANs need to
transmit, receive, and store EDI messages, with a two-hour maximum for

government transmission to supplier mail boxes. The VANs must be open 24

hours a day, 7 days a week, and they must be able to archive data for at least 30

days. They must to be able to protect data and have a backup and recovery plan
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS39
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in the event of a "crash." To be certified, VANs must also handle "one-to-all
interested parties" transaction sets. This means VANs must be able to connect

with all other people in the network, and all other functional areas.
A VAN is little more than an electronic mailbox. The government, on one
side, goes through a so-called gateway, which does nothing more than translate

business information into ANSI X12, the standard for EDI. From the gateway

this information goes to the Network Entry Point (NEP), where it is distributed to

the VANs, which in turn distribute it to the vendors.
Value-added service (VAS) adds significant value to the basic VAN function
of storing and forwarding EDI data. Typically, a VAS provides communications

and translation software. Choosing a VAN or a VAS is largely a filtering process

in which you identify those features that best meet your business needs. There are

two general approaches. You can sign up with a VAN that has the software you

need included (so-called bundled software); or, you can choose a VAN and a

third party's software. The software selected must be compatible with your own
system, so that you can connect to the DOD and commercial VANs you want to
reach.Some commercial entities already do business like this. K-Mart, Wal-Mart,
Sam's, J.C. Penny, Sears
Šthey all have their own VANs. If you want to sell your
widgets to Wal-Mart, you have to do it electronically. This is a consideration if

you are going to do business not only with the government, but also with a

commercial entity. Your choice should also depend in part on the volume of

business that you expect to do. You should estimate VAN costs for light,

moderate or heavy use, as appropriate.
Cost. There are several kinds of costs to consider in choosing a VAN. The
initial set-up fee is usually about $200. For electronic mailboxes, there are

account, access, and storage fees. You might select a per character charge, a

volume discount, or a flat rate. And there are interconnect fees. Of the 26 VANs

we have talked to, we find people are generally moving toward the flat rate

because it is easier.
Reporting. Everybody wants to look at reports. But you need to consider
exactly what it is you want to see, because you will pay for it. Ask for a sample

invoice and a sample monthly report. Are they easy to read and understand? Look

at report features such as characters transmitted, connection time, failed

transmissions, and failed log-on attempts.
Our ECRC maintains a list of 20 questions to ask a VAN, as follows.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS40
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Questions to Ask a VAN
1.What are the initial fees for establishing an account?

2.What are the recurring fees (monthly and annual) for maintaining an account?

3.What are the per transaction or per character charges?

4.What are the access charges (per transmission or per minute)?

5.Does the VAN offer volume discount rates?

6.What communications methods are supported by the VAN?

7.What are the rates for using different communication protocols and speeds?

8.Does the VAN support your selected transaction sets and standards?

9.Does the VAN provide a local access telephone number?

10.What levels of archiving does the VAN support (on-line and off-line)?

11.Does the VAN support interconnects with other VANs?

12.Does the VAN provide translation between different standards and versions?

13.Does the VAN provide compliance checking?

14.What is the VAN's record of availability and reliability (amount of downtime)?

15.What type of store and forward messaging services are provided?

16.What is the geographical coverage of the VAN (regional, national,
international)?17.What is the industry coverage of the VAN (transportation, government, etc.)?

18.What reporting is provided by the VAN?

19.What levels of security are provided by the VAN (password, automatic call-
back)?20.What additional features does the VAN support (broadcasting, BBS, etc.)?
Other criteria. Another important criterion to consider is market coverage.
Can the VAN connect with your trading partners, commercial and otherwise? The

Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) uses a special system, as does the Air Force.

Does the VAN provide training with its bundled software? Are
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS41
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.there other value-added services? You should obtain and check references of the
VAN that are businesses similar to yours.
Special needs.
 You should consider whether you have other special needs.
Fax-to-EDI is one capability. If you have a very low volume of transactions, and

are not EDI-capable, then for a minimal VAN fee you can arrange with your VAN

that, if it receives an EDI transaction from a buyer (either the government or a

commercial enterprise) that relates to what you sell, the VAN can fax that

transaction to you. Then you can write up a quote, fax it back to the VAN, and

the VAN will send it back to the buyer via EDI.
VANs can also be Internet service providers. They can scan bulletin boards.
They can translate your business information to other softwares (such as to

commercial VANs, such as those of K-Mart or Wal-Mart).
Activity level.
 In choosing a VAN, you need to weigh the costs and benefits
by activity level. What does that mean, activity level? If you have various

departments within your company
Šsay, accounting, finance, shipping and
receiving, inventory, and manufacturing, and a request for quote, or some other

EDI transaction set comes in, you would like to know whether you should route

that information to any or all of your departments. You cannot do this routing
unless you have an integrated database. This is the type of issue to be considered
in this context. EDI cost/benefit is usually volume-based.
Translation software.
 The software you select to go with the VAN must be
able to translate data into and out of standard EDI formats. In this case, the ANSI

X12 standard is what is used. There are several DOD versions of ANSI X12, so

you must be sure that your software, whether it is bundled into a VAN or

provided by a third party, has the capability to look at all versions. Again, you

may want to be able to exchange data not only with DOD, but also with

commercial trading partners.
The simplest and least expensive way to do business is to use a stand-alone
personal computer and EDI translation software, either bundled with a VAN or as

third party software. This software takes business information (either from the

buyer or the seller), and, through the ANSI X12 standard, translates it into

computer language and transmits it to the recipient (either the buyer or seller).

Once received, the information is translated back into business information that
can be read. The process is proceeds continually, back and forth. This approach is
straightforward to implement.
Of the many software vendors out there, roughly half offer DOS systems,
and half offer Windows-based software. But many are moving to
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS42
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Windows, and the DOS environment will likely eventually fade away in the EDI
world. The drawback of the stand-alone personal computer approach is the lack

of integration with existing software. Integrated EDI software is similar to stand-

alone software, but can integrate with other applications and allow the integration

of a company's entire database, so that all departments can communicate with one

another.Information goes into the system once, but you use it many, many times.
You can route an incoming request for a quote through all the departments

automatically. The information goes all the way through, and if you happen to

win the bid and get a purchase order, the same thing happens again. The

information can go directly to manufacturing and to shipping and receiving.
I recently took a tour through the local Safeway warehouse in Landover,
Maryland. It was an amazing experience. Almost their entire process is

automated. They have little buggies running around on the floor with magnetic

tracks. They have high-rise buildings with forklifts that go up five stories and

grab a crate of whatever, bring it down, and put it on a little cart. The cart runs

over, dumps the crate on a truck, and the order is gone. No one has touched it.

The whole operation has been run from an operations center. That's the kind of
operation we are headed for. They are saving enormous amounts of money using
this system.
Finally, a company can develop its own proprietary software. We highly
discourage this option. Proprietary software is written to fit a specific use in a

specific company or pad of a company. This software usually is poorly

documented and becomes obsolete very quickly. If and/or when the author leaves

the company, the documentation left behind is rarely adequate for successors to

maintain or troubleshoot the software.
People are concerned about the privacy of their information. But information
can be fire-walled, or compartmented. The only information that is available and

shared with everyone else is the information that you want them to see. It is not

hard to arrange this, simply more expensive.
Other EDI software capabilities.
 It is also valuable to have built-in
communications software included with the software package, so this software

does not have to be bought separately.
You might also want to arrange for unattended batch transmissions. If you
are going to be receiving large batch transmissions of transaction sets from the

VAN during off-hours, then you want to be able to say when to do that. You

arrange this, by the way, when you register using the Trading Partner Profile
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS43
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.transaction set (TS 838). You can provide a lengthy list of times when you want
to talk to people.
It is important to ensure that the EDI communications software you choose
allows multiple VAN connections in case you wish to do business with both

government and commercial enterprises.
In software system utilities, if you want security, you want to arrange for a
password. It is also helpful that your VAN or third party software have automatic

recovery and restart capability, so that if the VAN (or third party software)

crashes, they can recover, and the crash is transparent to you. Installation routines

should be fairly simple. It also helps if the software package allows manipulation

of the screen, so that you like what you see.
With regard to system maintenance, the software should provide automatic
purging and archiving. It should be able to save information for an adequate

period, say, for about 10 days; and the program should be updatable when ANSI

X12 standards are updated. The software should have good phone support, with

extended hours and knowledgeable technical support staff. Error reports, which

tell you of any errors the software may be experiencing, are important. Be sure

you can receive these error reports. There should be inbound/outbound
transaction set reporting. You ought to be able to receive a report at periodic
intervals that indicates all the transaction sets you have received and sent over any

given period.Functional acknowledgments.
 Functional acknowledgments can be
important, but you must sometimes pay for this feature (depending on the VAN).

Acknowledgment is something developers have struggled with, though it is

nothing more than a notice indicating that someone received what you sent them.

The problem is that such messages fail to go end-to-end; they only go from the

gateway to the VAN and back. They do not travel the full route from the agency
to the vendor and back. If you want such capability, it will generally cost you
extra money. The better VANs will pass this feature along as part of their flat rate

plan.There is also a transaction set called an 836, which is an awards, or
unsuccessful bidders, notice. It tells you who won and for how much, so that if

you are not the winner, you can learn more about the competition. This

communication can be a useful marketing tool.
Cost considerations
. Regarding software costs, you should consider the
initial cost, whether maintenance is ongoing (and whether you should get a

contract or not), and whether you will be charged for upgrades in the software.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS44
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.When transaction set 841 (Technical Information) is finally approved, will
you have to pay the VAN extra to receive it, or will it be received as part of the

flat rate package? Sooner or later the costs of developing the new transaction sets

will have to be passed along. Will an ANSI X12 standards update be possible,

and how much will it cost?
The total costs of EDI vary greatly, depending on your choices. You can buy a
personal computer today for $1,000, and it will do the job. You can get a 486

model with everything you need, and a modem for $100, and have the capacity to

do EDI. A VAN, after the initial investment of about $200, should not cost more

than $50 to $100 per month. Software can be expensive, particularly the more

advanced integration software.
Good assessments of software are available, and the ECRCs can also be
readily accessed through our Fairfax center's home page (
http://www.ecrc.gmu.edu ). The Dayton ECRC is building a valuable matrix with cost
comparison charts, to help both vendors and government agencies to select VANs

and software vendors.ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESOURCE CENTERS AND VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS45
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Speaker Biographies
All of the following people participated in the symposium as speakers or
moderators. The Federal Facilities Council is grateful for their contributions.
G. DOYLE DODGE,
 as Senior Advisor to the Assistant Commissioner,
Office of Network Applications for the U.S. General Services Administration, is

responsible for governmentwide management direction in a wide range of
advanced electronic commerce programs. Among his current activities, he heads
an interagency steering committee in designing, developing, and publishing on

the Internet the electronically shared databases necessary for electronic

contracting for the $200 billion of supplies and services required annually by the

federal government. For several years, Mr. Dodge has been involved in designing

and managing the electronic publishing and dissemination of federal acquisition

information. Mr. Dodge earned his B.S degree in business from Oregon State

University and his MBA in finance from Indiana University. He worked in

business analysis, development, administration, and management positions in the

steel and aerospace industries for 14 years before moving to the federal

government in 1972. He has headed regional professional associations, authored

many technical papers in his field, and has lectured frequently at regional and

national conventions of related professional organizations.
PETER G. DOYLE
 is a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects and a
principal in the firm Doyle and Synan. In a 26 year career with the Linbeck
Corporation, a Texas-based national builder, Mr. Doyle rose from engineer/
estimator and project manager to corporate executive, and was directly involved

in the planning and construction of buildings worth more than $1 billion. These

include the Biosphere visitor center in Arizona, a 16,000 seat
SPEAKER BIOGRAPHIES46
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.arena in Miami, and a 55 story office tower in Houston. In his professional
affiliations, Mr. Doyle has held leadership roles in the Associated General

Contractors of America, as chair, officer, and board member at local and national

levels. He has also been a board member and chairman of the National Institute

of Building Sciences. Mr. Doyle holds a bachelor of architecture degree from

Notre Dame University and a master of architecture from Rice University, and
has completed the Advanced Management Program at Harvard University. Peter
Doyle is known throughout the United States in both building and architectural

arenas as an industry leader, skilled negotiator, and client-focused general

manager.RON GROVER
 is Deputy Commander for Contracts at the Naval Facilities
Engineering Command Headquarters and a member of the Navy Electronic Data

Interchange Core Group. He was commissioned in the Civil Engineer Corps in

1976. In his 20 year career, Commander Grover has held a number of positions at

stations in the United States and abroad. These include assistant public works
officer and assistant resident officer in charge of construction, in Argentia,
Newfoundland; deputy resident officer and assistant officer in charge of

construction, in Fallon, Nevada; deputy officer in charge of contracts and

assistant public works officer at the Naval Submarine Base, in Kings Bay,

Georgia; and environmental and public works department head at Engineering

Field Activity in Washington, D.C. Commander Grover received a bachelor's

degree in electrical engineering from the University of Iowa and a master's degree

in civil engineering from Texas A&M University. He is a registered professional

engineer in the State of Nevada.
RONSON KUNG
 is a 1988 graduate from Texas A&M University, where
he received a B.S. in industrial engineering. Mr. Kung began his federal civil

service career as an industrial engineer in the Naval Facilities Engineering

Command's (NAVFAC) three-year professional development program. In 1991,

he joined the relatively new public works support team at Southwest Division.

His primary duties were to assist in establishing the southwest region's public
works management automation program and serve on facilities evaluation
assessment team visits, which provide process improvement recommendations to

Navy and Marine Corps installations throughout the southwest. After providing a

year of technical support to over 60 personnel in computer and network issues,

and involvement with implementation of NAVFAC's CAD2 program, Mr. Kung

accepted a position in 1994 with the Tri-Service CADD/GIS Technology Center.
SPEAKER BIOGRAPHIES47
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.He is currently responsible for various tri-service projects, development, and
implementation.MICHAEL R. McFARREN
 is currently assigned to the Defense
Information Systems Agency as the managing engineer for the Electronic

Commerce/Electronic Data Interchange (EC/EDI) project. In this position, Lt.

Colonel McFarren is responsible for the design, development, construction,

installation, and testing of the infrastructure to support electronic commerce for

the entire federal government. Additionally, he is chair of the EC/EDI standards

management committee and the Department of Defense representative to the
federal standards management coordinating committee. In his career, Lt. Colonel
McFarren has also served as a senior scientist for the Air Combat Command at

Langley Air Force Base, a research analyst at Armstrong Laboratories at

Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, an intercontinental ballistics missile combat

crew commander instructor at Grand Forks Air Force Base, and an assistant

professor of aerospace studies at Cornell University. He holds a B.S. in chemistry

education from Purdue University, an M.B.A. from the University of North

Dakota, and an M.S. in operations research from the Air Force Institute of

Technology. Lt. Colonel McFarren is currently completing his dissertation for a

Ph.D. in information technology at George Mason University.
JOYCE L. RUNYAN
 is the Chair of the Federal Facilities Council
Procurement and Contracting Committee and has 16 years of experience as a

contract specialist with the Naval Facilities Engineering Command (NAVFAC).

In her current position as assistant for construction, architect-engineering, and

environmental contracts policy in the contracts policy division, Ms. Runyan is

responsible for recommending NAVFAC construction and architecture-

engineering policy and reviewing requests for waivers and approvals. She is the

NAVFAC liaison with contractors' professional organizations. She is also the
Navy representative on the construction, architecture-engineering, and bonds
committee of the Defense Acquisition Regulation System, which recommends

revisions to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) or the Defense FAR

Supplement, to implement new policy and law. Ms. Runyan holds a B.A. from

Methodist College and a masters degree in contracting and acquisition

management from the Florida Institute of Technology.
SPEAKER BIOGRAPHIES48
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DELORES (DEE) SMITH
 is Director of the Department of Defense
Electronic Commerce Office. She was chair of the DOD electronic commerce in

contracting process action team, established by the Deputy Under Secretary of

Defense for Acquisition Reform, a group chartered to develop a comprehensive

implementation plan for DOD. The team included representatives from all

relevant entities, who worked full-time to analyze existing components of EC/
EDI contracting initiatives, determine the associated risks and benefits, establish
the educational requirements, and assess the costs associated with the plan. The

successful effort of the DOD charter laid the groundwork for the formulation and

signature of the President's Executive Memorandum, signed October 26, 1993,

which directed a similar effort to be performed by all federal agencies by March

1994. Ms. Smith previously was assigned to Sacramento Air Logistics Center, as

the Office of the Secretary of Defense program manager for defense electronic/

continuous acquisition and life-cycle support. Additionally, Ms. Smith was

aircraft contracting division chief in support of the F111, A-7, and A-10 aircraft

for five years, and served for 23 years in contracting at Oklahoma City Air

Logistics Center, Oklahoma. She received her bachelor's degree in accounting

and master's degree from Central State University of Oklahoma.
KEN STEPKA
 joined the Office of Procurement at the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters in May 1992. Since

December 1993, he has led the NASA's acquisition initiative in electronic

commerce. Today, NASA's Office of Procurement pursues electronic commerce

as a ''tool set,'' matching the appropriate electronic commerce solution to the wide

variety of federal procurements. The goals are to enhance accessibility and
transaction performance across the entire business process, at the lowest practical
cost. Prior to joining NASA, Stepka served as the contracting officer for the

Sidewinder and Sparrow air-to-air missile systems during a 12 year tour at the

Naval Air Systems Command, Washington, D.C. His procurement career began

as a Navy intern in Albany, Georgia.
JAMES JUSTIN TAYLOR
 is a program manager in the Engineering
Management Branch, Headquarters, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. He is

currently program coordinator for the Electronic Bid Set Project and provides

technical advice and management for computer-aided engineering programs and

applications. Mr. Taylor has held various engineering positions within the Corps,

including project manager for the Automated Review
SPEAKER BIOGRAPHIES49
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Management System Technical Center of Expertise at the Corps Sacramento
District. From July 1983 to July 1988, he was assigned to the design branch in the

Omaha District, where his responsibilities included the structural design for

projects ranging from enlisted and officer housing, and administrative and dining

facilities, to flight simulators and aircraft hangars. In July 1988, he was assigned

to the design quality assurance section, engineering division, Sacramento
District, where he was responsible for project compliance on in-house and
architect/engineer designed projects. He earned a B. S. in architectural

engineering in 1983 from Tennessee State University.
FRANK D. (DAN) TROYAN
 is Chief of Contracting Automation and
Federal Information Processing Resources Acquisition Programs Division at the

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. He is also program manager for the Standard

Army Automated Contracting System (SAACONS) and electronic commerce in

the Office of the Principal Assistant Responsible for Contracting at

Headquarters. Mr. Troyan is responsible for developing, managing, and
overseeing contract automation, contract program policies and procedures
involving audit and reporting functions, and information resource procurement

activities accomplished by the Corps at 57 worldwide contracting offices. He is

also responsible for implementation of federal, Department of Defense, and

Department of the Army requirements in Corps-wide automated information

systems used for acquisition. In previous positions with the Army, Mr. Troyan

engineered and built extensive communications facilities throughout Alaska and

managed one of the Army's earliest large-scale data reduction centers for digital

computer processing of radar, telemetry, film, and oscillographic information. As

a department head, he developed and expanded curricula at the Department of

Defense Computer Institute (now the Information Resources Management

College of the National Defense University). He holds a B.S. from the U.S.
Military Academy at West Point, an M.S. in electrical engineering from the
University of Arizona, and an M.A. in business and personnel management from

Central Michigan University.
BOSQUET (BISCUIT) N. WEV, Jr.,
 is Senior Vice President of Iris,
Limited Liability Company, and director of outreach at the Fairfax Electronic

Commerce Resource Center (ECRC) in Fairfax, Virginia. At the Fairfax ECRC,

he is responsible for increasing the awareness of the community (MD, DE, DC,

VA and NC) of the benefits that small to medium-sized enterprises can derive

from the services offered by the ECRC in the field of
SPEAKER BIOGRAPHIES50
Electronic Commerce for the Procurement of Construction and Architect-Engineer Services: Implementing the ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.electronic commerce. Additionally, Mr. Wev instructs business owners and
government officials about how to do business with the federal government using

electric commerce. He has been the general tutorials chair for the last three

Continuous Acquisition and Life-Cycle Support (CALS) expositions and will also

be in the next. Mr. Wev is a well-known speaker on CALS/EC/EDI in North

America, Europe, and Asia. Prior to 1992, Mr. Wev owned a retail business for
10 years, worked in the Washington, D.C., military-industrial complex for 13
years, served as a U.S. Navy submarine officer for 20 years, and graduated from

the U.S. Naval Academy in 1952.
SPEAKER BIOGRAPHIES51
