DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/5968The Evolution of Untethered Communications204 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05946-6 | DOI 10.17226/5968Committee on Evolution of Untethered Communications, National Research CouncilThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEiCommittee on Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.  1997THE EVOLUTION OFUNTETHEREDCOMMUNICATIONS
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of theNational Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy
of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of
the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with
regard for appropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of
Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distin-guished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of

science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter
granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the
federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the
National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of theNational Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autono-
mous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy
of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of
Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. William A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy
matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the responsibility given to

the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal
government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and educa-
tion.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering
knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies
determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is adminis-

tered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. William A.
Wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
Support for this project was provided by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 97-80464International Standard Book Number 0-309-05946-1
Copyright 1997 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Additional copies of this report are available from:
National Academy Press
2101 Constitution Ave., NW
Box 285
Washington, DC  20055
800-624-6242
202-334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)

http://www.nap.eduPrinted in the United States of America
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiCOMMITTEE ON EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED
COMMUNICATIONS
DAVID J. GOODMAN, Rutgers University, 
Chair
NORMAN ABRAMSON, ALOHA Networks, Inc.
EUGENE CACCIAMANI, Hughes Network Systems

JOEL ENGEL, Ameritech

MARK EPSTEIN, QUALCOMM, Inc.

BRUCE FETTE, Motorola, Inc.

DOUGLAS C. FIELDS, United Parcel Service

BEZALEL GAVISH, Vanderbilt University

ANDREA GOLDSMITH, California Institute of Technology

RANDY H. KATZ, University of California at Berkeley

EDWIN A. KELLEY, Hughes Aircraft Company

KAVEH PAHLAVAN, Worcester Polytechnic Institute

CHARLES E. PERKINS, Sun Microsystems

THEODORE RAPPAPORT, Virginia Polytechnic Institute

JESSE RUSSELL, AT&T Laboratories
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Chair
FRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JAMES CHIDDIX, Time Warner Cable

JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara

A.G. FRASER, AT&T Corporation

SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley

JAMES GRAY, Microsoft Corporation

BARBARA J. GROSZ, Harvard University

PATRICK M. HANRAHAN, Stanford University

JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco

DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin

BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation

EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington

MICHAEL LESK, Bellcore

DAVID LIDDLE, Interval Research

BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JOHN MAJOR, QUALCOMM, Inc.

DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley

DONALD NORMAN, Hewlett-Packard Company

RAYMOND OZZIE, Rhythmix Corporation

DONALD SIMBORG, KnowMed Systems

LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel Corporation
MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Program Officer

ALAN S. INOUYE, Program Officer

JON EISENBERG, Program Officer

MARK E. BALKOVICH, Research Associate

JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Associate

LISA L. SHUM, Project Assistant

SYNOD P. BOYD, Project Assistant
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,
MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONS
ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation, 
Co-chair
W. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, 
Co-chair
PETER M. BANKS, Environmental Research Institute of Michigan
WILLIAM BROWDER, Princeton University

LAWRENCE D. BROWN, University of Pennsylvania

RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University

JOHN E. ESTES, University of California at Santa Barbara

MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University

L. LOUIS HEGEDUS, Elf Atochem North America, Inc.

JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University

CAROL M. JANTZEN, Westinghouse Savannah River Company

PAUL G. KAMINSKI, Technovation, Inc.

KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota

KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory

MARGARET G. KIVELSON, University of California at Los Angeles

DANIEL KLEPPNER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JOHN KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company

MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania

NICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory

CHANG-LIN TIEN, University of California at Berkeley
NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
vThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
viiIn 1994, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
initiated the Global Mobile Information Systems (GloMo) program to ap-
ply advances in high-speed computation, signal processing, and minia-

turization to mobile, wireless, multimedia information systems.  The

GloMo program is intended to develop the technologies that will enable

military forces to carry out communication and computing tasks free of

tethersÑthat is, cables to power sources or telecommunications networks.
The concept of 
Òuntethered
Ó communications unites mobile and wireless
operations.In response to a request from DARPA, the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council ini-

tiated a one-year study on untethered communications in July 1996.  To

carry out the study, the CSTB appointed a committee of 15 wireless-tech-

nology experts, including researchers, program managers, technology de-

velopers, and users working in industry and academia.  The Committee

on the Evolution of Untethered Communications was charged with ad-

vising DARPA on where to invest in information technology for mobile

wireless systems.  In particular, DARPA posed the following questions:
¥What will industry do on its own?  When?
¥What are the military requirements and needs in mobile wireless
information technology?
¥To what extent will commercial technology development support
military needs?
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACE¥Where can DARPA have the greatest impact in technology develop-
ment or acceleration of technology development to support the military?
This report presents the results of the CSTB study.  In addition to
answering DARPA
Õs questions, the report provides a wealth of informa-
tion of interest to a broader audience, suggesting that this is an era of
unprecedented change, growth, and promise in untethered communica-

tions for both civilian and military users.  The report explores the evolu-

tion of wireless technology, the often-fruitful synergy between commer-

cial and military research and development efforts, and the technical
challenges still to be overcome.  Many examples of past ingenuity and

future opportunities in wireless systems are noted.  Although much of the

information can be obtained piecemeal from other sources, it is rarely

collected and analyzed in the manner found here.  This is the CSTB
Õs first
report on wireless communications.
The committee met four times during the one-year study time frame.
The report is based on the committee
Õs discussions with representatives
of military organizations and commercial developers, background infor-

mation from the literature, the expertise and judgment of individual com-

mittee members, and the deliberations of the committee as a group.
The committee appreciates DARPA
Õs sponsorship of this project and
in particular acknowledges the participation of four individuals.  Howard

Frank, former director of the Information Technology Office, provided

valuable advice to the CSTB prior to the initiation of the study.  Barry

Leiner, the original driving force behind the GloMo program, had the

vision to appreciate how a comprehensive technology assessment could

complement the specific research projects already under way.  Kevin
Mills, who later assumed leadership of the GloMo program, addressed

the committee at the beginning of its study.  Rob Ruth, who succeeded

Mills, shared his insights into operational military needs and encouraged

the committee and CSTB staff to support DARPA
Õs needs to advance and
refine GloMo planning.  All of these individuals provided regular re-

minders of DARPA
Õs strong interest in this study and helped motivate the
committee
Õs efforts to develop a comprehensive analysis that takes into
account the context of military decision making.
The committee also benefited enormously from the assistance of a
number of anonymous reviewers.  Reviewer comments and constructive

criticisms helped the committee transform a voluminous early draft into a

tighter, well-organized final report, calibrate the emphasis placed on a

variety of topics, and clarify the analysis of specific issues.
Finally, the committee appreciates the effort and energy devoted to
this project by former CSTB staff member Paul Semenza, who organized

the study and guided the writing and revision of this report, and former
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixCSTB project assistant Gail Pritchard, who provided administrative and
logistical support.  It also is grateful for the yeoman efforts of Laura Ost,

the writer-editor who worked with the committee during the summer of

1997 to improve the organization and written presentation of its ideas.
David Goodman, 
Chair
Committee on Evolution of
Untethered Communications
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsxiEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
11PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE
101.1Overview, 11
1.2Historical Perspective, 13
1.2.1Communications Before the Industrial Age, 13

1.2.2Telegraphy, 15

1.2.3Early Wireless, 15

1.2.4Telephony, 16

1.2.5Communications Satellites, 17

1.2.6Mobile Radio and the Origins of Cellular
Telephony, 18
1.2.7The Internet and Packet Radio, 19
1.3Military Wireless Systems and Research, 21
1.3.1Terrestrial Systems, 21

1.3.2Satellite Systems, 24

1.3.3Research Initiatives in Untethered
Communications, 25

1.3.3.1Global Mobile Information Systems
Program, 26
1.3.3.2Software-Defined Radio Research, 28

1.3.3.3Communications Systems Research, 29

1.3.3.4Radio Component Research, 29

1.3.3.5Small Unit Operations, 30

1.3.3.6Modeling and Simulation, 30
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTS1.4Commercial Terrestrial Mobile Telephone Systems
and Services, 30
1.4.1First-Generation Systems, 31

1.4.2Second-Generation Systems, 33

1.4.3Third-Generation Systems, 38
1.5Commercial Satellite Systems, 41

1.6Mobile Data Services, 44

1.7Wireless Local Area Networks, 47

1.8Comparison of International Research, Development,
and Deployment Strategies, 47
1.9Summary and Report Organization, 52
Notes, 54
2TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES56
2.1Communication Link Design, 58
2.1.1Characteristics of the Wireless Channel, 60
2.1.1.1Path Loss, 60

2.1.1.2Shadow Fading, 61

2.1.1.3Small-Scale (Multipath) Fading, 62

2.1.1.4Interference, 63

2.1.1.5Satellite Channels, 64
2.1.2Capacity Limits of Wireless Channels, 64

2.1.3Modulation, 65

2.1.4Channel Coding and Link-Layer Retransmission, 65

2.1.5Countermeasures for Fading, 67
2.1.5.1Flat-Fading Countermeasures, 67

2.1.5.2Countermeasures for Frequency-
Selective Fading, 69
2.1.6Channel Access, 72
2.1.6.1Fixed-Allocation Multiple Access, 72

2.1.6.2Demand-Assigned Multiple Access, 73

2.1.6.3Random Access, 74
2.2Network Issues, 75
2.2.1Architecture, 75
2.2.1.1Cellular System Design, 76

2.2.1.2Packet Radio System Design, 78
2.2.2Physical Resource Allocation, 79

2.2.3Interoperability, 80

2.2.4Routing and Mobility Management, 81
2.2.4.1Multihop Routing, 81

2.2.4.2Terminal Mobility, 82

2.2.4.3Wireless Overlay Networks, 84
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxiii2.2.5Resource Discovery, 85
2.2.6Network Simulation and Modeling Tools, 85
2.3End-to-End System Design Issues, 86
2.3.1 Application-Level Adaptation, 86

2.3.2Quality of Service, 87
2.3.2.1Approaches to Quality of Service, 87

2.3.2.2Transport-Layer Issues, 91
2.3.3Security, 92
2.4Hardware Issues, 94
2.4.1Antennas, 95

2.4.2Other Radio Components, 97
2.4.2.1Analog-to-Digital Converters, 98

2.4.2.2Digital Signal Processors, 99

2.4.2.3Filters, 100

2.4.2.4Radio Frequency Amplifiers, 100
2.4.3Portable Terminal Design, 101
2.4.3.1Displays, User Interfaces, and Input Devices, 101

2.4.3.2Processors, 102

2.4.3.3Batteries, 102

2.4.3.4Storage, 103
2.5Summary, 103
Notes, 104
3COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS1083.1Overview, 109

3.2Motivations for Commercial-Defense Synergy, 111
3.2.1Design Reuse, 113

3.2.2Production Learning Curve, 114

3.2.3Maintenance and Logistics Support, 116

3.2.4Training, 117

3.2.5Cycle Time, 117
3.3Barriers to Commercial-Defense Synergy, 119
3.3.1Risks of Dependence on Commercial Technologies, 120

3.3.2Trade-offs Between Cost and Complexity, 121
3.3.2.1Performance Issues, 121

3.3.2.2Quality and Testing, 122
3.3.3Infrastructure Differences, 124
3.4Designing Wireless Systems for Military Applications, 125
3.4.1Network Architecture, 125
3.4.1.1Network Design Issues, 125

3.4.1.2Bandwidth Requirements, 129
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTS3.4.1.3Source Coding, 131
3.4.1.4Highly Adaptive Systems, 133
3.4.2Security, 134
3.4.2.1Availability of Service, 135

3.4.2.2Confidentiality and Integrity, 135
3.4.3Multimode, Multiband Communications, 137
3.4.3.1Software-Defined Radios, 138

3.4.3.2Co-Site Interference, 139
3.5Defense Technology Policy Issues, 141
3.5.1Implications of Changes in Military Tactics, 141

3.5.2Rapid Infrastructure Deployment, 142

3.5.3Logistics, 142

3.5.4Preparing for Unsophisticated Adversaries, 143

3.5.5Preparing for Sophisticated Adversaries, 144
3.6Summary, 144
Notes, 145
4CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
149
4.1History and Challenges of Wireless Communications, 149

4.2Standards Development, 152

4.3Demonstration and Testing Rather Than Development, 154

4.4Procurement, 155

4.5Modeling and Simulation, 156

4.6Network Architecture, 158

4.7Network Security, 159

4.8High-Density Communications Platforms, 160

4.9Software Radios, 162

4.10Smart Antennas, 162

4.11Smart Waveforms, 163

4.12Filter Technology, 164

4.13Novel Components, 165
BIBLIOGRAPHY
167
APPENDIXES
ABiographies of Committee Members
175
BBriefers to the Committee
180
CGlossary
182
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Executive Summary
Extraordinary growth is evident in capabilities for ÒuntetheredÓ com-
munications, the union of wireless and mobile technologies.  An example
is cellular telephones, which were virtually unheard of in 1980 and are

now used by almost 200 million subscribers worldwide.  The subscriber

base for wireless communications services is growing 15 times faster than

the subscriber base for wired services; by 2010 wireless and wired sys-

tems are expected to serve equal numbers of users.  The vigorous public

demand for wireless services is fueling intense industrial and govern-

ment activity, including research and development (R&D) aimed at im-

proving the quality and reducing costs of wireless technology, design of

innovative systems and services, and implementation of new technical

standards and policies.  This dynamic environment is producing diverse

wireless technologies and standards, in stark contrast to other areas of

communications marked by a convergence toward uniformity.  All this

activity will bring the reality of the next century close to the vision of

Òanytime, anywhereÓ communications.
Historically, U.S. national defense needs have stimulated many ad-
vances in wireless communications technologies, and the Department of

Defense (DOD) has been among the first users.  Today, however, some

DOD systems lag the state of the art.  Whereas the commercial sector has

greater incentives than ever before to push the technology envelopeÑat a

cost driven down by a growing mass marketÑsome military wireless

equipment is based on 1970s and 1980s technology.  The adequacy of the

current defense communications infrastructure was called into question
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSduring the Gulf War, when voice and data systems failed to keep up with
rapidly moving front-line troops.  Only 10 percent of soldiers currently

have voice communications capabilities, and only satellites, certain air-

craft, and 
Òsmart
Ó missiles carry sensors for still imagery or video.
Changes in military operations are stimulating DOD interest in un-
tethered systems.  U.S. military personnel now need to be prepared to

move quickly throughout the world to respond to rapidly evolving re-

gional conflicts and carry out a variety of noncombat roles, such as peace-

keeping and humanitarian response.  Just as past hardware advances

(e.g., aircraft carriers, long-range jet aircraft) shaped the military conflicts

of yesteryear, information technology is now shaping plans for the

nation
Õs future defense.  Plans are being made for a digitized battlefield in
which sensors are widely distributed, and rapidly deployable, multime-

dia wireless systems extend from front-line soldiers all the way to the

Pentagon and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).  Advanced
command, control, communications, computing, and intelligence (C
4I)
systems will make it possible to monitor an adversary on a computer

screen, target specific threats, and neutralize them with the press of a

button.
The DOD is taking a dual approach to meeting its future communica-
tions needs by funding selected R&D and demonstration projects, focus-

ing primarily on components, while also relying increasingly on commer-

cial off-the-shelf (COTS) technologies.  In the Gulf War, for example, the

military obtained satellite-transmitted positioning data using commercial

receivers, which were rapidly fielded to meet an urgent military need.  On

the other hand, for some military applications, commercial products do

not meet stringent requirements for security, interoperability, and other

capabilities.  And yet, with defense budgets flat or declining, the DOD can

no longer rely solely on military suppliers to provide defense-unique

solutions.  The military needs to find a way to ride the wave of commer-

cial technology advances while maintaining technical capabilities that ex-

ceed those of any potential adversary.
This report, the result of a one-year study by the Computer Science
and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council,

recommends strategies and R&D to help the DOD field state-of-the-art,

cost-effective untethered communications systems that meet military

needs.  The report concentrates on wireless technologies that use the ra-

dio frequency (RF) part of the electromagnetic spectrum.  The study was

funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to

address the following questions:
¥What technologies, products, and services will the commercial in-
dustry make available on its own, and when?
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3¥What are the military requirements and needs in mobile wireless
information technology?
¥To what extent will commercial technology development support
military needs?
¥Where can DARPA have the greatest impact in technology develop-
ment or acceleration of technology development to support the military?
Answers to those questions are outlined in this summary, which con-
tains two major sections.  The first section presents the report
Õs five conclu-
sions and summarizes the supporting facts and analysis contained in Chap-
ters 1 through 3 of the report.  The conclusions represent the expert

judgments of the 15 members of the CSTB
Õs Committee on the Evolution of
Untethered Communications.  The second section presents the committee
Õs12 recommendations, which are based on the conclusions and the support-

ing facts and analysis.  The recommendations, which are directed to DOD

and DARPA, are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.  It should be noted that

although the report focuses on military needs, it also contains a wealth of

information about commercial technology developments as well as a primer

on the many technical challenges involved in designing wireless systems.

The report therefore should also interest a wider, civilian audience.
CONCLUSIONS
A large gap remains between public expectations for mobile commu-
nications and the available technology.  
Voracious consumer demand is
stimulating many advances in wireless communications technology, par-

ticularly cellular and cordless telephones.  As of 1997 there were more

than 50 million cellular subscribers in the United States.  The portfolio of

wireless services now available in the commercial marketplace includes a

wide range of telephony, paging, and data applications delivered over a

variety of service offerings, ranging from land-based mobile radio to cel-

lular and satellite communications.  Each service offers a unique combi-

nation of coverage region, bandwidth (i.e., capacity), subscriber equip-

ment features, and connectivity.
In the aggregate, commercial wireless capabilities are considerable.  Yetmany technical challenges remain.  Wireless systems, especially those serv-

ing mobile users, are extremely complex.  A network needs to be capable of

rerouting information seamlessly and efficiently as users move, and sophis-

ticated digital signal processors (DSPs) and antennas are needed to mini-

mize interference, distortion, jamming, and interception without undue

power burdens on portable devices.  The cost of wireless voice systems

remains high compared to that of wired networks, and transmission qual-

ity and security could be improved.  Specialized wireless data networks
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONShave not taken off as yet, perhaps because they are not powerful enough
or because two-way mass market applications have yet to emerge.
For a worldwide operator, the management and coordination of di-
verse systems are complicated by the absence of any trend toward con-

vergence toward a single standard in wireless communications.  One

digital wireless technology, global system for mobile communications

(GSM), is deployed throughout Europe and in more than 100 countries

worldwide, whereas the Japanese use their own technology, the personal

handyphone system (PHS), and the United States supports three compet-

ing technologies: GSM, a time-division system (IS-136), and a code-divi-

sion system (IS-95).  The diversity of technologies in the United States is a

result of spectrum regulation policies, which require only that systems

not interfere with one another.  These policies leave interoperability and

other system properties such as quality and efficiency to be settled in the

marketplace.
Over the next 10 years or so, market forces will fill the gap between
public expectations and the available technology by developing new tech-

nologies for commercial wireless communications. 
Fueled by the success
of cellular communications and projections of ever-expanding markets

for wireless services, U.S. and foreign industries are performing extensive

R&D to overcome remaining technical challenges in wireless systems.

For example, efforts are under way to enable portable devices to commu-

nicate at the high bit rates needed for advanced information services.  In

addition, to foster economies of scale in R&D and manufacturing in a

world of diverse and changing technical standards, considerable effort is

dedicated to advancing the technology of software radios.  These radios,

by downloading different types of operating software, can serve as single

platforms that transmit signals conforming to a variety of standards.
The European Union, which supports cooperative research leading to
development of precompetitive technologies, has a vision of the future

extending beyond 2002, when universal mobile telecommunication ser-

vices are scheduled to be deployed.  That vision and various industry road
maps suggest that, by early in the twenty-first century, commercial wireless

communications will achieve the 
Òanytime, anywhere
Ó paradigm.
This optimism does not extend to prospects for fully interoperable
wireless communications systems anytime soon.  In the United States,

wireless communications research is performed by individual companies

in the context of their own product plans, and coordination occurs prima-

rily in standards-setting organizations (e.g., Telecommunications Indus-

try Association, Internet Engineering Task Force).  Moreover, in the past

there was a proliferation of proprietary rather than open network inter-

faces.  The trends toward open systems and digital components will make
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5it easier to build customized systems, but the capabilities of commercial
services will continue to depend on consumer demand as well as trade-

offs between technology availability and costs.
The military has much to gain from positioning itself to use COTS
communications equipment to the greatest extent possible.
The civilian
and military sectors have a long history of interaction in the design and

deployment of wireless technology, such as mobile radios and satellite

systems.  Commercial wireless technologies are now more attractive than

ever in terms of their performance, quality, and cost.  By acquiring com-

mercial equipment when it meets military needs, the DOD can field state-

of-the-art equipment while also lowering its costs by benefiting from the

economies of scale achievable in mass-market manufacturing.  For ex-

ample, software radios for military applications can be built using many

COTS components, such as analog-to-digital converters, DSPs, RF ampli-

fiers, displays, batteries, and data-storage devices.
The insertion of commercial technologies into military systems is not
always easy.  As an example, asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) offers

many attractive features, such as high-speed transmission, fast switching,

the capability to assign message priority, and queue management.  It

could provide the basis for improved situational awareness, enabling the

DOD to provide real-time imagery, cryptographic security, and low-cost

devices for wide distribution.  However, the integration of ATM and

Internet protocols into wireless battlefield communications will require

sophisticated link protocols.  Industry is addressing these issues, but the

DOD can ensure that its needs are met only by participating in standards-

setting activities to influence technology directions and by testing emerg-

ing COTS products in battlefield exercises.
Some military needs for wireless communications technologies will
exceed or differ significantly from anticipated commercial developments.

For example, the military has unique concerns with respect to network

design, security, interoperability, and multimode/multiband systems.

Although there is clearly overlap between the capabilities of commercial

technologies and the DOD
Õs needs, they also differ in a number of re-
spects (see Table ES-1).  For example, commercial R&D on integrated (i.e.,

multimedia) systems is oriented toward base-station-oriented network

architectures, an efficient and reliable design in which mobile users com-

municate with central access nodes.  An alternative is the easily recon-

figurable peer-to-peer architecture, in which network elements communi-

cate directly.  It is not yet clear which architecture will be the most

appropriate in future military settings.  Improved modeling and simula-

tion tools, especially for communications traffic and mobility of network
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSelements, would support realistic analyses of complex military networks
and the design of appropriate protocols and optimization algorithms.
Commercial capabilities and military needs also differ with respect to
the security of networks, radio links, and hardware.  Commercial users
ArchitectureMobilityDeploymentstrategyModes/waveformsFrequency range(per system)Data rateSystem accessInteroperability ofsystemsSecurity
AntijamLow probability ofdetection/
interceptionRobustness ofsystems andequipmentInterferencerejectionBase-station orientedMobile terminals, fixed
infrastructureSite-specific planning andmeasurementsSix at mostNarrowband (one bandper system)384 kilobits per second to
2 megabits per second
(Mbps) by 2002Anyone who can payIncreasingly importantIncreasingly importantMay become an issue withwidespread system useNot an issue at this timeYes, under moderateconditionsSomewhat importantNot clear at this timeMobile terminals, manymobile infrastructure elementsRapid deployment atunpredictable locationsCurrently 1 to 20; ideal ismultimode systems usingadaptive waveformsMultiband (e.g., 2 megahertzto 2 gigahertz)
Long-term goal is at least10 Mbps
UniversalRequired for all defensenetworks and foreign alliesCriticalCriticalCriticalYes, under extreme conditions(e.g., extreme temperatures,
shock, vibrations, submersion)CriticalTABLE ES-1Comparison of Commercial Wireless Technologies and
Future Military Needs
Feature
Commercial Systems
Future Military Needs
xxxxx
xxxxThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7are concerned mainly with privacy and the prevention of unauthorized
access to their hardware and data.  Some security breaches are tolerated

(in fact, analog cellular telephones typically provide no link security).  By

contrast, the military requires end-to-end encryption to prevent unautho-

rized access and monitoring of network activity.  The military also re-

quires hardware security to prevent an adversary who is opening a de-

vice from discerning the hardware or software secrets.  Military systems

also benefit from antennas and other technologies designed to make sig-

nals difficult to detect, jam, or intercept.
Interoperability is another area in which the DOD
Õs needs exceed the
interests of the commercial sector.  Advanced military wireless systems

need to be compatible with the 17 legacy communications networks as

well as systems operated by NATO and the United Nations.  One means

of achieving this objective is the software radio.  Now the focus of several

military R&D programs, the ideal military software radio is a multimode,

multiband unit using many different waveforms over a broad frequency

range, whereas commercial versions are likely to offer less flexibility and

operate in a single frequency band.  To make optimal use of this promis-

ing technology, the DOD needs to support specialized R&D focusing on

antennas, filters, and adaptive waveforms.
The commercial sector has its own incentives to produce advanced
communications devices, components, and subsystems as well as com-

plete systems.  To use commercial technologies effectively, the DOD will

have to take special measures to promote the development and acquisi-

tion of COTS products that can be integrated into systems that meet

specialized military requirements.
  Current commercial R&D and stan-
dards activities seek to enable the transmission of many types of informa-

tion, including data, video, and images, to and from portable wireless

devices.  Although this work is certain to create new technology, the

commercial deployment of the technology is not assured.  The availability

of the technology in the marketplace will depend on business, social, and

government policy factors.  Military planners will need to maintain a

continuing awareness of the differences between what is possible techni-

cally and what is available in the market to meet military needs.
As part of this process, the DOD needs to translate its operational
requirements into technical specifications that can be used to determine

the suitability of commercial wireless technologies for military applica-

tions.  New approaches to procurement, as well as technology demonstra-

tion and testing rather than development, will help DOD obtain the great-

est return on its investments.  In addition, by fully understanding the

barriers to synergy between the commercial and defense sectors, the DOD

can develop processes for accommodating or overcoming these barriers.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSFor example, the commercial sector tends to add functions to equipment
only if economically justified by customer demand; by participating in

standards-setting activities the DOD can encourage the design of COTS

products that can be more easily modified to meet military needs.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee
Õs 12 recommendations are organized from the general
to the specific.  The first three recommendations identify organizational

changes that DOD should make to foster an environment conducive to

the absorption of state-of-the-art commercial wireless communications

technologies.  The other nine recommendations identify research that
should be undertaken by DARPA to fill gaps in commercial development

efforts and ensure that advanced wireless systems meet military needs.

The research recommendations are presented in order of priority, reflect-

ing the committee
Õs view that top-level systems issues are paramount.
The remaining recommendations deal with subsystems and components.
Organizational Changes
1.The DOD should participate in standards-setting activities for wire-
less communications technologies and systems.
2.The DOD should pursue a vigorous process of technology demon-
stration and testing prior to extensive development and procurement.  In

particular, the focus should be on systems concepts based on commercial

technologies and specialized military enhancements.
3.The DOD should plan a new approach to procurement that will
identify how commercial infrastructure systems and subscriber equip-

ment can best be used for military purposes and how to purchase com-

mercial equipment in the most productive way.
Systems Research
4.DARPA should build on current research in modeling and simula-
tion to incorporate the communications traffic, mobility of network ele-

ments, and radio propagation encountered in mobile military informa-

tion networks.
5.DARPA should initiate research to produce network architectures
that incorporate commercial products in a manner that meets military

requirements.
6.DARPA should conduct research aimed at understanding and
bridging the differences between security needs in commercial and mili-

tary networks.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY97.DARPA should conduct research aimed at reducing co-site inter-
ference.Component Research
8.DARPA should carry out research and demonstration projects de-
signed to field software radio technology for military applications.
9.DARPA should conduct the research needed to adapt smart anten-
nas for mobile military applications.
10.DARPA should conduct research to produce transmission tech-
niques that adapt to a wide range of operating conditions.
11.DARPA should conduct research to overcome the limitations of
current filter technology for use in military software radios and high-
density platforms.
12.DARPA should develop novel components to enhance the flexibil-
ity of software radios.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS101Past, Present, and Future
Humans have long dreamed of possessing the capability to commu-
nicate with each other anytime, anywhere.  Kings, nation-states, military
forces, and business cartels have sought more and better ways to acquire

timely information of strategic or economic value from across the globe.

Travelers have often been willing to pay premiums to communicate with

family and friends back home.  As the twenty-first century approaches,

technical capabilities have become so sophisticated that stationary tele-

phones, facsimile (fax) machines, computers, and other communications

devicesÑconnected by wires to power sources and telecommunications

networksÑare almost ubiquitous in many industrialized countries.  The

dream is close to becoming reality.  The last major challenge is to develop

affordable, reliable, widespread capabilities for ÒuntetheredÓ communi-

cations, a term coined by the U.S. military and referring to the union of

wireless and mobile technologies.  Because ÒuntetheredÓ is not a widely

used term, this report concentrates on ÒwirelessÓ communications sys-

tems that use the radio frequency (RF) part of the electromagnetic spec-

trum.  These systems and their component technologies are widely de-

ployed to serve mobile users.
Mobile wireless communications is a shared goal of both the U.S.
military and civilian sectors, which traditionally have enjoyed a synergis-

tic relationship in the development and deployment of communications

technology.  The balance of that long-standing interdependence is chang-

ing now as a result of trends in the marketplace and defense operations

and budgets.  These trends suggest that market forces will propel ad-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE11vances in technology to meet rising consumer expectations.  However,
the military may need to take special measures to field cost-effective,

state-of-the-art untethered communications systems that meet defense

requirements.
This chapter lays the foundation for an analysis of military needs in
this area by chronicling the evolution of military and civilian applications

of communications technology, from ancient times leading up to the hori-

zon of 2010.  Section 1.1 is an overview of the challenge facing the U.S.

military.  Section 1.2 provides an historical perspective on the develop-

ment of communications infrastructures.  Section 1.3 outlines the wireless

systems currently used by the U.S. military and the related research and

development (R&D) activities.  Sections 1.4 through 1.7 recount the evolu-

tion and current status of commercial wireless systems.  Section 1.8 com-

pares the development paths for wireless technologies in the United

States, Europe, and Japan.
1.1  OVERVIEW
In the final years of the twentieth century, all aspects of wireless
communications are subject to rapid change throughout the world.  Di-

mensions of change include the following:
¥Vigorously expanding public demand for products and services;
¥Dramatic changes worldwide in government policies regarding
industry structure and spectrum management;
¥ Rapidly advancing technologies in an atmosphere of uncertainty
about the relative merits of competing approaches;
¥Emergence of a wide variety of new systems for delivering com-
munications services to wireless terminals; and
¥Profound changes in communications industries as evidenced by
an array of mergers, alliances, and spin-offs involving some of the world
Õslargest corporations.
These changes are fueled by opportunities for profit and public ben-
efit as perceived by executives, investors, and governments.  Although

the patterns are global, the details differ significantly from country to

country.  Each dimension of change is complex and all of them interact.

Overall, the dynamic nature of wireless communications creates a mix-

ture of confusion and opportunity for stakeholders throughout the world.
A principal attraction of wireless communications is its capability to
serve mobile users.  Because mobility is an important feature of military

operations, the U.S. armed forces have always played a leading role in the

development and deployment of wireless communications technology.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSIn the coming years, however, it appears that the commercial sector will
have sufficient incentives and momentum to push the technical envelope

on its own.  At the same time, flat or declining defense budgets are moti-

vating the military to adopt commercial products and services to an in-

creasing extent.  Yet there are significant differences between military and

commercial requirements.  Thus, it is important to examine carefully the

opportunities for, and limitations to, military use of commercial wireless

communications products and services.
In contrast to other areas of information technology, wireless commu-
nications has yet to converge toward a single technical standard or even a

very small number of them.  Instead it appears that diversity will endure

for the foreseeable future.  In this environment, the management and

coordination of complex, diverse systems will be an ongoing challenge,

particularly for the U.S. military, which coincidentally has to adapt to

new threats and responsibilities after more than half a century of follow-

ing the paradigm set by World War II and the Cold War.  Information is

now assuming greater strategic importance than ever before in warfare

and other military operations, and so the wide deployment of cost-effec-

tive, state-of-the-art wireless communications systems has become par-

ticularly critical.
The present situation recalls previous epochs in which breakthroughs
in hardware
Ñaircraft carriers, jet aircraft, tactical missiles, nuclear weap-
ons
Ñhave led to radical revisions of military doctrine.  The next great
revolution in military affairs could be shaped by information technology:

global communications, ubiquitous sensors, precision location, and per-

vasive information processing.  Advanced command, control, communi-

cations, computing, and intelligence (C
4I) systems could make it possible
to monitor an adversary, target specific threats, and neutralize them with

the best available weapon.  Admiral William Owens, former vice chair-

man of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has called such an integrated capability a

Òsystem of systems.
Ó  Using such a system, a commander could observe
the battle from a computer screen, select the most threatening targets, and

destroy them with the press of a button.  Battles would be won by the side

with the best information, not necessarily the one with the largest battal-

ions.But unlike the military hardware of the past, information technology
is advancing at a breakneck pace in a worldwide marketplace, driven not

by military requirements but by the industrial and consumer sectors.  In-

creasingly these technologies are available worldwide, and the best tech-

nology is no longer limited to U.S. manufacture and control.  Highly

accurate position data transmitted by satellite are now available to any

yachtsman.  High-resolution satellite photographs are for sale around the
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE13world.  Any nation can purchase the latest communications gadgets from
the electronics stores of Tokyo.
Therein lies the challenge for the U.S. military:  how to exploit the
advances in affordable technology fueled by worldwide consumer de-

mand while also maintaining technical capabilities that significantly ex-

ceed those of any potential adversary.
1.2  HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Throughout most of history, the evolution of communications tech-
nologies has been intimately intertwined with military needs and applica-

tions.  Some of the earliest government-sponsored R&D projects focused

on communications technologies that enabled command and control.  A

synergistic relationship then evolved between the military and commer-

cial sectors that accelerated the technology development process.  Now

large corporations develop the latest communications technologies for

international industrial and consumer markets shaped by government

regulation and international agreements.  World trade in telecommunica-

tions equipment and services was valued at $115 billion in 1996 (
The
Economist
, 1997).
Modern wireless communication systems are rooted in telephony andradio technologies dating back to the end of the nineteenth century and

the older telegraphy systems dating back to the eighteenth century.  Wire-

less systems are also influenced by and increasingly linked to much newer
communications capabilities, such as the Internet, which originated in the

1960s.  All wireless systems transmit signals over the air using different

frequency transmission bands designated by government regulation.

Table 1-1 provides an overview of wireless RF communications systems

and services and the frequency bands they use.
1  Each frequency band has
both advantages and disadvantages.  At low frequencies the signal propa-

gates along the ground; attenuation is low but atmospheric noise levels

are high.  Low frequencies cannot carry enough information for video

services.  At higher frequencies there is less atmospheric noise but more

attenuation, and a clear line of sight is needed between the transmitter

and receiver because the signals cannot penetrate objects.  These frequen-

cies offer greater bandwidth, or channel capacity.
1.2.1  Communications Before the Industrial Age
The annals of antiquity offer examples of muscle-powered communi-
cations:  human runners, homing pigeons, and horse relays.  Perhaps the

earliest communications infrastructure was the road network of Rome,

which carried not only the legions needed to enforce the emperor
Õs will
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSTABLE 1-1  Overview of Wireless Radio Frequency Communications Systems and Services
Frequency Band
aCommunications Applications
Characteristics
3Ð30 kHz (very low, or VLF)Long-range navigation, marine radio beaconsLow attenuation, high atmospheric noise
30
Ð300 kHz (low, or LF)
300
Ð3000 kHz (medium, or MF)Maritime radio, AM radio, telephone, telegraph,Attenuation varies, noise drops at 30 MHz
3Ð30 MHz (high, or HF)
facsimile
30
Ð300 MHz (very high, or VHF)VHF television, FM two-way radio, UHF
Cosmic noise, line-of-sight propagation
0.3
Ð3 GHz (ultrahigh, or UHF)television, radar
3Ð30 GHz (superhigh, or SHF)Satellite, radar, microwave
Atmospheric attenuation
30
Ð300 GHz (extremely high,Experimental satellite, radar
Line-of-sight propagation
or EHF)
aFrequencies are in kilohertz (kHz), megahertz (MHz), and gigahertz (GHz).
SOURCE:  Adapted from Couch (1995).
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE15but also messengers to direct forces far from the capital.  Ancient societies
also developed systems that obviated the need for physical delivery of

information.  These systems operated within line-of-sight distances (later

extended by telescope):  smoke signals, torch signaling, flashing mirrors,

signal flares, and semaphore flags (Holzman and Pehrson, 1995).  Obser-

vation stations were established along hilltops or roads to relay messages

across great distances.
1.2.2  Telegraphy
The first comprehensive infrastructure for transmitting messages
faster than the fastest form of transportation was the optical telegraph,

developed in 1793.  Napoleon considered this his secret weapon because

it brought him news in Paris and allowed him to control his armies be-

yond the borders of France.  The optical telegraph consisted of a set of

articulated arms that encoded hundreds of symbols in defined positions.

Under a military contract, the signaling stations were deployed on strate-

gic hilltops throughout France, linking Paris to its frontiers.  By the mid-

1800s, 556 stations enabled transmissions across more than 5,000 kilome-

ters (km).
The optical telegraph was superseded by the electrical telegraph in
1838, when Samuel Morse developed his dot-and-dash code.  Now infor-

mation could be transmitted beyond visible distances without significant

delay.  In an 1844 demonstration on a government-funded research

testbed, Morse sent the message 
ÒWhat Hath God Wrought?
Ó from Balti-more to the U.S. Capitol (Bray, 1995).
The rapid deployment of telegraphic lines around the world wasdriven by the need of nineteenth-century European powers to communi-

cate with their colonial possessions.  High-risk technology investments

were required.  After the use of rubber coating was demonstrated on

cables deployed across the Rhine River, the first transatlantic cable was

laid in 1858, but it failed within months.  A new cable designed by Lord

Kelvin was laid in 1866 and operated successfully on a continuous basis.
The result was a rapidly expanding telegraphic network that reached
every corner of the globe.  By 1870, Great Britain communicated directly

with North America, Europe, the Middle East, and India.  Other nations

scrambled to duplicate that system
Õs global reach, for no nation could trust
its critical command messages to the telegraphic lines of a foreign power.
1.2.3  Early Wireless
Within a few decades of its widespread deployment, telegraphy be-
gan to lose customers to a new technology
Ñradio.  In 1895 Guglielmo
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSMarconi demonstrated that electromagnetic radiation could be detected
at a distance.  Great Britain
Õs Royal Navy was an early and enthusiastic
customer of the company that Marconi created to develop radio commu-

nications.  In 1901 Marconi bridged the Atlantic Ocean by radio, and

regular commercial service was initiated in 1907 (Masini, 1996).
The importance of this new technology became evident with the on-
set of World War I.  Soon after hostilities began, the British cut Germany
Õsoverseas telegraphic cables and destroyed its radio stations.  Then Ger-

many cut Britain
Õs overland cables to India and those crossing the Baltic
to Russia.  Britain enlisted Marconi to put together a string of radio sta-

tions quickly to reestablish communications with its overseas possessions.The original Marconi radios were soon replaced by more advanced
equipment that exploited the vacuum tube
Õs capability to amplify signals
and operate at higher frequencies than did older systems.  In 1915 the first

wireless voice transmission between New York and San Francisco sig-

naled the beginning of the convergence of radio and telephony.  The first

commercial radio broadcast followed in 1920 (Lewis, 1993).  The use of

higher frequencies (called shortwaves) exploited the ionosphere as a re-

flector, greatly increasing the range of communications.  By World War II,

shortwave radio had developed to the point where small radio sets could

be installed in trucks or jeeps or carried by a single soldier.  The first

portable two-way radio, the Handie-Talkie, appeared in 1940.  Two-way

mobile communications on a large scale revolutionized warfare, allowing

for mobile operations coordinated over large areas.
1.2.4  Telephony
The telephone was first demonstrated in 1876.  A telephone network
based on mechanical switches and copper wires then grew rapidly.  The

high cost of the cables limited the number of conversations possible at any

one time; as demand increased, multiplexing techniques, such as time

division and frequency division, were developed.
A mix of independent operators ran telephone services in the early
days.  Subscribers to different services could not call each other even

when in the same town.  In 1913 the U.S. government allowed American

Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) to assume control of the national tele-

phone network in return for becoming a regulated monopoly delivering

Òuniversal
Ó service.  Yet it was not until the 1950s that unified network
signaling was offered to subscribers, allowing them to make direct-dial

long-distance telephone calls (Calhoun, 1992).  Since then, the rapid ex-

tension of the long-distance telephone network has been made possible

by advances in photonic communications and network control technolo-

gies.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE171.2.5  Communications Satellites
The concept of using geosynchronous satellites for communications
purposes was first suggested in 1945 by the science fiction writer Arthur
C. Clarke, then employed at Britain
Õs Royal Aircraft Establishment, part
of the Ministry of Defence.  Satellites of this type are positioned above the

equator and move in synch with Earth
Õs rotation.  In 1954 J.R. Pierce at
AT&T
Õs Bell Telephone Laboratories developed the concept of orbital ra-
dio relays and identified the key design issues for satellites:  passive

versus active transmission, station keeping, attitude control, and remote

vehicle control (Bray, 1995).  Pierce advocated an approach of reaching

geostationary orbit in successive stages of technology development, start-

ing with nonsynchronous, low-orbit satellites.  Hughes Aircraft Company

advocated a geostationary concept based on the company
Õs patented sta-
tion-keeping techniques.
In 1957 the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the first satellite to be
placed in orbit.  Amateur radio operators were able to pick up its low-

power transmissions all over the world.  In 1960 the National Aeronautics

and Space Administration (NASA) and Bell Laboratories launched the

first U.S. communications satellite, Echo-1, in a low Earth orbit.  The first

satellite-based voice message was sent by President Dwight Eisenhower

using passive transmission techniques.  The next advance in satellite tech-

nology was the successful launch of the TELSTAR system by NASA and

Bell Laboratories.  Using active transmission technology TELSTAR deliv-

ered the first television transmission across the Atlantic in 1962.  Because

it was placed in an elliptical orbit that varied from low to medium alti-

tudes, the satellite was visible contemporaneously to Earth stations on

both sides of the Atlantic for only about 30 minutes at a time.  Clearly

geostationary orbits were desirable if satellites were to be used for con-

tinuous telephone and television communications across long distances.
In 1963 Hughes Aircraft and NASA achieved geosynchronous orbit
(known as GEO today) with the successful launch of the SYNCOM satel-

lite.  The satellite was placed in an orbit of approximately 36,210 km, a

distance that allowed it to remain stationary over a given point on Earth
Õssurface.  SYNCOM led the way for the next several decades of satellite

systems by demonstrating that synchronous orbit was achievable, and

that station keeping and attitude control were feasible.  Today most satel-

lites, both military and commercial, are of the GEO variety.
COMSAT was formed by an act of Congress in 1962 and represented
U.S. commercial interests in satellite technology development at Intelsat,

established in 1964 as an international, government-chartered organiza-

tion to coordinate worldwide satellite communications issues.

INTELSAT-II (Early Bird) was launched into a geosynchronous orbit in
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS1965 and supported 240 telephone links or one television channel.  Channel
capacities are now measured in the tens of thousands of voice channels (the

INTELSAT-VI, launched in 1987, supports 80,000 voice channels).
The first military satellites, the DSCS-I group, were launched by the
U.S. Air Force in 1966.  Three launches placed 26 lightweight (100-pound)

satellites in near-geosynchronous orbit.  These systems supported digital

voice and data communications using spread-spectrum technology (an

important signal-processing approach discussed extensively in Chapter

2).  The satellites were replaced in the 1970s by the DSCS-II group, which

increased channel capacity by using spot-beam antennas with high gain

to boost the received power.  The first cross-linked military satellites, the

LES 8/9, were launched in 1976.  This demonstration fostered a vision of

space-based architectures
Ñwithout vulnerable ground relays
Ñfor com-
munication, navigation, surveillance, and reconnaissance.
Satellites offer several advantages over land-based communications
systems.  Rapid, two-way communications can be established over wide

areas with only a single relay in space, and global coverage with only a

few relay hops.  Earth stations can now be set up and moved quickly.

Furthermore, satellite systems are virtually immune to impairments such

as multipath fading (channel impairments are discussed in Chapter 2).

But with the rapid deployment of undersea fiber-optic links, the use of

satellite channels for telephony has been on the decline.  The high capac-

ity of fiber provides for competitive costs, which, combined with low

latency, have attracted consumers.  The future of the satellite industry

depends on the emergence of applications other than fixed telephony

channels.  A new generation of satellite systems is being deployed to

provide mobile telephone services (see Section 1.5).
1.2.6  Mobile Radio and the Origins of Cellular Telephony
The early development of mobile radio was driven by public safety
needs.  In 1921 Detroit became the first city to experiment with radio-

dispatched police cars.  However, transmission from vehicles was limited

by the difficulty of producing small, low-power transmitters suitable for

use in automobiles.  Two-way systems were first deployed in Bayonne,

New Jersey, in the 1930s.  The system operated in 
Òpush-to-talk
Ó (i.e.,
half-duplex) mode; simultaneous transmission and reception, or full-du-

plex mode, was not possible at the time (Calhoun, 1988).
Frequency modulation (FM), invented in 1935, virtually eliminated
background static while reducing the need for high transmission power,

thus enabling the development of low-power transmitters and receivers

for use in vehicles.  World War II stimulated commercial FM manufactur-

ing capacity and the rapid development of mobile radio technology.  The
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE19need for thousands of portable communicators accelerated advances in
system packaging and reliability and reduced costs.  In 1946 public mo-

bile telephone service was introduced in 25 cities across the United States.

The initial systems used a central transmitter to cover a metropolitan area.

The inefficient use of spectrum and the coarseness of the electronic filters

severely limited capacity:  Thirty years after the introduction of mobile

telephone service the New York system could support only 543 users.
A solution to this problem emerged in the 1970s when researchers at
Bell Laboratories developed the concept of the cellular telephone system,

in which a geographical area is divided into adjacent, non-overlapping,

hexagonal-shaped 
Òcells.
Ó  Each cell has its own transmitter and receiver
(called a base station) to communicate with the mobile units in that cell; a

mobile switching station coordinates the handoff of mobile units crossing

cell boundaries.  Throughout the geographical area, portions of the radio

spectrum are reused, greatly expanding system capacity but also increas-

ing infrastructure complexity and cost.
In the years following the establishment of the mobile telephone ser-
vice, AT&T submitted numerous proposals to the Federal Communica-

tions Commission (FCC) for a dedicated block of spectrum for mobile

communications.  Other than allowing experimental systems in Chicago

and Washington, D.C., the FCC made no allocations for mobile systems

until 1983, when the first commercial cellular system
Ñthe advanced mo-
bile phone system (AMPS)
Ñwas established in Chicago.  Cellular tech-
nology became highly successful commercially with the miniaturization

of subscriber handsets.
1.2.7  The Internet and Packet Radio
The original concepts underlying the Internet were developed in the
mid-1960s at what is now the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

(DARPA), then known as ARPA.  The original application was the

ARPANET, which was established in 1969 to provide survivable computer

communications networks.  The ARPANET relied heavily on packet switch-
ing concepts developed in the 1960s at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-

nology, the RAND Corporation, and Great BritainÕs National Physical Labo-ratory (Kahn et al., 1978; Hafner and Lyon, 1996; Leiner et al., 1997).  This

approach was a departure from the circuit-switching systems used in tele-

phone networks (see Box 1-1).
The first ARPANET node was located at the University of California
at Los Angeles.  Additional nodes were soon established at Stanford Re-

search Institute (now SRI International), the University of California at

Santa Barbara, and the University of Utah.  The development of a host-to-

host protocol,
2 the network control protocol (NCP), followed in 1970,
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSenabling network users to develop applications.  At the same time, the
ALOHA Project at the University of Hawaii was investigating packet-

switched networks over fixed-site radio links.  The ALOHANET began

operating in 1970, providing the first demonstration of packet radio ac-

cess in a data network (Abramson, 1985).  The contention protocols used

in ALOHANET served as the basis for the 
Òcarrier-sense multiple access
with collision detection
Ó (CSMA/CD) protocols used in the Ethernet local
area network (LAN) developed at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in

1973.  The widespread use of Ethernet LANs to connect personal comput-

ers (PCs) and workstations allowed broad access to the Internet, a term

that emerged in the late 1970s with the design of the Internet protocol (IP).

The need to link wired, packet radio, and satellite networks led to the

specifications for the transmission control protocol (TCP), which replaced

NCP and shifted the responsibility for transmission from the network to

the end hosts, thereby enabling the protocol to operate no matter how

unreliable the underlying links.
3The development of microprocessors, surface acoustic wave filters,
and communications protocols for intelligent management of the shared

radio channel contributed to the advancement of packet radio technology

in the 1970s.  In 1972 ARPA launched the Packet Radio Program, aimed at

developing techniques for the mobile battlefield, and SATNet, an experi-

mental satellite network.  In 1983 ARPA launched a second-generation

packet radio program, Survivable Adaptive Networks, to demonstrate

how packet radio networks could be scaled up to encompass much larger

numbers of nodes and operate in the harsh environment likely to be en-

countered on the mobile battlefield.
BOX 1-1Circuit Switching Versus Packet SwitchingTelephone systems are based on a connection-oriented or circuit-switched mod-el in which connections are fixed for the duration of a call.  Such systems are ineffi-
cient when transmission occurs in short bursts separated by long pauses.  Packet
switching replaces the centralized switches with distributed routers, each with mul-
tiple connections to adjacent routers.  Messages are divided into ÒpacketsÓ that areindependently routed on a hop-by-hop basis.  Such an approach allows messages tobe multiplexed over the available paths on a statistically determined basis, gracefully
adapting the transmissions to traffic levels and optimizing the use of existing linkcapacity without pre-allocating link bandwidth.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE211.3  MILITARY WIRELESS SYSTEMS AND RESEARCH
1.3.1  Terrestrial Systems
Radio communications technology is widely used by U.S. military
units at all levels.  The many different types of military radios and appli-
cations cause a variety of communication problems.  The military envi-

ronment magnifies common difficulties such as the failure of one radio

type to communicate with another type (interoperability), failure of one

user to communicate with another (connectivity), incompatibility of new

radios with old radios (legacy systems), and one radio at a location inter-

fering with another radio at the same location (co-site interference).
In general, U.S. military radio systems can be categorized by the loca-
tion of users and the information they broadcast and receive (see Figure 1-

1).  Multiple radios are often gathered together in an aircraft, shipboard

radio room, or communications van to form tactical radio complexes and

command-and-control centers.  The radios operate simultaneously using

many different waveforms across several frequency bands (e.g., high fre-

quency [HF], very high frequency [VHF], and ultrahigh frequency [UHF]).Combat net radios take the form of either a single radio in a vehicle
(much like a car radio) or a device like a 
Òwalkie-talkie
Ó carried around by
a soldier.  Most of the information broadcast on combat net radios con-

sists of voice communications, often to share position information.  Many

of today
Õs combat net radios have been enhanced to carry data in addition
to voice.  In general, combat net radios have fewer capabilities and cost

less than do tactical radios (see Table 1-2).  Military radios generally cost

much more than commercial systems supporting similar applications.
Deployed military radios have various shortcomings.  For example,
the mobile subscriber equipment (MSE), the U.S. Army
Õs mobile tele-
phone system for the battlefield, was designed to be like a cellular tele-

phone but is outdated compared to current technology.  The single-chan-
FIGURE 1-1Military radios are designed for different uses.  Combat net radios,
for example, are designed for communications within a battle group.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSnel ground and airborne radio system (SINCGARS) has been updated
with recent technology, including programmable microprocessors, appli-

cation-specific integrated circuits (ASICs), and surface-mount technology,
but it implements a series of outdated waveform standards for single-

channel digital voice.  Furthermore, SINCGARS has experienced severe

co-site interference problems because it hops transmission frequencies

within the VHF band, a design capability that helps prevent jamming by

adversaries but results in hops onto channels already in use for other

communications traffic.  The mobile subscriber radio terminal (MSRT)

costs $70,000 and is about the size of a microwave oven; an updated

version, introduced in 1994, is no less expensive and no smaller.  Numer-

ous HF radios have been built by the Army, but most are in storage

because these radios are not simple push-to-talk designs and user train-

ing for the difficult HF channel has not been widespread.
The problems posed by individual radios are exacerbated by the diffi-
culties encountered in linking communications systems of varying sophis-

tication together (see Box 1-2).  Special interfaces can be designed;

SINCGARS, for example, can be interfaced into the MSRT.  Inherent inter-

operability is among the features sought in sophisticated future systems.

But in the near term, front-line troops will continue to use both existing and

evolving radios, such as SINCGARS, mobile tactical satellite (TACSAT)
TABLE 1-2  Tactical and Combat Net Radios
CharacteristicsC
4I Radios
aArmy Tactical Radios
Simultaneous4
Ð201channelsWaveforms5Ð201Ð4Waveform structureWideband and narrowbandNarrowband
Cost$50,000Ð$500,000+$5,000Ð$50,000Deployed examples¥Joint tactical informationdistribution system¥Joint Tactical Terminal
¥Fleet broadcast (UHF-satellitenaval command-and-controlradio)aCommand, control, communications, computing, and intelligence.
¥Single-channel groundand airborne radio system¥Enhanced positionlocation reporting system¥Mobile subscriber
equipmentThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE23terminals, MSE, MSRT, and packet radios.  The Army is struggling with
how to upgrade the MSE, a proprietary system.  The SINCGARS is ex-

pected to be replaced and upgraded with a tri-service joint tactical radio in

1999.
The U.S. Department of Defense established IP as the underlying
Òbuilding code
Ó for the Army, making a commitment to migrate all com-
munications networks to the same basic structure as the Internet to posi-

tion the military to integrate and leverage the advances in commercial

information technologies.  The Army
Õs Task Force XXI 
ÒTactical Internet
Ó(Booz-Allen & Hamilton, 1995) was the first major experimental fielding

of this new architecture (Sass and Eldridge, 1994; Sass, 1996).
BOX 1-2Realities of Military Communications in BosniaU.S. military communications systems in Bosnia have been frustrating, accordingto Brigade Commander Kenneth Allard (1996), who described the situation this way:Despite the imperative of supporting the warfighter, the river of informationavailable to U.S. military forces in Bosnia often diminishes to a trickle by thetime it reaches the soldiers actually executing peacekeeping missions.  Onone recent operation, a brigade commander who had requested overhead
imagery of his area complained that 
Òthe system
Ó took three weeks to pro-
vide photographs that eventually turned out to be six months old.  The rea-
sons are many:  communications pipelines too narrow to efficiently carry
digital data to the field, outmoded tactical equipment, and automation re-sources easily overwhelmed by what data are available. . . . The Army communications system has generally worked well in Bosnia,but only at great costs in manpower and effort.  Because Army tactical radiosoperate on line-of-sight transmissions, it is essential to place repeaters and
relays on mountain tops.  But with large numbers of radios nets required forthe 15 brigades operating in the U.S. sector, there is a real problem withinterference (Òsignal fratricideÓ).  When these critical relay sites must be for-
tified and defended, support requirements can consume 7
Ð8 percent of com-
bat manpower in addition to the U.S. signal brigade of over 1,100 soldiers.
. . . Although the military communications system features free morale calls,

most U.S. soldiers Òphone homeÓ with AT&T prepaid credit cardsÑexpenseoutweighed by clarity and convenience.  Their commanders have similar feel-
ings.  ÒThe former warring factions have better communications,Ó snappedone U.S. brigade commander, Òbecause they have cellular phones and IdonÕt.ÓThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS1.3.2  Satellite Systems
Satellite systems play a major role in military communications.  They
are attractive alternatives to land-based systems because they provide
mobile and tactical communications to a large number of users over a

wide geographical area.  In addition, communication links can be added

or deleted quickly, and satellites are less vulnerable to destruction or

enemy exploitation than are land-based systems.
The DOD uses both military and commercial satellites to meet its
communications needs.  Fleet communications are supported by the gov-

ernment-owned FLTSAT and contractor-owned LEASAT systems, both

of which are geosynchronous.  The U.S. Air Force uses FLTSAT, the ellip-

tical-orbit Satellite Data System, and the DSCS-III satellites to support the

AFSATCOM satellite system.  The DSCS, a vital component of the global

defense communications system, is the DOD
Õs primary system for long-
haul, high-volume trunk traffic.  The operational DSCS space segment

consists of a mix of DSCS-II and DSCS-III satellites.
In 1982 the military began developing new satellite and terminal tech-
nology for MILSTAR, a millimeter-wave system operating in the 30
Ð60
gigahertz (GHz) range.  This new system consists of both geosynchronous

and inclined-orbit satellites.  The system provides enhanced antijam (AJ)

capabilities as well as hardening against nuclear attack.  Only a few of the

planned eight MILSTAR satellites have been deployed so far.  The com-

plete system would provide two satellites per coverage area over the

continental United States and the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans.
In general, existing tactical-satellite ground terminals incorporate new
technology (e.g., microprocessors, ASICs, surface-mount technology) but

are still forced to implement legacy waveforms.  As a result, they have

generally not kept pace with innovations in commercial communications

waveforms and standards.  In the case of MILSTAR, the military uses a

noncommercial frequency band and is therefore unable to use
Ñor take
advantage of the price reductions in
Ñcommercial hardware.  The new
Joint Tactical Terminal (one of the systems listed in Table 1-2) is designed

using modern radio technology, perhaps even including software-defined
radios (see Section 1.3.3.2).  High data rates sufficient for multimedia

transmissions can be achieved only with the most advanced technology.

For example, the global broadcast system (GBS), part of the U.S. Navy
ÕsUHF Follow-On satellites 8, 9, and 10, has bandwidth exceeding 100 mega-
bits per second (Mbps) and worldwide coverage.
The most widely used military satellite system is the global position-
ing system (GPS), which encompasses 18 to 24 satellites in inclined orbits

transmitting spread-spectrum signals.  The GPS receivers extract precise

time and frequency information from these signals to determine with
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE25great accuracy the receiver location, velocity, and acceleration.  The sys-
tem can be used by anyone with a receiver.
4  Commercial GPS receivers
are used for numerous applications, including surveying, aircraft and

ship navigation, and even recreational activities on land.  Although

launching and upkeep of the entire fleet of satellites are paid for by the

United States, commercial GPS receivers were used by both sides in the

Gulf War.
1.3.3  Research Initiatives in Untethered Communications
The DOD
Õs vision for future communications systems is typically
expressed in general terms, such as 
Òmultimedia to the foxhole
Ó (see Box
1-3).  For example, the Army
Õs architecture for the digitized battlefield of
the twenty-first century consists of fixed high-bandwidth infrastructure

at the Army, theater, and corps levels, integrated with the DOD
Õs global
grid (a concept for spanning the world with high-bandwidth computing

and communications systems) and based on asynchronous transfer mode

(ATM) wide-area networking technology (Sass and Gorr, 1995).  Band-

width is allocated not only up and down the command hierarchy but also

horizontally to cooperating formations.  At the division level and below,

wireless extensions provided by mobile radio access points (RAPs) will

link the front-line combat communications systems to the infrastructure

in the rear areas.  The RAP is a wheeled or tracked vehicle with an on-the-

move antenna system.  The RAPs carry extensive communications sys-

tems and are interconnected by high-capacity trunk radios capable of
BOX 1-3Preparing for Battle in a Multisensor EnvironmentThe ArmyÕs Force XXI Soldier Program is developing the prototype technologiesneeded to make the soldier more efficient as a sensor and more lethal.  Many sensorswill be used in future theaters of operation:  Everything that moves will have one ormore sensors, and there will be many stationary sensors.  Soldiers may carry position,
identification, health, and imagery sensors, for example, or a networking body-wornradio.  They will probably be able to image and locate anything on the battlefieldand notify others of the onset of a firefight, drawing support from nearby assets.
Finally, soldiers will be able to provide reconnaissance reports in far greater detail,perhaps catching important details missed in traditional daily radio reporting.  Thedismounted soldier is not the only user of imagery and video services; ships, aircraft,
and other platforms may also carry sensors.  Video and video teleconferencing appli-cations have already been deployed on an experimental basis.  All of these sensorswill increase the data load on the military communications system.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONScommunicating at up to 45 Mbps over a range of 30 km.  Satellites or other
systems may provide back-up communications.
To the committee
Õs knowledge, the operational requirements for fu-
ture untethered communications have not been translated into technical

specifications.  In the future, technical specifications will need to be for-

mulated in a way that will make it possible to determine which commer-

cial technologies are capable of meeting military needs.  As an alternative,

some general DOD requirements can be inferred from military plans and

the known technical capabilities of existing and emerging communica-

tions technologies.  For example, future military wireless systems will

require high data rates
Ñthe long-range goal is at least 10 Mbps
Ñand the
capability to transmit over broad and variable frequency bands (some

experimental radios are designed to span frequencies from 2 MHz to

2 GHz).  The systems will need to be rapidly deployable and the infra-

structure will need to be mobile.  Multilevel communications security that

encompasses the most secure levels possible will be needed.  Further-

more, to enable worldwide strategic communications, the new equipment

will need to be interoperable with older military systems as well as those

used by foreign allies and international forces.  There are more than 17

different U.S. defense communications networks, and none are readily

interoperable at present.  New concepts and technologies will clearly be

needed to meet all these requirements.
To meet its future communications requirements, the DOD is funding a
number of research and demonstration projects, typically pursuing high-

risk ventures with potentially high payoff.  The most comprehensive DOD-

funded initiative dealing with untethered communications is the Global

Mobile Information Systems (GloMo) program initiated by DARPA in 1994.

Other relevant research initiatives deal with software-defined radios, com-

munications systems, and radio technology (Leiner et al., 1996).
1.3.3.1  Global Mobile Information Systems Program
The overarching goal of GloMo is to develop technology for robust
end-to-end information systems in a global mobile environment by ex-
ploiting commercial products and generating new technologies with ap-

plications in both commercial and military domains.  The program sup-

ports a wide range of research projects, which are identified based on the

priorities of GloMo managers rather than on a systems approach to the

development of top-down solutions.  Notably missing from the program,

for example, is a comprehensive assessment of the suitability of various

network architectures, even though all other component needs are dic-

tated by the system design.  (Network architecture issues are discussed in

detail in Chapters 2 and 3.)  The GloMo program currently focuses on
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE27developing innovative technologies that span the following research
thrusts.Design Infrastructure.
  This effort spans tools, languages, and environ-
ments for designing and deploying wireless systems.  Research areas
include computer-aided design tools for estimating power and designing

low-power systems, design libraries and models for mixed-signal inte-

grated circuits (ICs) suitable for implementing highly integrated RF chip

sets, and simulation tools for modeling the propagation of radio waves

and higher-level protocols.
Untethered Nodes.  
This effort focuses on high-performance, modular, low-
cost, and low-power wireless nodes.  Research activities are aimed at devel-
oping the next generation of agile, highly integrated radio technology.  Ra-

dio control points are exposed to higher software layers to make radios and

applications more adaptable to changing needs and conditions.  Comple-

mentary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology (an inexpensive,

low-power technology) is being pushed to its limits to achieve high-speed

RF circuitry coupled to high levels of integration.  Several activities are

combining custom signal processing for audio and video with the radio

circuitry.  In these efforts radios are viewed as modular building blocks that

can be combined to yield systems with different cost-performance-function

attributes.  Some projects are investigating the architectures of software

radios, in which many of the radio functions are performed by software

combined with very-high-performance processing architectures.
Network Protocols and Algorithms.  This effort deals with the developmentof robust network architectures and techniques for rapid deployment of
wireless networks.  Research efforts include the development of new
packet-radio routing schemes such as dynamic routing protocols for ad

hoc networking.  The concepts being studied are not limited to end-node

mobility:  Other possibilities include base-station mobility and network

reconfiguration as base stations are repositioned in a battlefield scenario.
End-to-End Networking.  This effort addresses how best to operate across a
heterogeneous mix of underlying networks, both wireless and wired.Research areas include extensions to TCP/IP that will enable mobile us-

ers to access the Internet, satellite extensions to the Internet, and overlay

wireless networking that supports mobility across diverse wireless sub-

networks inside buildings and in the wider area.
Mobile Applications Support.  
This effort deals with the development of
distributed computing techniques that will enable applications to adapt
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSto varying network connectivity and quality of service (QoS) needs.  The
techniques being studied include software agents (sometimes called me-
diators or proxies) that adapt data representations to the capabilities of

bandwidth-constrained wireless links; methods of performing compu-

tations in the wireline infrastructure on behalf of power- and display-

limited portable devices such as personal digital assistants (PDAs); ca-

pabilities to move code between wired and portable nodes to provide

location-dependent or new functionality when the node is poorly con-

nected; file system structures that operate whether well connected, dis-

connected, or poorly connected to a wired infrastructure; event-notifica-

tion protocols that enable applications to learn of changes to the

underlying network connectivity and QoS; and techniques for structur-

ing applications to exploit information about their current location.
1.3.3.2Software-Defined Radio Research
The DOD is devoting considerable attention to designing and demon-
strating software-defined radios, none of which is in production as yet.  The
most prominent of these initiatives is the SpeakEASY program sponsored

by DARPA, the Air Force Rome Laboratory, and the Army Communication

Electronics Command.  The key objective of SpeakEASY is to change the

paradigm for military radios.  In the past, radios were based on 
Òpoint
designs
Ó with negligible capabilities for functional upgrades or waveform
changes
Ñcapabilities that define SpeakEASY.  In phase 1 of the program,
analog-to-digital (A/D) converters were used to complete the radio signal

path and high-speed digital signal processors (DSPs) were used for filtering

and demodulation.  The key technologies demonstrated in phase 1 include

digital frequency conversion and wideband signal processing.
In SpeakEASY phase 2, modular radio elements (separate modules
for the analog elements, A/D converter, and DSPs) will be integrated on

an open-architecture bus.  The key objective of phase 2 is to demonstrate

a software-defined networking radio with support for legacy and future

waveform evolution using a single architecture.  This approach increases

production volume, reduces costs, and enhances logistical support.  The

open-architecture design implies that competitive bids would be sought

for commercial boards, modules, and software.  Other goals include the

use of commercial modules in the radio and the commercialization of any

functions developed specifically for the radio.
The Naval Research Laboratory has an ongoing research program
focusing on a software-defined radio known as the Joint C
4I Terminal
(JCIT).  The JCIT grew out of an Army requirement for an advanced,

helicopter-based command-and-control system.  The JCIT will incorpo-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE29rate multiple software-defined radios for combat net, intelligence com-
munications, and military data links on a single platform.
Also under development is the advanced communications engine(ACE), which evolved from a project sponsored by DARPA.  The ACE is

a software-defined digital radio with capabilities for multiple simulta-

neous band and channel transmissions (it has six receiving and transmit-

ting channels).  The initial prototypes demonstrate 
Òdual-use
Ó (i.e., both
military and commercial) capabilities including those of combat net ra-

dios SINCGARS and Have Quick (a UHF system designed to provide

secure air-to-air and air-to-ground communications with AJ capabilities)

and commercial avionics radios such as GPS, VHF air to ground, and the

aircraft communications addressing and reporting system.
A very ambitious program, Millennium, was initiated to design an
ultra-wideband radio.  One objective was to demonstrate extremely high

speed (approximately 1 billion samples per second) A/D data converters

for both military and commercial communications.  After the data con-

version process, all tuning, filtering, demodulation, and decoding func-

tions are performed by software (these processes and the associated tech-

nologies are discussed in Chapter 2).
1.3.3.3  Communications Systems Research
Several important research programs focus on complete communica-
tion systems.  The DARPA Battlefield Awareness and Data Dissemination
(BADD) program combines radios, ATM routers, and various communi-

cations networks and airborne relays from the Army
Õs digital battlefield
technology development effort for the deployment of high-speed data

and large-file image transfer to the forward area.  The Bosnia Command

and Control Augmentation program, which is phase 1 of the GBS and

focuses on satellite communications, grew out of BADD testing.  Phase 2

of the GBS involves the incorporation of DirecTV transponders into Navy

UHF satellites.  Phase 3 will provide the means for stand-alone satellite

transfer of high-speed data and large-file images.
1.3.3.4  Radio Component Research
The DODÕs Extremely Lightweight Antenna program produced acompact, lightweight (under 2 pounds), and wideband (85 MHz to 2.2
GHz) antenna.  The antenna incorporates a directional wideband satellite

beam as well as low-gain omnidirectional radiation patterns.  The DARPA
Advanced Digital Receiver Technology program was initiated to demon-

strate technology elements for software-defined receivers in communica-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStions, radar, and electronic warfare.  Several of these functions might be
merged into one digital receiver unit.
1.3.3.5  Small Unit Operations
The Small Unit Operations Situational Awareness System includes a
significant wireless communications component.  One goal of the researchis to create a radio system for exchanging information among groups of

up to 12 foot soldiers operating in an area of approximately 4 km
2.1.3.3.6  Modeling and Simulation
The Scalable Self-Organizing Simulations (S3) Program, supported by
DARPA and the National Science Foundation, uses parallel computers to

simulate communications networks.  This program includes projects that

create models and a library of computer programs for simulating mobility,

radio propagation, and teletraffic patterns in large-scale wireless networks.
1.4  COMMERCIAL TERRESTRIAL MOBILE TELEPHONE
SYSTEMS AND SERVICES
Commercial wireless communications systems have exhibited remark-
able growth over the past decade (see Figure 1-2).  There are currently more

than 50 million U.S. cellular subscribers (Hill, 1997) and more than 34 mil-

lion U.S. paging subscribers (Mooney, 1997).  An estimated 17 percent of

the U.S. population now has cellular service, compared to 95 percent with

wireline telephone service (Hill, 1997).  There are also 50 million subscribers

to systems based on the global system for mobile communications (GSM)

standard, the European cellular technology.  Worldwide, the total number

of subscribers to cellular systems is projected at just under 200 million (Hill,

1997).  It should be noted that these figures, as market research estimates,

are fundamentally imprecise and, moreover, tend to be volatile because of

the dynamic nature of the wireless industry.
Throughout the world, wireless communication systems are enabling
developing countries to provide instant telephone service to new sub-

scribers who otherwise would have to wait years for wireline access.

Although wireless users are still far outnumbered by the approximately

700 million wireline telephone users worldwide, the number of new wire-

less subscribers is growing 15 times faster than the wireline subscriber

base, and this pace is expected to accelerate in the coming years.  Analysts

predict that, by the year 2010, there will be equal numbers of wireless and

wireline connections throughout the world.
Wireless mobile telephone systems can be divided into three genera-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE31tions.  The first generation, introduced in the 1980s and early 1990s, uses
analog cellular and cordless telephone technology.  Second-generation

systems transmit speech in digital format.  They provide advanced calling

features and some nonvoice services.  There are two categories of second-

generation systems.  High-tier systems feature high-power transmitters,

base stations with coverage ranges on the order of kilometers, and sub-

scribers moving at vehicular speeds.  Low-tier systems, serving subscrib-

ers moving at pedestrian speeds, have low-power transmitters with a

range on the order of 100 meters (m).  Some of these systems are designed

primarily for indoor use.  Third-generation systems, planned for intro-

duction after 2002, are expected to integrate disparate services, including

broadband information services that cannot be delivered with second-

generation technology.  Many users are looking forward to the increased

convenience promised by the integration or compatibility of systems (see

Box 1-4).  In addition to terrestrial mobile telephone systems, other com-

mercial wireless systems include satellite communications, mobile data

systems, and wireless local area networks (LANs).
1.4.1  First-Generation Systems
Of the original wireless communications systems deployed in the
1980s, the most popular was the analog cordless telephone, which uses
FIGURE 1-2  The number of U.S. cellular subscribers and cell sites soared be-
tween 1984 and 1996.
   
Note that 1984 figures are for January 1985.  Source:  Re-
produced with the Cellular Telephone Industry Association
Õs permission from
the CTIA
Õs Semi-Annual Data Survey.
05101520
253035
40451984198519861987198819891990199119921993199419951996Year-endmillions of subscribersthousands of cell sitesThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSradio to connect a portable handset to a unit that is wired to the public
switched telephone network.  Hundreds of millions of such devices have

been produced, and the technology has been standardized in Europe un-

der the cordless telephone first-generation (CT0, CT1, and CT1+) stan-

dards.  There is no single U.S. standard.  Analog cordless telephones have

ranges limited to tens of meters and require a dedicated telephone line.

Cellular systems have enabled much greater mobility.
In establishing cellular service in 1983 the FCC divided the United
States into 734 cellular markets (called metropolitan statistical areas and

rural service areas), each with an 
ÒA-side
Ó and 
ÒB-side
Ó cellular service
provider.  Historically, the designation of A or B indicated the origins of

the cellular provider:  An A-side provider did
 not
 originate in the tradi-
tional telephone business and was called a nonwireline carrier, whereas a

B-side provider had roots in traditional services and was called a wireline

carrier.  Each cellular carrier is licensed to use 25 MHz of radio spectrum

in the 800-MHz band to provide two-way telephone and data communi-

cations for its particular market.  Because the U.S. analog cellular system

is standardized with AMPS, any cellular telephone is capable of working

in any part of the country.
The AMPS cellular standard uses analog FM and full-duplex radio
channels.  The frequency division multiple access (FDMA) technique en-

ables multiple users to share the same region of spectrum.  This standard

supports clear communication and inexpensive mobile telephones, but

the transmissions are easy to intercept on a standard radio receiver and

therefore are susceptible to eavesdropping.  As of late 1996, 88 percent of

all cellular telephones in the United States used the AMPS standard (digi-
BOX 1-4So Many Systems, So Little Integration
The proliferation of commercial communications systems can seem overwhelm-ing, especially to international travelers.  One such traveler explains:  ÒI have a two-way pager that works in the United States.  I have a one-way pager that works insome countries.  I have another one-way pager that works in other countries.  I
Õve got
a GSM phone.  IÕve got a CDPD [cellular digital packet data] modem.  I have a RAM
[Mobile Data] and an Ardis radio.  I have a cable to connect my cellular phone to themodem in my PC.  I have accounts with two Internet service providers, CompuServe,America Online, an account at the office.  IÕve got seven phone numbers in the 847area code, one phone number in the 708 area code.  IÕve got one phone number inNew Jersey because AT&T wireless are the only people who will give you a GSM
account, so I have a New Jersey phone number.  I live in Chicago.  .  .  . I have my
own phone book which just has me in it.  That
Õs the problem today:  I
Õve got all of
this stuffÓ (Lou Dellaverson, Motorola, Inc., December 10, 1996).The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE33tal cellular standards have only recently become available).  Outside of
the United States and Canada, a wide variety of incompatible analog

cellular systems have been deployed (see Table 1-3).  The European cellu-

lar service, which predated the AMPS system, used the Nordic mobile

telephone (NMT) standard beginning in 1982.  Other European nations

and Japan also developed analog standards.
1.4.2  Second-Generation Systems
Spurred by growing consumer demand for wireless services, stan-
dards organizations in North America, Europe, and Japan have specified

new technologies to meet consumer expectations and make efficient use

of allocated spectrum bands.  These second-generation systems use ad-

vanced digital signal processing, compression, coding, and network-con-

trol techniques to conserve radio bandwidth, prevent eavesdropping and

unauthorized use of networks, and also support additional services (e.g.,

voice mail, three-way calling, and text transmission retrieval).
In the United States, second-generation technologies have been de-
ployed in the original 800- MHz cellular bands and in personal communi-

cations bands around 1900 MHz that were allocated by the FCC between

1995 and 1997.  In Europe and most other parts of the world, second-

generation technologies are deployed in the 900-MHz cellular bands and

in 1800-MHz personal communications bands.  Japan operates digital

cellular systems in various bands between 800 MHz and 1500 MHz as

well as a personal communications band near 1900 MHz.
The most widespread second-generation techniques include three high-
tier standards:  the European standard, GSM; and two North American stan-

dards, IS-136, a time division multiple access (TDMA) technique, and IS-95, a

code division multiple access (CDMA) technique.5  The GSM standard, whichhas been adopted in more than 100 countries, specifies a complete wide-area

communications system.  The other two standards specify only the commu-

nications between mobile telephones and base stations.  A separate standard,

IS-41, governs communications between mobile switching centers and other

infrastructure elements in the United States.  Table 1-4 summarizes the prop-

erties of the principal high-tier second-generation systems.
Among low-tier standards, the personal handyphone system (PHS)
provides mobile telephone services to several million Japanese subscrib-

ers.  Two other standards, digital European cordless telecommunications

(DECT) and cordless telephone second generation (CT2), form the basis of

several wireless business telephone (i.e., private branch exchange, or PBX)
products.  A fourth low-tier system is the personal access communica-

tions system (PACS), a U.S. standard.  Although PACS has attracted con-

siderable industry interest, it has not been widely deployed to date.  Table

1-5 summarizes the properties of low-tier systems.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSTABLE 1-3Analog Cellular Systems
Transmission Frequency (MHz)Channel
SpacingRegions
StandardMobile StationBase Station(kHz)Covered
Comments
AMPS
a824
Ð849869
Ð89430America, Australia, SE Asia, Africa
TACS
b890
Ð915935
Ð96025Europe
Bands later allocated to GSM
cETACS
d872
Ð905917
Ð95025United Kingdom
NMT
e 450453
Ð457.5463
Ð467.525Europe
NMT 900890
Ð915935
Ð96012.5Europe, Africa, SE Asia
Frequency overlapping
C-450450
Ð455.74460
Ð465.7410Germany, Portugal
RTMS
f450
Ð455460
Ð46525Italy
Radiocom192.5
Ð199.5200.5
Ð207.512.5France
First two bands are regional, second
2000215.5
Ð233.5207.5
Ð215.5
two are national
165.2
Ð168.4169.8
Ð173
414.8
Ð418424.8
Ð428
NTT
 g925
Ð940870
Ð88525/6.25Japan
First band is nationwide, others are
915
Ð918.5860
Ð863.56.25
regional
922
Ð925867
Ð8706.25
JTACS
h915
Ð925860
Ð87025/12.5Japan
All are regional
NTACS
i898
Ð901843-84625/12.5
918.5
Ð922863.5
Ð86712.5
aAdvanced mobile phone system.
bTotal access communications system.
cGlobal system for mobile communications.
dExtended total access communications system.
eNordic mobile telephone.
fRadio telephone mobile system.
gThe dominant telecommunications operating company in Japan.
hJapanese total access communications.
iNarrowband total access communications.
SOURCE:  Reprinted from Padgett et al. (1995) with permission.  Copyright © 1995 by IEEE.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE35TABLE 1-4  High-Tier Digital Cellular Systems
System
IS-95
GSM
aIS-136
PDC
bRegion
Worldwide
Worldwide
Americas
Japan
Access methodCDMA
cFDMA
d/TDMA
eFDMA/TDMATDMA
Frequency bands824
Ð849, 869
Ð894,890
Ð915, 935
Ð960824
Ð849, 869
Ð894810
Ð826, 940
Ð956, 1477
Ð(megahertz)1850
Ð1910, 1930
Ð1710
Ð1785, 1805
Ð1885
1489, 1429
Ð1441, 1501
Ð1990
1850
Ð1910, 1930
Ð1990
1513, 1453
Ð1465
Carrier spacing1250
200
30
25
(kilohertz)
Channels perSoft capacity (limited8
33carrier
by noise and
interference)
aGlobal system for mobile communications.
bPacific digital cellular.
cCode division multiple access.
dFrequency division multiple access.
eTime division multiple access.
SOURCE: Reprinted from Padgett et al. (199
5) with permission.  Copyright © 1995 by IEEE.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSIn addition to the 1900-MHz licensed personal communications bands(see Table 1-5, the fifth column), the FCC has allocated the 1910
Ð1930
MHz band for unlicensed low-tier systems.  Commercial products based
on DECT, PHS, and a modified version of PACS (designated PACS-UB,

for unlicensed band) are under consideration for deployment in the 1910
Ð
1930 MHz band.
Each of the second-generation systems has distinct features and limi-
tations, but none was designed specifically with the problems of large,

complex organizations such as the military in mind.  Nevertheless, it is

possible to combine disparate approaches in a customized network built

to meet the unique voice and data communications needs of an organiza-

tion with national reach (see Box 1-5).
BOX 1-5Tracking Packages Across North AmericaTotalTrack was established by the United Parcel Service (UPS) and a consortium of
more than 100 cellular carriers in the United States and Canada in response to custom-er demands for real-time package tracking.  The system was the first nationwide cellu-
lar data service.  In conjunction with the private UPS telecommunications network(UPSnet), TotalTrack provides broad coverage, enabling 60,000 UPS vehicles in theUnited States and Canada to transmit status information to the UPS mainframe com-puter within minutes of package delivery.  TotalTrack uses existing cellular technology
and infrastructure to process 1.25 million calls and large quantities of data daily.
The UPS drivers record package information using a custom-built, handheld elec-tronic data collection device, which is used to scan the package bar code and to
capture the receiverÕs signature.  This information is transmitted through a modem in
the vehicle to the local cellular network, which provides the link to UPSnet.  Thesystem is designed to be fail-safe with cellular redundancies, dual access to UPSnet,and multiple connections to the data center.The effectiveness of cellular technology for this application was proven by a 10-city field test that compared specialized mobile radio with cellular.  Initially there
were concerns about cellular reliability for data transmission.  Cellular was believed

to be too noisy and prone to signal interference to transmit data effectively.  Howev-er, UPS achieved link reliability by using a particular combination of error-controlprotocols.  To reduce the duration and cost of data calls, the cellular carriers con-
nected their switching systems directly into UPSnet using a multipurpose access plat-form.  This equipment receives the cellular data from UPS vehicles, converts it froman analog circuit-switched to a digital packet-switched format, and then forwards it
to one of 40 UPS packet switches around the country.  Other innovations include aphone numbering plan that allows UPS vehicles to roam between the service areasof adjacent alliance members, a billing system that consolidates all carrier charges
into a single UPS bill, and a unified Òhelp deskÓ that quickly resolves cellular serviceproblems.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE37TABLE 1-5  Low-Tier Wireless/Personal Communications Systems
System
CT2/CT2+
aDECT
bPHS
cPACS
dRegion
Europe, CanadaEurope
Japan
United States
Access method
FDMA
eFDMA/TDMA
fFDMA/TDMAFDMA/TDMA
Frequency band (megahertz)864
Ð868, 944
Ð9481880
Ð19001895
Ð19181850
Ð1910, 1930
Ð1990
Carrier spacing (kilohertz)100
1728
300
300
Number of carriers
40
10
77
16 per pair
Channels per carrier
112
48 per pair
aCordless telephone second generation.
bDigital European cordless telecommunications.
cPersonal handyphone system.
dPersonal access communications system.
eFrequency division multiple access.
fTime division multiple access.
SOURCE:  Reprinted from Padgett et al. (1995) with permission.  Copyright © 1995 by IEEE.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSThe commercial success of second-generation wireless telephone sys-
tems has stimulated widespread interest in enhancing their capabilities to
meet public expectations for advanced information services.  For example,
new speech-coding techniques offering improved voice quality have been

introduced to all three high-tier systems.  Efforts are also under way to

make these systems more attractive for data services.  Accordingly, stan-

dards for fax-signal transmission have been established, and standards

for circuit-switched data transmission at rates of up to 64 kilobits per

second (kbps) are under development for GSM and CDMA.  In addition,

technology for packet-switched data transmission, suitable for providing

wireless Internet access, is being developed for all second-generation sys-

tems.  The technology base will continue to grow as R&D organizations

worldwide design innovations for a third generation of wireless commu-

nications systems.
61.4.3  Third-Generation Systems
The original concept for third-generation wireless systems emerged
from an International Telecommunications Union (ITU) initiative known

as the future public land mobile telecommunication system (FPLMTS).
7Over the past decade the ITU advanced the concept of a wireless system

that would encompass technical capabilities a clear step above those of

second-generation cellular systems.  The current name for the third-gen-

eration system is International Mobile Telecommunications-2000 (IMT-

2000).  The number refers to an early target date for implementing the

new technology and also the frequency band (around 2000 MHz) in which

it would be deployed.
As envisioned in the IMT-2000 project, the third-generation wireless
system would have a worldwide common radio interface and network.  It

would support higher data rates than do second-generation systems yet

be less expensive.  It would also advance other aspects of wireless com-

munications by reducing equipment size, extending battery life, and im-

proving ease of operation.  In addition, the system would support the

services required in developing as well as developed nations.  Box 1-6

lists the complete set of goals established in 1990 for FPLMTS.
Since 1990 IMT-2000 recommendations have been approved that elabo-
rate on the initial goals, establish security principles, prescribe a network

architecture, present a plan for developing nations, establish radio interface

requirements, and specify a framework for a satellite component.  The ITU

anticipated an international competition leading to a radio interface that

could be developed and deployed by the year 2000.  The competing radio

interfaces would provide minimum outdoor data rates of 384 kpbs and an

indoor rate of 2 Mbps.  Other than providing a forum for discussion of
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE39standards proposals, the ITU has not adopted clear plans of how to proceed
beyond the point of reviewing the proposals.
The 1995 World Radio Conference set aside spectrum for nations to
consider for the deployment of IMT-2000.  The bands are 1920
Ð1980 MHz
and 2110
Ð2170 MHz for terrestrial communications and 1980
Ð2010 MHz
and 2170
Ð2200 MHz for satellites.  As noted in Table 1-4 and Table 1-5, the
United States has already allocated spectrum bands to personal commu-

nications that include part of the lower IMT-2000 band, making it unlikely
BOX 1-6 Goals for Third-Generation Commercial Wireless SystemsHigh quality and integrity comparable to the fixed networkFlexibility for evolutionUse of a small pocket terminal worldwide but accommodation of other terminal types
Higher service quality, especially for voiceAvailability of a range of voice and other services, including multimediaFlexible radio bearer leading to improved spectral efficiency and lower cost per erlang

Higher bit rate capabilityImproved securityImproved ease of operation
Compatibility of services within the system and with the fixed networkA framework for continuing expansion of mobile network services and access to thefixed networkIntegration of satellite and terrestrial components
Wider range of operating environments, including aeronautical and maritimeOpen architecture that will permit easy introduction of advances in technology andapplicationsServices provided by more than one network in each coverage area
Services provided over a wide range of user densities and coverage areas
Services provided to both mobile and fixed users in urban, rural, and remote regions
Modular structure to enable the system to grow in size and complexity as neededCaters to the needs of developing countries
Equipment compatible with off-the-shelf products worldwideService creation and service profile management by ÒintelligentÓ network
Coherent systems managementEfficient use of the radio spectrum consistent with provision of services at acceptablecostsExpanded marketplace leading to lower costs
Global standard promoting a high degree of design commonality while incorporat-ing a variety of systemsWorldwide common frequency band
Worldwide roaming based on terminal mobilitySOURCE:  International Telecommunications Union Task Group 8/1 (1996).The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSthat U.S. service providers could deploy IMT-2000 at all.  Early on, atten-
tion to the ITU work was limited in both Europe and the United States,

where growth in second-generation digital cellular and personal commu-

nications markets has been strong.  It was the Japanese, virtually alone

among all nations, who insisted that the ITU program proceed as fast as

possible because they were running out of spectrum for their cellular and

personal communications systems.
8  The Japanese were able to keep the
IMT-2000 program on schedule, resulting in an ITU call for radio-inter-

face proposals, now due in mid-1998.  In support of this effort, the Japa-

nese radio standards group is developing one or more Japanese standards

for use in the ITU-2000 spectrum.  Presumably the standard(s) will be

submitted to the ITU for possible worldwide use.
Meanwhile, the European telecommunications industry established a
framework for developing third-generation mobile wireless technology.

The universal mobile telephone system (UMTS) is intended to replicate

the commercial success achieved a decade earlier with GSM.  The UMTS

schedule calls for establishing the technology base by December 1997,

deploying a minimum system in 2002, and achieving a full system in

2005.  The technical goals of UMTS closely resemble many of the IMT-

2000 goals.  The Europeans plan to propose the technologies adopted for

UMTS as candidates for IMT-2000.
In the United States, action on this issue did not take place until mid-
1997, when the four U.S. CDMA cellular infrastructure manufacturers
ÑLucent Technologies, Motorola, Nortel, and QUALCOMM, Inc.
Ñan-
nounced a third-generation program called Wideband cdmaOne.  Like
many candidate systems under consideration in Europe and Japan, the U.S.

system uses a 5-MHz CDMA signal, although the operating parameters

and design features differ from those of foreign counterparts.  Additional

U.S. proposals for IMT-2000 could emerge from other communities of com-

panies supporting other digital radio interface standards.
9Among related developments, interest in 
Ònomadicity
Ó is growing
within the Internet community in the United States.  As originally con-

ceived, the national information infrastructure (NII) placed little empha-

sis on the wireless delivery of information to mobile users (Computer

Science and Telecommunications Board, 1994).  But with the growth in

demand for Internet services, reflected by the transition to private suppli-

ers, providers are seeking to leverage Internet technology either directly

or as part of heterogeneous networks.  Plans are being made to accommo-

date nomads (i.e., mobile users) who draw on a variety of communica-

tions, computing, and information systems simultaneously, a concept that
will require attention by multiple industries to issues such as security,

interoperability, and synchronization within and between systems (Cross-
Industry Working Team, 1995).
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE41Other ITU activities are addressing network aspects of IMT-2000.10Here again the Japanese have made major contributions toward the estab-
lishment of a single worldwide network to support wireless systems.  Only

in mid-1997 did the U.S. and European delegations begin to make signifi-

cant contributions, concerned about their current investments in cellular

and personal communications networks and the possible effects of estab-

lishing a worldwide network that was incompatible with their systems.

The latest U.S. and European proposals emphasize the idea of a family of

networks supporting a family of radio interfaces through the use of appro-

priate gateways to achieve worldwide roaming and interoperability.
Although it is clear that many new wireless communications tech-
nologies will emerge in the 2002
Ð2005 time frame, it is not clear when and
how they will be commercialized.  The robust evolution of second-gen-

eration systems will limit commercial incentives to introduce a new gen-

eration of systems.  It is possible that advances in second-generation sys-

tems will meet future demand for mobile telephone services and that a

demonstrated demand for high-bit-rate data services will be necessary to

stimulate the commercial deployment of third-generation technology.
1.5  COMMERCIAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS
Satellite systems can be classified by frequency and orbit.  Above 1
GHz a satellite signal easily penetrates the ionosphere.  Transmission at

higher frequencies is desirable because additional bandwidth is available

there, but then expensive components are needed to overcome signal at-

tenuation, absorption, and path loss (see Chapter 2 for a discussion of

channel impairments).  Most satellite systems are of the GEO variety, offer-

ing configuration simplicity, wide footprint (i.e., one satellite covers an

entire geographical region), and fixed satellite-to-ground-terminal char-
acteristics.  But GEO systems also have a number of disadvantages, includ-

ing long propagation delays (a round-trip takes approximately half a sec-

ond), high transmitter-power requirements, and poor coverage at the far

northern and southern latitudes.  Moreover, GEO satellites are expensive to

launch, and, because only a handful of satellites are typically used to achieve
global coverage, they are vulnerable to single points of failure.
The International Maritime Satellite (INMARSAT) Organization, formed
in 1979, is now backed by the governments of 75 member countries.  Its first

satellites (INMARSAT-A) became operational in 1982, supporting voice

and low-rate data applications with analog FM technology.  By the end of

1993, 30,000 ground terminals were in operation.  The next generation of

INMARSAT satellites (INMARSAT-B and C) used digital technology, but

data rates remained low (600 bps).  With the introduction of INMARSAT-M

in 1996 it is now possible to use laptop computer-sized satellite terminals
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSfor voice and low-rate (2.4 kbps) data transmission.  However, the voice
quality of this system remains poor due to propagation delay, and data

transmission rates are 10 times slower than those of a standard modem.
In the late 1980s QUALCOMM deployed the OMNITracs vehicle-track-ing and communications system for both North America (using GSTAR

satellites) and Europe (using EUTELSAT satellites).  The service provides

two-way messaging and automatic position reporting.  By 1997 more than

200,000 trucks, most of them in the United States, were equipped with the

system.  The use of such systems in Europe has been restricted by high

equipment costs and expectations for less-costly alternatives with the next

generation of systems.
Recently introduced GEO systems for data communications include
Mobilesat in Australia and MSAT in North America (see Table 1-6).  Inno-

vations in GEO systems include spot beams for custom broadcast coverage

and improved on-board processing.  Although GEO satellite communica-

tions systems are not fully mobile (i.e., the terminals are not handheld),

innovations in terminal design have enabled the development of private

networks and rapidly reconfigurable systems.  Very small aperture termi-

nals (VSATs) use small Earth-station antennas to form private networks

through links to GEO satellites.  The VSAT is the result of more than 20

years of advances in digital Earth-station technology.  The applications

have evolved from point-to-point transmission links to networking termi-

nals that leverage the broadcasting capability of satellites.
TABLE 1-6  Selected Geosynchronous Earth Orbiting Systems
Number
Data
ofRateSystemOrganizationSatellitesCoverage
(kbps)aMSATbAMSCc, TMId2North America4.8
INMARSAT-MINMARSAT
5Global
2.4MobilesatOptus  Communication2Australia
2.4EMSeEuropean Space Agency1Europe, Northern10
Africa
LLMfEuropean Space Agency1Europe, Asia10
aKilobits per second.
bMobile satellite.
cAmerican Mobile Satellite Corporation.
dTelesat Mobile, Inc.
eEuropean mobile satellite.
fL-band land mobile.
SOURCE: Reprinted from Abrishamkar and Siveski (1996) with permission.  Copyright ©
1996 by IEEE.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE43The VSAT terminals offer various types of access.  Fast-response pro-
tocols are used for time-sensitive transactions such as credit card pur-
chases and hotel or airline reservations, throughput-efficient access is

used for file transfers, and circuit-switched access is used for speech and

digital video.  (Throughput is the fraction of time during which a channel

can be used.)  An important feature of VSAT technology is ease of deploy-

ment:  Installation takes approximately 2 hours.  Companies are now

installing VSATs at the rate of more than 1,500 per month.  There are more

than 200,000 VSATs worldwide, operating in nearly every country; indi-

vidual networks range in size from as few as 20 nodes operating in a

shared-hub environment to nearly 10,000 in the General Motors Corpora-

tion network.
In 1994 direct-broadcast satellites (DBSs) became operational, some
two decades after the first experiments were performed with this technol-

ogy.  These systems broadcast a signal from a GEO satellite with sufficient

power to allow direct reception in a home, office, or vehicle with an

inexpensive receiver.  The two primary applications for DBS systems are

television and radio; emerging applications include DirecPC and GBS.

Systems for direct-broadcast television are operational in Europe, Japan,

and the United States.  By the end of 1996 these systems had more than 2.5

million U.S. subscribers.  Digital audio broadcasting (DAB) has the poten-

tial to provide every radio within a service area with continuous trans-

missions of a sound quality comparable to that of a compact disc.  Sys-

tems are being tested around the world that deliver DAB from satellites as

well as from terrestrial antennas.
Communications systems using non-GEO satellites are emerging as
major players in commercial wireless applications.  These satellites are

characterized as either medium Earth orbit (MEO) or low Earth orbit

(LEO).  The LEOs, deployed in either circular or elliptical orbits of 500 to

2,000 km, offer several advantages including reduced propagation delay

and low transmit-power requirements, allowing the use of handheld ter-

minals.  But at these altitudes a system requires many satellites to achieve

global coverage.  Furthermore, satellite movement relative to the ground

terminal introduces Doppler shift in the received signal, and each satellite

is visible from a ground terminal for only a few minutes at a time so that

handoffs between satellites are frequent.  The MEO satellites offer fea-

tures that represent a compromise between LEOs and GEOs.  The MEOs

are deployed in circular orbits at an altitude of about 10,000 km.  Approxi-

mately 10 to 15 satellites (more than GEOs but fewer than LEOs) are

required for global coverage, and average visibility is one to two hours

per satellite (less than for GEOs but more than for LEOs).  The Doppler

shift in MEOs is also considerably less than that in LEOs, but higher

transmit power is required.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSThe majority of new satellite systems that will become operational by
the year 2000 are LEO or MEO systems.  These satellites can be catego-
rized further by size.  Big LEO/MEOs (see Table 1-7) support voice and

data communications with large satellites (weighing 400
Ð2,000 kilograms
[kg]) and operate at frequencies above 1 GHz.  Little LEOs use much

smaller satellites (weighing 40
Ð100 kg) and operate in the UHF and VHF
bands, thereby enabling the use of inexpensive transmission hardware for

both the satellite and ground terminal.  The 36-satellite Orbcomm system

is an example.
Most of these systems provide voice and low-rate data to mobile
users with handheld terminals.  The link rates for little LEOs are asym-

metric, with lower rates on the uplink (ground to satellite) than on the

downlink (satellite to ground) because of power limitations in the

handheld unit.  Teledesic is unusual because it is intended primarily for

broadband wireless data communications with stationary terminals at

integrated services digital network (ISDN) rates.  Teledesic and Iridium

have direct intersatellite communication links independent of the ground

segment, enabling the provision of services to countries lacking a commu-

nications infrastructure.  Iridium is designed to consist of 66 satellites

arranged in six planes, all in a nearly polar orbit.  Each satellite is expected

to serve as a 
Òswitchboard in the sky,
Ó routing each channel of voice
traffic through various other satellites in the system; communications are

eventually delivered to an appropriate ground-based gateway to terres-

trial telecommunications.
Globalstar is a LEO digital telecommunications system that will begin
offering wireless telephone, data, paging, fax, and position location ser-

vices worldwide beginning in 1998.  The 48-satellite constellation operat-

ing 1,410 km from the planet surface serves as a 
Òbent-pipe
Ó relay to local
ground-based infrastructure.
1.6  MOBILE DATA SERVICES
Commercial packet-switched mobile data services emerged after the
success of short-message, alphanumeric one-way paging systems.  Mo-

bile data networks provide two-way, low-speed, packet-switched data

communication links with some restrictions on the size of the message (10

to 20 kilobytes) in early systems.  Services provided by mobile data net-

works include the following:
¥Transaction processing (credit card verification, paging, notice of
voice or electronic mail);
¥Broadcast services (general information, weather and traffic advi-
sories, advertising);
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE45TABLE 1-7Selected Big Low Earth Orbit (LEO)/Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) Systems
Number of
Data RateYear
System
Organization
SatellitesOrbitCoverage
 (kbps)
aOperational
GlobalstarLoral/QUALCOMM48
LEOGlobal
9.61998
IridiumMotorola
66
LEOGlobal
2.41998
OdysseyTRW
12
MEOGlobal
9.61998
TeledesicTeledesic
240
LEOGlobal
20
Ð2,0002002
ICO
ICO Global
10
MEOGlobal
2.41999
Communications
ArchimedesEuropean Space Agency5
Ð6MEOEurope, Asia, Canada256After 2000
a Kilobits per second.
SOURCE:  Reprinted from Abrishamkar and Siveski (1996) with permission.  Copyright © 1996 by IEEE.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS¥Interactive services (terminal access to host, remote LAN access,
games); and
¥Multicast service (subscription information services, law enforce-
ment, private bulletin boards).
The first commercial mobile data network was Ardis, a private net-
work developed in 1983 by IBM Corporation and Motorola to enable IBM
to provide computing facilities in the field.  By 1990 Ardis was deployed

in more than 400 metropolitan areas and 10,700 cities and towns using

1,300 base stations.  By 1994 Ardis (since then owned by Motorola) pro-

vided nationwide roaming for approximately 35,000 users, at a rate of 45

million messages per month, and a data rate of 19.2 kbps.
In 1986, Swedish Telecomm and Ericsson Radio Systems AB intro-
duced Mobitex and deployed it in Sweden.  This system is available in the

United States, Norway, Finland, Great Britain, the Netherlands, and

France.  The system supports a data rate of 8 Mbps and nationwide roam-

ing (international roaming is planned).  This service is distributed by

RAM Mobile Data in the United States, where by 1994 it had 12,000 sub-

scribers.  A total of 840 base stations are connected to 40 switching centers

to cover 100 metropolitan areas and 6,300 cities and towns.
Cellular digital packet data (CDPD) technology was developed by
IBM, which together with nine operating companies formed the CDPD

Forum to develop an open standard and multivendor environment for a

packet-switched network using the physical infrastructure and frequency

bands of the AMPS systems.  The CDPD specification was completed in

1993 with key contributions from IBM, McCaw Cellular Communications,
Inc., and Pacific Communications Sciences, Inc.  Deployment of the

19.2-kbps CDPD infrastructure, designed to make use of idle channels in

analog cellular systems, commenced in 1995.
In the 1990s Metricom, Inc., developed a metropolitan-area network
that was deployed first in the San Francisco Bay area and then in Wash-

ington, D.C.  The signaling rate of this system is advertised at 100 kbps

but the actual data rate is substantially slower.  The Metricom system uses

Òfrequency hopping
Ó spread-spectrum (FHSS) technology in the lower
frequencies (around 900 MHz) of the unlicensed industrial, scientific, and

medical (ISM) bands.
11
In 1996 the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)
standard for mobile data services, trans-European trunked radio (TETRA),
was completed.  It is currently being used primarily for public safety

purposes.  Work is in progress to enhance the digital cellular and personal

communications technologies.  More recently, the digital cellular stan-

dards (GSM, IS-95, PHS, PACS, and IS-136) have been updated to support

packet-switched mobile data services at a variety of data rates.  Key fea-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE47tures of existing mobile data services are shown in Table 1-8.  Although
many services are available, the mobile data market has grown more

slowly than have voice services.
1.7  WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Wireless LANs provide data rates exceeding 1 Mbps in coverage ar-
eas with dimensions on the order of tens of meters.  They are used for a

variety of applications, including the following:
¥LAN extensions in hospitals, factory floors, branch offices, and
offices with wiring difficulties;
¥Cross-building inter-LAN bridges that serve as point-to-point,
high-speed links connecting separate LANs located within a few miles of

each other;
¥Temporary ad hoc networks used in conference registration, cam-
paign headquarters, and military camps;
¥Temporary wireless access to a wired LAN from a portable device
such as a laptop computer; and
¥Access to centralized computing facilities of a shipboard or re-
search facility through a wireless device such as a notepad computer.
In 1990 the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
formed a committee to develop a standard for wireless LANs operating at

1 and 2 Mbps.  In 1992 the ETSI chartered a committee to develop

a standard for high-performance radio LANs (HIPERLAN) operating at

20 Mbps.
Table 1-9 indicates the technical features of various LAN products (in-
cluding some that use the infrared portion of the spectrum and are there-

fore not examined in detail in this report).  The market for wireless LAN

products is growing rapidly but not nearly as fast as the market for wireless

voice applications.  The $200 million market for wireless LANs is tiny com-

pared to the cellular industry, which is worth billions (Wickelgren, 1996).
1.8  COMPARISON OF INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH,
DEVELOPMENT, AND DEPLOYMENT STRATEGIES
Commercial wireless technologies have followed divergent evolution-ary paths in different parts of the world.  For example, strong contrasts

are evident in the transition from first-generation cellular systems to sec-

ond-generation systems in the United States and Europe.  At first a single

U.S. system was used for analog cellular communications, AMPS, and

every cellular telephone in the United States and Canada could communi-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSTABLE 1-8Mobile Data Services
System
Ardis
Mobitex
CDPD
aTETRA
bMetricom
Frequency band (MHz)
c800 bands; 45 kHz
d sep.935
Ð940, 896
Ð961869
Ð894,
380
Ð383,902
Ð928 (ISM
e bands)
824
Ð849
390
Ð393
Channel bit rate (kbps)
f19.2
8.0
19.2
36100
RF
g channel spacing25
12.5
30
25160
(kHz)
Channel access/
FDMA
h/ALOHASlotted ALOHAFDMA/ALOHAALOHAFHSS
i/BTMA
jmultiuser access
aCellular digital packet data.
bTrans-European trunked radio.
cMegahertz.
dKilohertz.
eIndustrial, scientific, and medical.
fKilobits per second.
gRadio frequency.
hFrequency division multiple access.
iFrequency hopping spread spectrum.
jBusy tone multiple access.
SOURCE:  Reprinted from Cox (1995) with permission. Copyright © 1995 by IEEE.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE49TABLE 1-9  Wireless Local Area Network Technologies
Technology
DFIR
aDBIR
bRF
cDSSS
dFHSS
eaDiffused infrared.
bDirected-beam infrared.
cRadio frequency.
dDirect sequence spread spectrum.
eFrequency hopping spread spectrum.
fMegabits per second.
gLine of sight.
hGigahertz.iIndustrial, scientific, and medical.
SOURCES:  Reproduced from material in Cox (1995) and Pahlavan et al. (1995).
Channel bit rate (Mbps)
fMobility
Range (meters)
Frequency bands
Systems (companies)
1Ð4Stationary/
portable
15
Ð60
Infrared
Spectrixlite
(Spectrix
Corp.);

Photolink
(Photonics)
10
Ð155
Stationary

with LOS
g30
Infrared

Infralan
(InfraLAN);
UWIN (Jolt
Ltd.)
5Ð10
Stationary
10
Ð40
18 GHz
h, ISM
iAltair (Motorola,
Inc.); Fast Wave

(Southwest
Microwave, Inc.);
RediCARDrf

(Data Race, Inc.)
2Ð20
Stationary/portable
30
Ð200
ISM
Roamabout (Digital Equipment
Corp.); ARLAN (AiroNet Wireless
Communications); WaveLAN
(Lucent Technologies); INTERSECT

(Persoft, Inc.); AIRLAN (Solectek
Corp.); RangeLAN (Proxim);
FreePort (WinData); PRISM (Harris
Corp.)
1Ð3Portable
30
Ð100
ISM
Range-LAN2
(Proxim);

PortLAN (RDC
Networks);
Netwave

(Xircom)
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONScate with every base station.  By contrast, European users were faced
with a complex mixture of incompatible analog systems.  To maintain

mobile telephone service, an international traveler in Europe needed up

to five different telephones.  The situation was reversed by second-

generation systems.  Now there is a single digital technology, GSM,

deployed throughout Europe (and in more than 100 countries world-

wide), whereas the United States has become a technology battleground

for three competitors:  GSM (DSC-1900), TDMA (IS-136), and CDMA

(IS-95).The differences in technology evolution are due in large measure to
different government policies in Europe, the United States, and Japan, the

world
Õs principal sources of wireless technologies. Three types of govern-
ment policies influence developments in wireless systems:  policies on

radio spectrum regulation, approaches to R&D, and telecommunications

industry structure.  The reasons for the shifts in the above example can be

found primarily in changes in spectrum regulation policies adopted in the

1980s.  In establishing first-generation systems in the United States in the

late 1970s, the FCC regulated four properties of a radio system: noninter-

ference, quality, efficiency, and interoperability.  In the 1980s, deregula-

tion was in vogue and the scope of the FCC
Õs authority was restricted to
noninterference; the other properties were deemed commercial issues to

be settled in the marketplace.  Although this policy stimulated innovation

in the U.S. manufacturing industry, it also meant that operating compa-

nies had to choose among various competing technologies.
In Europe, the main trend in government regulation in the 1980s was
a move from national authority to multinational regulation under the

aegis of the European Community (EC; now the European Union [EU]).

The EC had a strong interest in establishing continental standards for

common products and services, including electric plugs and telephone

dialing conventions.  In this context the notion of a telephone that could

be used throughout Europe had a strong appeal.  To advance this notion,

the EC offered new spectrum for cellular service on the condition that the

operating industries of participating countries agree on a single standard.

Attracted by the availability of free spectrum, operating companies (many
of them government-owned) in 15 countries put aside national rivalries

and adopted the GSM standard.
Thus, a new pattern of technical cooperation was established in Eu-
rope.  This cooperation was reinforced by the European Commission (the

administrative unit of the EU), which funded cooperative precompetitive

research focusing on advanced communications systems, first in the Re-

search for Advanced Communications in Europe (RACE) program and

then in the Advanced Communications Technologies and Services (ACTS)
program.  In both programs a consortium of companies and universities
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE51performs the research.  Spectrum management rules continue to prescribe
a single standard for each service, meaning that an industry consensus is

required before a standard is introduced.  Once a technology is estab-

lished, companies enter the competitive phase of product development

and marketing.  This process promotes a thorough investigation of tech-

nologies prior to standardization and assures economies of scale when

commercial service begins.  In preparation for UMTS, scheduled for ini-

tial deployment in 2002, extensive R&D and evaluation of competing

prototypes have been under way since 1994.  All of this activity will

provide European industry with a strong technical base for realizing the

goals for mobile communications in the first decade of the next century.
The U.S. approach to communications technology R&D is much more
competitive.  Individual companies perform much of this research in the

context of their product marketing plans.  Coordination takes place within
diverse standards organizations such as the Telecommunications Indus-

try Association, IEEE, and American National Standards Institute.  Some

interaction also takes place in the GloMo program, which brings together

universities and industry to fill specific technology gaps identified by

DARPA program managers.  But for the most part standards setting is a

competitive rather than cooperative process, with each company or group

of companies striving to protect commercial interests.  The FCC rules for

spectrum management allow license holders to transmit any signals, sub-

ject only to constraints on interference with the signals of other license

holders.  Similar flexibility is extended to unlicensed transmissions.  As a

consequence, there are multiple competing standards (seven in the case of

wideband personal communications) for wireless service in the United

States.Government policies on industry structure also strongly influence
technology development.  After the FCC issued cellular operating licenses,
most of the companies that began offering cellular service had limited

technical resources and relied almost entirely on vendors and consultants

for technical expertise.  Even the cellular subsidiaries of the regional Bell

operating companies had to build a new base of expertise:  Under the

terms of the consent decree that broke up AT&T in 1984, these cellular

companies had no access to the abundant technical resources of Bellcore,

the research unit of the regional Bell companies.  In this environment,

much of the new wireless communications technology in the United States
has come from the manufacturing industry, with the result that propri-

etary rather than open network-interface standards have proliferated.  The
published technical standards for wireless communications were at first

confined to the air interface between terminals and base stations.  Eventu-

ally the industry adopted a standard for intersystem operation to facili-

tate roaming.  Many other interfaces, especially those between switching
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONScenters and base stations, remain proprietary but the situation is chang-
ing to allow fully open systems.
By contrast, the European cellular operating industry has been domi-
nated by national telephone monopolies.  These companies have strong

research laboratories that participate fully in technology creation and stan-
dards setting.  To gain the advantage of flexibility in equipment procure-

ment, operating companies favor mandatory open interfaces, a prefer-

ence reflected in the GSM standard.
Little has been published concerning the factors that influence the
evolution of wireless communications technology in Japan.  In recent

years NTT, the dominant telecommunications operating company, has

provided a strong coordinating mechanism for creating and standardiz-

ing new technology.  The biggest success has been PHS, which entered

commercial service in 1995 and attracted 4 million subscribers in its first

year of operation.  The initial R&D for PHS was conducted by NTT, but it

licenses many manufacturers to offer PHS equipment.  Now many Japa-

nese companies are cooperating in a study of wideband CDMA technol-

ogy for third-generation systems.  A joint experimental trial of one system

is scheduled for the end of 1997.  In addition to corporate R&D, a govern-

ment organization, Research and Development Center for Radio Systems,

is a significant source of wireless communications technology in Japan.
Worldwide efforts to guide the evolution of wireless communications
technology come together in the IMT-2000 project.  National delegations

to IMT-2000 reflect their country
Õs policies:  The U.S. delegation pushes
for diversity,
12
 the Europeans advocate a structure favorable to UMTS
and its descendants, and the Japanese delegation favors convergence to a

small number of worldwide standards.  Other countries assert their own

service needs, which in some cases can be met by mobile communications

satellites and in other cases by wireless local loops.
1.9  SUMMARY AND REPORT ORGANIZATION
The history of wireless communications suggests a number of key
points to be considered in evaluating potential future strategies for the

DOD and DARPA.  Wireless technology has now evolved to a point where
the goal of 
Òanytime, anywhere
Ó communications is within reach.  Since
1980 consumer demand for cordless and cellular telephones has driven

rapid growth in wireless services, especially for voice communications.

Wireless data services have not taken off as yet although expectations are

high, given the growth of Internet applications.  Extensive research is

under way to develop third-generation commercial wireless systems,
which are expected to be in place before 2010.  These trends suggest that
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE53the DOD will continue to have an ample selection of advanced commer-
cial wireless technologies from which to choose.
The DOD, which currently uses a variety of wireless systems based
on 1970s and 1980s technology, is relying increasingly on commercial

wireless products to cope with reductions in defense budgets and the

growing need for flexible systems that can be deployed rapidly.  In the

Gulf War, the DOD used commercial equipment such as GPS receivers

and INMARSAT links and found that performance was comparable to

that of technologies designed explicitly to meet military needs.  However,

the DOD will continue to have unique needs for security, interoperability,

and other features that might not be met by commercial products.  The

gaps between commercial technologies and military needs are difficult to

identify precisely because, although the DOD has defined its vision for

future untethered systems in general terms, projected operational needs

have apparently not been translated into technical specifications that con-

form to the capabilities of commercial products.
The GloMo program and other military R&D efforts are attempting to
meet DOD
Õs future communications needs and have produced some use-
ful results.  However, none of these programs has adopted a systems

approach to the problem, most notably with respect to the design of a

network architecture.  There may be other unmet needs as well; however,

the committee based its work on first principles rather than an assessment

of GloMo.  A new strategy may be needed to identify the needs more

specifically as a basis for determining where to focus DARPA
Õs R&D
efforts and where commercial products will suffice.
The effort to evaluate commercial technologies in light of defense
needs will be complicated by the characteristics of the U.S. marketplace.

In Europe there is a single standard (GSM) for digital wireless communi-

cations, and precompetitive research on new wireless technologies is car-

ried out in cooperative, government-funded programs.  The U.S. wireless

market features a mixture of competing standards, and most technology

R&D is conducted by individual companies.  This environment forces

operators to choose from an assortment of competing technologies.
The remainder of this report is an attempt to help the DOD devise
strategies for making those choices.  Chapter 2 provides technical back-

ground on the many issues that need to be addressed in designing wire-

less communications systems, which are extremely complex.  The highly

technical discussion may not interest all readers but is fundamental to

any informed analysis of wireless systems.  Chapter 3 explores the oppor-

tunities for and barriers to synergy between the military and commercial

sectors in the development of wireless technologies.  Chapter 4 integrates

all the information presented in this report to provide a set of recommen-

dations for the DOD and DARPA.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSNOTES1.This report does not address unguided optical communications systems,
which use the 103Ð10
7 
gigahertz frequency band (infrared, visible, and ultraviolet
light), because the commercial products that operate in these bands are designed
for indoor applications and therefore would not be of great use in military appli-
cations.2.A protocol is a set of rules, encoded in software, for performing specific
functions.3.The developments since the mid-1970s, when the use of computer net-
works moved beyond the ARPA research community, paved the way for com-mercial services.  The CSNet project, funded by the National Science Foundation(NSF) for the computer science community, eventually led to the NSFNET and a
dramatic increase in the number of interconnected nodes.  The commercialization
of Internet service was symbolized by the decommissioning of the ARPANET in1990 and privatization of the NSFNET in 1995.
4.Two types of codes are used to spread the signal.  A long code is reserved
for use by the military to obtain location information within a few meters of
accuracy and timing information within 100 nanoseconds.  A shorter code is usedby commercial systems to obtain location information accurate to within 100
meters.
5.A fourth digital modulation technique, based on Motorola
Õs iDEN tech-
nology, is used by some specialized U.S. mobile radio services in the lower

800-MHz band to provide cellular-like voice, trunked radio, paging, and messag-

ing services.
6.One integrated solution not addressed in detail in this report is the new
generation of public safety radio networks.  These systems are used in both the

military and commercial sectors for applications such as law enforcement and
fire fighting.  Until recently these systems were characterized simply as 25-kilo-
hertz FM voice radios and 9.6-kbps modems.  In the past a municipal law en-

forcement radio system typically was deployed as a redundant overlay of towers
and repeaters separate from the radio systems operated by fire, health, highway,
and other municipal departments.  Today
Õs tight budgets often force municipali-
ties to pool departmental funds to upgrade public safety radios and establish a
single system with enough capacity to meet every user
Õs needs.  To assist in this
process the Association of Public Safety Communication Officers (APCO), which
includes law enforcement, highway, forestry, health, and many other municipal
and federal users, recently initiated an ambitious program called Project-25 to
reduce the cost of next-generation radios.  APCO Project-25 seeks to reduce user

dependence on proprietary radios from a single manufacturer (generally the sys-
tem installer) and introduce cost competition in the upgrading and replacement
market at the municipality level.  The strategy is to standardize a digital-modula-

tion radio, which would be described as APCO Project-25 compliant, thus open-
ing up public radio purchasing to a variety of competing manufacturers.  Some
radios that are APCO Project-25 compliant are now available and are being

adopted by the Federal Law Enforcement Radio Users Group (representing radio
users in the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Drug Enforcement Agency, Secret
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE55Service, Department of the Treasury, and other civilian agencies).  The APCO
Project-25 process has encouraged an unprecedented level of cooperation among
municipal radio users.
7. These activities are carried out by the ITU Radiocommunication Sector
(ITU-R) Working Party 8/13, later renamed ITU-R Task Group 8/1.
8.The implementation of standards based on IMT-2000 in Japan clearly
would give Japanese companies early experience with the technology and per-
haps position them to dominate future world markets for IMT-2000 products.
9.Although optical communications systems are not addressed in detail in
this report, in large part because the commercial research focuses on indoor ap-

plications, the advantages of laser systems need to be mentioned.  A laser pro-
duces optical radiation by stimulating emissions from an electronic or chemical

material.  Unlike light produced by incandescent or fluorescent sources, the re-
sultant beam is coherent and exhibits extremely low angular divergence, proper-
ties that enable transmissions spanning great distances (i.e., thousands of miles).

The data, voice, images, or other signals are modulated on a beam of light, which
is detected by an optical receiver and decoded.  The transmitter and receiver need
to be in direct visual contact, and so the laser beam is steered in the appropriate

direction using mirrors or other optical elements.  Laser communications systems
offer several advantages over RF systems.  The main advantage is high capacity:
Systems now under development will support transmissions in the range of hun-

dreds of megabits per second, with systems under consideration attaining the
gigabits-per-second range.  Another advantage is the low power requirement for
point-to-point communications (orders of magnitude lower than RF systems).

All the energy is focused into a very narrow beam because the physical disper-

sion of a laser beam in space is minimal.  Furthermore, laser communications
systems offer security benefits because almost no energy is diffused outside the
laser beam, which is therefore not easily detected by an adversary.  This combina-

tion of features makes laser communications systems attractive for secure trans-
missions between hub points in mobile, dynamically changing environments (e.g.,between base stations on vehicle-mounted switching facilities).  However, laser

systems are sensitive to interference from other light sources, such as the sun,
and any obstructions of the visual link by dust, rain, or fog.  There is also a risk of
damage to the eyes of unprotected observers.  Finally, components for laser-

based systems are much more expensive than those for RF systems and therefore
are unlikely to penetrate the commercial market for some time.
10.These activities are carried out by the ITU Telecommunications Sector,
Study Group 11.
11.The ISM bands (at 902
Ð928 MHz, 2400
Ð2483 MHz, and 5700
Ð5850 MHz)
are available for any wireless device that uses less than 1 watt of transmit power.
12.The United States participates in the IMT-2000 process in Task Group 8/1
through a delegation led by the FCC.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSWireless communications networks incorporate a broad range of tech-nologies, including electrochemical materials, electronic devices and cir-
cuits, antennas, digital signal processing algorithms, network control pro-

tocols, and cryptography.  Although all of these technologies are well

advanced in other applications, wireless systems introduce a set of con-

straints and challenges beyond those addressed in the evolution of other

communications networks, such as the (wireline) public switched tele-

phone network and the Internet.  These special constraints make it ex-

ceedingly difficult to design affordable wireless systems that meet every

need.  The challenges can be grouped into three categories:  mobility,

connectivity, and energy.
Mobility is a fundamental feature of untethered communications net-
works.  Portable, wireless communications devices significantly enhance

the mobility of users, but they also pose network design difficulties.  As

the communications devices move, the network has to rearrange itself.

To deliver information to a mobile terminal, the network has to learn the

new location(s) of the terminal and change the routing of information

accordingly, sometimes at very high speeds.  The rerouting must be done

seamlessly without any perceived interruption of service.
A wide variety of problems arise when mobile wireless communica-
tions terminals send and receive signals over the air.  The signals of all the

terminals are subject to mutual interference.  The characteristics of the

propagation medium change randomly as users move, and the mobile

radio channel introduces random variation in the received signal power
562Technology Limits, Trade-offs, and
Challenges
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES57and other distortions, such as frequency shifts and the spreading of sig-
nals over time.  Signals that travel over the air are also more vulnerable to

jamming and interception than are those transmitted through wires or

fibers.  These limitations are often addressed with a combination of so-

phisticated signal processing techniques and antennas.  However, these

solutions add to the complexity of portable communications devices and

increase power requirements.
Wireless systems pose two types of power challenges.  First, when
power is radiated from an antenna, very little of it typically reaches the

receiver, a phenomenon known as path loss.  This problem can be partly

overcome with increased transmit power, special types of antennas, and

other solutions.  Second, wireless terminals often carry their own power

supplies in the form of batteries.  Battery life is limited and is influenced

by many aspects of terminal design as well as the technology of the net-

work infrastructure.  Scarce power constrains the signal processing capa-

bilities and transmit power of the mobile terminal, motivating efforts to

keep these units as simple as possible.  However, a low-power design

cannot accommodate the most sophisticated techniques available to cope

with the vagaries of the wireless channel and support the network proto-

cols of mobility management.  In the absence of research breakthroughs

that simplify these techniques, the only solution is to increase the com-

plexity of the network, which needs to compensate for the simplicity of

portable communications devices.
The challenges related to mobility, connectivity, and energy have
stimulated a high level of R&D activity in the telecommunications in-

dustry and academia.  Still, a chasm remains between the capabilities of

wired and wireless communications systems.  Even as commercial wire-

less systems evolve, additional features will be needed to meet military

requirements for untethered communications.  Military applications in-

troduce additional challenges because the systems need to be rapidly

deployable on mobile platforms in any one of a diverse range of operat-

ing environments; they need to interoperate with other systems; and

they need protection against enemy attempts to jam, intercept, and alter

information.
This chapter provides the technical basis for the analysis of military-
commercial synergy in Chapter 3 by examining the challenges of mobil-

ity, connectivity, and energy and the technologies devised to overcome

them.  The discussion refers to the various layers of a network as defined

in the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model (see Box 2-1).  Section

2.1 is a tutorial on the wireless channel, its capacity limits, techniques for

overcoming channel impairments, and the access and operational issues

that arise when multiple users share the same channel.  The next three

sections address network, system, and hardware issues with an emphasis
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSon military needs.  Section 2.2 examines network design issues including
architecture, resource allocation and discovery, inoperability, mobility

management, and simulation and modeling tools.  Section 2.3 addresses

end-to-end systems design issues including application-level adaptation,

quality of service, and security.  Section 2.4 reviews hardware issues of

particular military concern, focusing on radio components.
2.1  COMMUNICATION LINK DESIGN
The ideal wireless communications system would provide high data
rates with high reliability and yet use minimum bandwidth and power.  It

would perform well in wireless propagation environments despite mul-

tiple channel impairments such as signal fading and interference.  The

ideal system would accommodate hardware constraints such as imper-

fect timing and nonlinear amplifiers.  The mobile units would have low

power requirements and yet still provide adequate transmit power and

signal processing.  In addition, despite the system complexity required to

achieve this performance level, both the transmitter and receiver would

be affordable.
Such a system has yet to be built.  In fact, many of the desired proper-
ties are mutually exclusive, meaning that trade-offs need to be made in

system design.  A case in point is the choice of approaches for overcoming

the limitations and impairments of the wireless channel.  The impair-

ments inherent in any wireless channel include the rate at which received

signal power decreases relative to transmitter-receiver distance (path loss),BOX 2-1Open Systems Interconnection ModelThe Open Systems Interconnection model identifies seven layers, some or all ofwhich are implemented by virtually any network system.  The 
physical layer includes
the mechanical, electrical, and procedural interfaces to the transmission medium.  Thelink layer converts the transmission medium into a stream that appears to be free ofundetected errors.  This layer includes error-correction mechanisms and the protocols
used to gain access to shared channels.  The network layer chooses a route from thesender to the receiver and deals with congestion and address issues. The IP protocolfalls into this layer.  The transport layer is responsible for the end-to-end delivery ofdata.  The TCP protocol falls into this layer.  The session layer allows multiple trans-port-layer connections to be managed as a single unit.  The
 presentation 
layer chooses
common representations (typically application dependent) for the data being carried.The applications layer deals with application-specific protocol issues.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES59attenuation caused by objects blocking the signal transmission (shadow
fading), and rapid variations in received signal power (flat fading).  The

impairments determine the types of applications that can be supported in

different propagation environments.  Applications require different data

rates and bit-error rates (BER, or the probability that a bit is received in

error).  For example, voice applications require data rates on the order of

8 to 32 kbps and a maximum tolerable BER of 10
3, whereas database
access and remote file transfer require data rates up to 1 Mbps and a

maximum tolerable BER of 10
7.1  Both sets of specifications are difficult
to achieve in many radio environments.
In general, systems designed for the worst-case propagation condi-
tions assume high error rates, which limit their capability to support high-

speed data and video teleconferencing applications.  The random nature

of the radio channel makes it difficult to guarantee quality and perfor-

mance for demanding applications.  However, a wireless system can be

designed to adapt to the varying link quality at both the link and network

level, such that the system can support improved data rates and quality.

Applications can also be designed to adapt to deteriorating channel con-

ditions to minimize the degradation perceived by the user.  The overall

system can be optimized by making trade-offs among various perfor-

mance measures such as BER, outage probability, and spectral and power

efficiency.  These trade-offs dictate the choice of modulation, signal pro-

cessing, and antenna techniques used to mitigate channel impairments.
These techniques require fairly intensive digital signal processing at
the mobile unit.  The extent of the computation that can be performed is

limited by the power available to drive the DSP chips and the micropro-

cessor.  Thus, in addition to being power limited, the mobile unit is also

complexity limited, which means that trade-offs need to be made in de-

signing the communication link.  For example, the transmit power re-

quirements of the mobile unit can be reduced if error-correction coding is

used, but then additional power is needed to drive the encoding and

decoding hardware.  In cellular systems it is preferable to place much of

the computational burden at the base station, which has fewer power

restrictions than do the mobile units.  Research aimed at simplifying DSP

and antenna processing techniques (Section 2.4) can also help mitigate the

computational burden.
The remainder of this section outlines the characteristics of the wire-
less channel, focusing on fading and interference problems (Section 2.1.1);

key communications technologies, including modulation and coding (Sec-
tions 2.1.2 through 2.1.4); the countermeasures available to address fad-

ing and interference (Section 2.1.5); and the various ways in which users

access wireless systems (Section 2.1.6).
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.1.1 Characteristics of the Wireless Channel
The characteristics of the radio channel impose fundamental limits on
the range, data rate, and quality of wireless communications.  The perfor-
mance limits are influenced by several factors, most significantly the
propagation environment and user mobility pattern.  For example, the

indoor radio channels typically support higher data rates with better reli-

ability than does the outdoor channel used by persons moving rapidly.
 Electromagnetic signals can be characterized by the features of the
waveform:  amplitude (the power, or magnitude, of the signal); phase (the

timing of the peak or trough of the signal variations); and frequency (the

number of repetitions of the signal per second).
2  The effects of the wireless
channel on the received signal power are typically divided into large-scale

and small-scale effects.  Large-scale effects involve the variation of the mean
received signal power over large distances relative to the signal wave-

length, whereas small-scale effects involve the fluctuations of the received

signal power over distances commensurate with the wavelength.  Path loss

effects are noticeable over large distances (i.e., distances on the order of

100 m or more).  Signal power variations due to obstacles such as building

or terrain features are observable over distances that are proportional to the

length of the obstructing object.  Very rapid variations result from multipath
reflections, which are copies of the transmitted signal that reflect or diffract

off surrounding objects before arriving by different paths at the receiver.

These reflections arrive at a receiver later than the nonreflected signal path

and are often shifted in phase as well.  The multipath reflections either

reinforce or cancel each other and the nonreflected signal path depending

on the exact position of the receiver (if moving) or the transmitter (if mov-

ing).  The overall effects of multipath propagation involving a moving

terminal are rapid variation in the received signal power and nonuniform

distortion of the frequency components of the signal.
The first four subsections below discuss path loss, fading, and various
sources of interference as they apply to the path between two terrestrial RF

devices.  The fifth subsection details the characteristics of satellite RF links.
2.1.1.1  Path Loss
Path loss is equal to the received power divided by the transmitted
power, and this loss is a function of the transmitter-receiver separation.
For a given transmit power, a path loss model
3 predicts the received
power level at some distance from the transmitter.  The simplest model

for path loss, which captures the key characteristics for most channels, is

an exponential relationship:  The received signal power is proportional to

the transmit power and inversely proportional to the square of the trans-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES61mission frequency and the transmitter-receiver distance raised to thepower of a Òpath loss exponent.Ó
4  In free space the path loss exponent is
2, whereas for typical outdoor environments it ranges from 3 to 5.  In

environments with dense buildings or trees, path loss exponents can ex-

ceed 8.  Thus, systems designed for typical suburban or low-density ur-

ban outdoor environments require much higher transmit power to achieve
the same desired performance in a dense jungle or downtown area packed
with tall buildings.
The BER of a wireless link is determined by the received signal power,noise introduced by the receiver hardware, interference, and channel char-
acteristics.  The noise is typically proportional to the RF bandwidth.  For

the exponential path loss model just described, the received signal-to-

noise ratio (SNR) is the product of the transmit power and path loss,

divided by the noise power.  The SNR required for faithful reception

depends on the communications technique used, the channel characteris-

tics, and the required BER.  Because path loss affects the received SNR,

path loss imposes limits on the data rate and signal range for a given BER.

In general, for a given BER, high-data-rate applications typically require

more transmit power or have a smaller coverage range (sometimes both)

than do low-data-rate applications.  For example, given a transmit power

of 1 W, a transmit frequency of 1 GHz, and an omnidirectional antenna,

the transfer of data through free space (for which the path loss exponent is

2) at 1 Mbps and 10
Ð7
 BER can be accomplished between radios that are
728 m apart, whereas in a jungle (for which the path loss exponent is 10)

the range can be as low as 4 m.
2.1.1.2  Shadow Fading
A received signal is often blocked by hills or buildings outdoors and
furniture or walls indoors.  The received signal power is in fact a ran-
dom variable that depends on the number and dielectric properties of

the obstructing objects.  Signal variation due to these obstructions is

called shadow fading.  Measurements have shown that the power, mea-

sured in decibels (dB), of signals subject to shadow fading exhibits a

Gaussian (i.e., normal) distribution, a pattern referred to as log-normal

shadowing.  The random attenuation of shadow fading changes as the

mobile unit moves past or around the obstructing object.  Because the

signal coverage is not uniform even at equal distances from the trans-

mitter, the transmit power needs to be increased to ensure that the re-

ceived-SNR requirements are met uniformly throughout the coverage

region.  The power increase imposes additional burdens on the trans-

mitter battery and can cause interference for other users of the same

frequency band.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.1.1.3  Small-Scale (Multipath) Fading
Small-scale fading is caused by interference between multiple ver-
sions of the signal that arrive at the receiver at different times.  Multipathcan be helpful if the signals add constructively to produce a higher

power (a random event), but more often it results in harmful interfer-

ence.  The overall effect is a standing wave pattern of the received signal

power.  Harmful interference can cause the received signal power to

drop by a factor of 1,000 below its average value at nulls in the standing

wave pattern.  Moreover, for practical speeds of wireless terminals, the

changes in signal power are extremely rapid:  At a frequency of 900

MHz the signal power changes every 30 centimeters, or every 23 milli-

seconds if the terminal is moving at 50 km per hour.  In many practical

environments, these changes are referred to as 
ÒRayleigh fading
Ó be-
cause the received signal amplitude conforms to a Rayleigh probability

density function.
Signal fading can be characterized by determining the delay spread of
the fading relative to the signal bandwidth.  The delay spread is defined

as the time delay between the direct-path signal component and the com-

ponent that takes the longest path from the transmitter to the receiver.

Because the delay spread is a random variable, it is often characterized by

its standard deviation, called the root mean square (RMS) delay spread of

the channel.  If the product of the RMS delay spread and the signal band-

width is much less than 1, then the fading is called flat fading.  In this case

the received signal envelope has a random amplitude and phase (com-

monly described by a Rayleigh distribution), but there is no additional

signal distortion.
When the product of the RMS delay spread and signal bandwidth is
greater than 1, the fading becomes frequency selective.  Frequency-selec-

tive fading introduces self-interference because the delay spread is so

large that multipath reflections corresponding to a given bit transmission

arrive at the receiver simultaneously with subsequent data bits.  This

intersymbol interference (ISI) establishes an 
Òerror floor
Ó in the received
bits that cannot be reduced by an increase in signal power because doing

so also increases the self-interference.  Without compensation, the ISI

forces a reduction in the data rate such that the product of the RMS delay

spread and signal bandwidth is less than 0.1.  For a 10
3 BER and a rural
environment, the delay spread is approximately 25 microseconds and the

corresponding maximum data rate is only 8 kbps; the data rates for lower

BERs are even more limited.  Some form of compensation, either signal

processing or sophisticated antenna design, clearly is needed to achieve

high-rate data transmission in the presence of ISI.  These techniques im-

pose additional complexity and power requirements on the receiver.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES63Movement of a receiver relative to the transmitter (or vice versa)
causes the received signal to be frequency shifted relative to the transmit-
ted signal.  The frequency shift, or Doppler frequency, is proportional to

the mobile velocity and the frequency of the transmitted signal.  For a

transmitted signal frequency of 900 MHz and a receiver or transmitter

speed of 96 km per hour, the Doppler frequency is roughly 80 Hz.  This

Doppler shift creates an irreducible error floor for noncoherent detection

techniques (which use the previous bit to obtain a phase reference for the

current bit).  In general the irreducible BER is not a problem when data

are transmitted at high speed (faster than 1 Mbps), but it is an issue for

moderate-rate (slower than 100 kbps) data applications.
In general the signal changes slowly with time because of path loss,
more quickly because of shadow fading, and very quickly because of

multipath flat fading; all of these effects are simultaneously superim-

posed on the transmitted signal.  As noted above, the shadow fading

needs to be addressed by an increase in transmit power.  The deep fades

in signal power caused by flat fading also need to be counterbalanced by

an increase in transmit power or some other approach (see Section 2.1.5.1).
Otherwise the transmitted signal typically exhibits bursts of errors that

are difficult to correct.
2.1.1.4  Interference
Users of wireless communications systems can experience interfer-
ence from various sources.  One source is frequency reuse, a popular
technique for increasing the number of users in a given region who can be

supported by a particular set of frequencies.  Cellular systems reuse fre-

quencies at spatially separated locations, taking advantage of the falloff in

received signal power with distance (which is indicated by the path loss

model).  The downside of frequency reuse is the introduction of co-chan-

nel interference (see Section 2.2.1.1), which increases the noise floor and

degrades performance.
Other sources of interference include adjacent channels and narrow
bands of problem frequencies.  Adjacent-channel interference can be miti-

gated by the introduction of guard channels between users, although this

technique consumes bandwidth.  Narrowband interference can be re-

moved by notch filters or spread-spectrum techniques.  Notch filters are

simple devices that block the band of frequencies containing the interfer-

ence; these devices are effective only if the specific frequencies of concern

are known.  Spread-spectrum techniques (see Section 2.1.5.2), which

spread a signal across a larger band of frequencies than is required for

normal transmission, can reduce the effect of interference and hostile

jamming signals.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.1.1.5  Satellite Channels
Satellite channels (the link between a receiver or transmitter on Earth
and an orbiting receiver or transmitter) have inherent advantages over
terrestrial radio channels.  Multipath fading is rare because a signal propa-
gating skyward does not experience much reflection from surrounding

objects (except in downtown areas with densely packed buildings).  More-
over, most satellite systems operate in the gigahertz frequency range,

allowing for large-bandwidth communication links that support very high

bit rates.
The primary limitation of satellite channels is very high path loss,
which generally follows the formula described earlier in this chapter.  For

satellites the path loss exponent is 2.  Because satellites operate at high

frequencies and the path distance is long (500 to 2,000 km for a LEO

satellite), much higher transmit power is needed than is the case for ter-

restrial systems operating at the same data rate.  Satellite signals are also

subject to attenuation by Earth
Õs atmosphere.  The effects are especially
adverse at frequencies above 10 GHz, where oxygen and water vapor,

rain, clouds, fog, and scintillation cause random variations in signal am-

plitude, phase, polarization, and angle of arrival (similar to the adverse

effects of multipath fading in terrestrial propagation).  Satellite systems

compensate somewhat for the large path loss and adverse atmospheric

effects by using high-gain directional antennas to boost the received

power.2.1.2  Capacity Limits of Wireless Channels
The pioneering work of Claude Shannon determined the total capac-
ity limits for simple wired and wireless channel models:  These limits

established an upper bound on the maximum spectral link efficiency,

measured as the data rate per unit of bandwidth as a function of the

received SNR.  For a channel without fading, ISI, or Doppler shift, this

maximum bandwidth efficiency was identified by Shannon to be the loga-
rithm of the term [SNR + 1] (Shannon, 1949).
Determining the capacity limits of wireless channels with all the im-
pairments outlined in the previous section is quite challenging.  A rela-

tively simple lower bound for a channel capacity that varies over time is

the Shannon capacity under the worst-case propagation conditions.  This

is often a good bound to apply in practice because many communication

links are designed to have acceptable performance even under the worst

conditions.  However, this design wastes resources because typical oper-

ating conditions are generally much better than the worst-case scenario.

For channels that exhibit shadow fading or multipath fading, the channel
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES65capacity under worst-case fading conditions is close to zero.  The capacity
of these fading channels increases greatly when the data rate, power, and

transmission are adapted using sophisticated modulation techniques,

which are discussed in the next section.  As measured by spectral link

efficiency, these adaptive techniques in both Rayleigh fading and log-

normal-shadowed channels can support much higher data rates than are

typical in today
Õs wireless systems.  For example, typical digital voice
systems deliver 8 kbps in a 30-kHz channel, which corresponds to a spec-

tral link efficiency of 8/30, far less than 1.  If this channel experiences

Rayleigh fading, then an SNR of approximately 30 dB is required.  At this

SNR, a spectral link efficiency of approximately 8 can be achieved in

Rayleigh fading by using adaptive techniques
Ña 30-fold improvement
over the typical voice system of today (see Figure 2-1).
52.1.3  Modulation
Modulation is the process of encoding information into the ampli-
tude, phase, and/or frequency of a transmitted signal (Ziemer and

Tranter, 1995).  This encoding process affects the bandwidth of the trans-

mitted signal and its robustness under impaired channel conditions.  In

the case of bandwidth-limited channels, digital modulation techniques

encode several bits into one symbol.  The rate of symbol transmission

determines the bandwidth of the transmitted signal:  the larger the num-

ber of bits encoded per symbol, the more efficient the use of bandwidth

but the greater the power requirement for a given BER in the presence of

noise.Modulation techniques fall into two categories:  linear and nonlinear.
In general, linear modulation techniques use less bandwidth than do non-

linear techniques.  However, linear modulation techniques also tend to

produce large fluctuations in signal amplitude.  This is a disadvantage

when using nonlinear amplifiers such as class C amplifiers (the least expen-

sive, most readily available, and most power-efficient amplifiers), because

they distort linear modulation signals.  Thus, the bandwidth efficiency of

linear modulation is generally obtained at the expense of the additional

power needed for very linear amplifiers (and reduced battery life).
2.1.4  Channel Coding and Link-Layer Retransmission
Channel coding improves performance by adding redundant bits in
the transmitted bit stream that are used by the receiver to correct errors

introduced by the channel, thus reducing the average BER.  This ap-

proach enables a reduction in the transmit power required to achieve a

target BER.  Conventional forward-error-correction (FEC) codes, which re-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSFIGURE 2-1  Spectral link efficiency can be greatly increased using adaptive techniques.  Theoretical efficiencies are shown.
Rayleigh FadingSignal-to-Noise Ratio (in decibels)Signal-to-Noise Ratio (in decibels)Adaptive Coded ModulationReceiver AdaptationFading Inverted (Optimal Cutoff)Fading Inverted (No Cutoff)Fading Inverted (No Cutoff)Log-Normal ShadowingSpectral Link Efficiency 
Spectral Link Efficiency 
Adaptive Coded ModulationFading Inverted (Optimal Cutoff)Receiver AdaptationThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES67duce the required transmit power for a given BER at the expense of in-
creased signal bandwidth or a reduced data rate (Lin and Costello, 1983),

use block or convolutional code designs.  Block codes add parity bits to

blocks of messages.  Convolutional codes map a continuous sequence of

information bits onto a continuous sequence of encoded bits.  Trellis codes

combine channel code design and modulation to reduce the BER without

bandwidth expansion or rate reduction (Ungerboeck, 1982).  More recent

advances in coding technology, such as Turbo codes (Berrou et al., 1993),

exhibit superior error-correction performance, although they are generally

very complex and impose large delays on end-to-end transmission, draw-

backs that make them unsuitable for many wireless applications.
Another way to reduce the link errors prevalent in wireless systems is
to implement link retransmission (part of the protocol known as automatic

repeat request, or ARQ).  The data are encoded with a checksum (the sum

of the 1s and 0s in the transmitted digitized data), which the receiver com-

pares to the data received; if the data are corrupted, then the receiver re-

quests a retransmission.  Link-layer retransmission wastes system resources

because of the added power requirements and interference with other us-

ers.  In addition, retransmission schemes can result in the delivery of data in

the wrong order:  When a block is lost on the link because of an error burst,

a subsequent block is likely to be sent and received before the lost block is

sent again.  This phenomenon triggers duplicate acknowledgments and

end-to-end retransmissions at the transport layer, further burdening the

network.  (When countermeasures for fading are used to reduce link errors,

as discussed in the next section, the problems introduced by retransmission

are similarly reduced.)  Even so, ARQ is the only alternative in many cases

because FEC is not sufficient in applications with stringent BER require-

ments.  Some link-layer schemes, such as asymmetric reliable mobile access

in link layer (AIRMAIL; Ayonoglu et al., 1995), can avert out-of-order de-

livery to higher-protocol layers, but this approach increases delays and

variability in the interpacket delivery times.
2.1.5   Countermeasures for Fading
Numerous signal processing and design techniques have been devel-
oped to counter the effects of fading on the wireless channel.  Of particu-

lar interest are countermeasures for the two types of small-scale fading

described above:  flat fading and frequency-selective fading.
2.1.5.1Flat-Fading Countermeasures
The random variation in received signal power caused by multipath
flat fading results in a very large increase in BER.  For example, to main-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStain an average BER of 10
3 (a typical requirement for point-to-point voice
systems at the link level) using binary phase-shift key modulation, 60
times more power is required than would be in the absence of flat fading.

The difference in required power is even larger at the much lower BER

required for data transmission.  It follows that the required transmit power
can be significantly reduced by combating the effects of flat fading.  The

most common flat-fading countermeasures are diversity, coding and in-

terleaving, and adaptive modulation.  Spread-spectrum techniques also

mitigate fading effects (see Section 2.1.5.2).
In diversity, several separate, independently fading signal paths are
established between the transmitter and receiver and the resulting re-

ceived signals are combined.  Because there is a low probability of sepa-

rate fading paths experiencing deep fades simultaneously, the signal ob-

tained by combining several such paths is unlikely to experience large

power variations.  Independent fading paths can be achieved by separat-

ing the signal in time, frequency, space, or polarization.  Time and fre-

quency diversity are spectrally inefficient because information is dupli-

cated; polarization diversity is of limited effectiveness because only two

independent fading paths (corresponding to horizontal and vertical po-

larization) can be created.  That leaves space diversity as the most efficient

of these techniques.  Independent fading paths in space are obtained

using an antenna array, in which each element receives a separate path.

Multiple antenna elements are mounted at the receiver with a separation

greater than or equal to half the signal wavelength (Yacoub, 1993).  Al-

most all of the multipath variation is removed by first creating and then

later combining four independent paths, with each path weighted by its

received signal power.  Because the wavelength is inversely proportional

to frequency, antenna arrays can be mounted on handheld units when

using superhigh frequencies (above 10 GHz) but not when using frequen-

cies below the 1-GHz range.
Coding and interleaving can also be used to combat flat fading.
Coding and interleaving involves the spreading of a burst error over

many 
Òcode words.
Ó  If the errors are sufficiently spread out that each
code word has at most one error, then these errors can be corrected

easily.  This technique results in time diversity without the need for

repeat transmissions.  However, error-correcting codes typically result

in the loss of spectral link efficiency.  The cost of coding and interleav-

ing
Ñincreased delay and complexity of the interleaver
Ñcan be large if
the fading rate is slow relative to the data rate, as is typically the case for

high-speed data.  For example, at a Doppler frequency of 10 Hz and a bit

rate of 10 Mbps, an error burst will last for approximately 300,000 bits,

and so the interleaver needs to be large enough to handle at least that

much data.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES69In general, flat fading causes bit errors to occur in bursts correspond-
ing to the times when the channel is in a deep fade.  Channel codes
(discussed in Section 2.1.4) are best suited for correcting one or two simul-

taneous errors; code performance deteriorates rapidly when errors occur

in large bursts.
The third type of countermeasure is adaptive modulation.  In theory,
the receiver can make an estimate of the channel conditions and send it

back to the transmitter, which can then adapt its transmission scheme as

appropriate.  Adaptation to signal fading enables adjustments in the
power level and data rate to take advantage of the favorable conditions,

saving more than 20 dB of power.  But most modulation and coding

techniques do not enable sufficiently rapid adaptation to typical fading

conditions.  If the channel is changing more rapidly than the rate at which

condition estimates are fed back to the transmitter, then adaptive tech-

niques perform poorly.  Another drawback is the additional complexity

required in the transmitter and receiver to carry out all the requisite steps.

Finally, the channel estimate needs to be relayed to the transmitter on a

feedback path, which occupies a small amount of bandwidth on the re-

turn channel.
2.1.5.2  Countermeasures for Frequency-Selective Fading
Techniques for combating the ISI delay spread of a frequency-selec-
tive fading channel fall into two categories:  signal processing (at the
transmitter or receiver) and antenna solutions.  Transmitter-based signal

processing techniques, including equalization, multicarrier modulation,

and spread spectrum, can make the signal less sensitive to delay spread.

Antenna solutions, including distributed antenna systems, small cells,

directive beams, and 
Òsmart
Ó antennas, change the propagation environ-
ment to reduce or eliminate delay spread.
The goal of equalization is to invert the effects of the channel or cancel
the ISI.  Channel inversion, or linear equalization, can be achieved by

passing the received signal through a filter with a frequency response that

is the inverse of the channel frequency response (the channel being the

original 
Òfilter
Ó for the transmitted signals).  This process neutralizes the
effects of the channel.  Although linear equalization can be implemented

using relatively simple hardware, the technique has drawbacks in that

noise and interference are also passed through the inverse filter.  If the

channel frequency response is small anywhere within the signal band-

width, then the noise and interference components at those frequencies

are amplified.  Thus, on channels with deep spectral nulls, a linear equal-

izer enhances the noise, resulting in poor performance on frequency-se-

lective fading channels.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSA more effective technique is the nonlinear decision-feedback equal-
izer (DFE), which determines the ISI from previously detected symbols
and subtracts it from the incoming symbols.  The DFE does not enhance

noise because it estimates the channel frequency response rather than

inverting it.  On frequency-selective fading channels the DFE has a much
lower probability of error than does a linear equalizer but also slightly

higher complexity.  The main drawback of the DFE is the chance of error

propagation:  If a symbol is detected incorrectly then the associated ISI

is still subtracted from subsequent symbols, possibly causing errors in

these symbols as well.  Moreover, because of decoding delays, the ISI

estimates cannot benefit from error-correction coding.  Therefore, a DFE

can be used only on channels where the probability of error without

coding is reasonably low.  In addition, because the ISI at low data rates

is small, the DFE does not yield substantial BER improvement for data

rates much less than 100 kbps.  In general, equalizers (especially the

DFE) are most beneficial at high data rates, when the product of RMS

delay spread and the data rate is much greater than 1.  The BER can be

improved by as much as 2 to 3 orders of magnitude depending on the

data rate and SNR.  In indoor environments, 20 Mbps can be achieved at

a BER of 10
3 using a DFE (Pahlavan et al., 1993).  The achievable rates
on outdoor channels are generally much less because delay spreads are

much greater and there are other channel impairments.  Commercial

outdoor wireless systems using delay-spread countermeasures currently
achieve on the order of tens to hundreds of kilobits per second, depend-

ing on the available bandwidth.
The use of equalizer techniques requires continuous, accurate esti-
mates of the channel frequency response, usually obtained with finite-

impulse-response (FIR) filters in the receiver.  The number of filter delay

elements (or equalizer taps used to track variations in the channel) is

proportional to the delay spread.  Updates are needed at the Doppler rate.

To assist in the estimation process, the transmitter sends training se-
quences that have known characteristics.  Because they consume band-

width, training sequences need to be as short as possible to maximize

spectral link efficiency.  The trade-off is that short training sequences

require rapid estimation of the channel and, typically, increased signal-

processing complexity.
Multicarrier modulation is another technique that compensates for
delay spread.  The transmission bandwidth is divided into subchannels

and the information bits are divided into an equal number of streams,

which are transmitted in parallel.  Each stream is used to modulate one

of the subchannels.  Ideally, the subchannel bandwidths are narrow

enough that the fading on each subchannel is flat as opposed to fre-

quency selective, thereby eliminating ISI.  The simplest approach is to
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES71implement nonoverlapping subchannels, but spectral link efficiency can
be increased by overlapping the subchannels in such a way that they can

be separated at the receiver.  This is called orthogonal frequency divi-

sion multiplexing, which can be implemented efficiently using the fast

Fourier transform (invertible mapping from the time domain to the fre-

quency domain) to separate the subchannels in the receiver.  In this case

the entire signal bandwidth experiences frequency-selective fading be-

cause wideband channels tend to have different fading characteristics at

different frequencies, and so some of the subchannels will have weak

SNRs.  Their performance can be improved by coding across sub-

channels, frequency equalization, or adding more bits in subchannels

with high SNRs.  Multicarrier modulation offers an advantage in that

less training is required for frequency equalization than for time equal-

ization.  However, time-varying fading, frequency offset, and timing

mismatch impair the separation of the subchannels, resulting in self-

interference.  Moreover, multicarrier signals tend to have a large peak-

to-average signal-power ratio, which severely degrades the power effi-

ciency when nonlinear amplifiers are used.
Spread-spectrum techniques increase the signal bandwidth
Ñbeyond
what is needed to transmit the information
Ñto reduce the effects of flat
fading, ISI, and narrowband interference.  Each channel is spread over the

larger bandwidth by a pseudo-noise sequence, which is used by receivers

to invert the spreading operation and recover the original data.  Spread-

spectrum techniques first achieved widespread use in military applica-

tions because they 
Òhide
Ó the signal below the noise floor during trans-
mission, reduce the effects of narrowband jamming, and reduce multipath

fading.  There are two common forms of this technique:  direct sequence,

in which the data sequence is multiplied by the pseudo-noise sequence,

and frequency hopping, in which the carrier frequency is varied by the

sequence.During the demodulation process, multipath signal components andinterference are reduced in two stages:  First the spectrum-spreading

modulation is removed, and then the remaining signal is demodulated

using conventional frequency- or phase-shift techniques to obtain the

original data signal.  In direct-sequence systems, the received signal is

multiplied with an exact copy of the code sequence, perfectly synchro-

nized in time.  When narrowband interference and delayed multipath

signal components are multiplied by the spreading sequence, their sig-

nal power is spread over the bandwidth of the spread-spectrum code.  A

narrowband filter can be used in the demodulator to remove most of

their power.  Alternatively, a RAKE receiver can be used to combine all

multipath components coherently.
6  A RAKE is a means of implement-
ing diversity (see Section 2.1.5.1).
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.1.6  Channel Access
In many modern wireless systems, multiple users share the same
bandwidth, creating a need for a protocol that ensures efficient, equitable
channel access.  Wireless-channel access issues are complicated by the

variability and statistical nature of user traffic:  Voice traffic typically

requires a 40 percent duty cycle (i.e., the channel is used 40 percent of the

time), whereas data traffic tends to come in bursts with a much lower

duty cycle.  All traffic generally varies depending on how many transmit-

ters are active.  In addition, many new applications do not exhibit the

symmetric two-way flow of voice data that is characteristic of standard

telephone service.  In typical surfing of the World Wide Web, for ex-

ample, 100 to 1,000 times more data flows to the user than from the user.

This variability and asymmetry are creating a need for new access strate-

gies for digital integrated networks.
Channel sharing through fixed-allocation, demand-assigned, or ran-
dom-allocation modes is called multiple access.
7  The three basic mul-
tiple-access techniques
ÑFDMA, TDMA, and CDMA (all introduced in
Chapter 1)
Ñcan be implemented in any of the three modes.
2.1.6.1  Fixed-Allocation Multiple Access
Fixed-allocation multiple-access techniques assign dedicated chan-
nels to multiple users through some type of channel resource division.

The assignments are made by a protocol for the duration of a single trans-

mission.
8  In FDMA the total system bandwidth is divided into channels
that are allocated to the different users.  In TDMA time is divided into

orthogonal slots that are allocated to different users.  In CDMA (which is

the same as direct sequence spread spectrum) time and bandwidth are

used simultaneously by different users, modulated by different spread-

ing signals, or codes.  The spreading codes allow receivers to separate the

signal of interest from the CDMA channel.  The three primary competing

U.S. standards for cellular and personal-communications multiple access

are mixed FDMA/TDMA with three time slots per frequency channel (IS-

54), mixed FDMA/TDMA with eight time slots per frequency channel

(GSM), and CDMA (IS-95).
The debates over multiple access among standards committees and
equipment providers have led to numerous analytical studies claiming

the superiority of one technique or another (e.g., Gilhousen et al., 1991;

Gundmundson et al., 1992; Baier et al., 1996).  However, there is no wide-

spread agreement as to which access technique is the best.  Theoretical

analysis indicates that under heavy traffic conditions CDMA combined

with some form of detecting all users simultaneously
9 (using knowledge
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES73of all spreading codes to eliminate interference) results in higher spectral
efficiency than does TDMA or FDMA (Gallager, 1985; Goldsmith, 1997).

Without simultaneous detection and in the absence of fading, TDMA and

FDMA are more spectrally efficient than is CDMA.
10
  The spread spec-
trum gives CDMA the advantage of soft capacity (there is no absolute

limit on the number of users), but performance is degraded in proportion

to any increase in users on the system.  The TDMA and FDMA techniques

place hard limits on the number of users sharing a given bandwidth

because each time or frequency slot can support a maximum of one user

(less than one if multiple slots are assigned to the same user).  In general

FDMA is the simplest technique to implement, TDMA is slightly more

complex because of the requirement for time synchronization among all

the users, and CDMA is the most complex because of the need for code

synchronization.  Another consideration with respect to CDMA is the

need for stringent power control to prevent the 
Ònear-far problem,
Ó which
arises when signals from mobile units close to the base station overwhelm

those of units farther away.  Such control is difficult to maintain in a

fading environment and is one of the major challenges of spread-spec-

trum multiple access.
Fixed-allocation multiple-access techniques are inefficient for many
voice and data applications because the variability in traffic from a single

transmitter limits throughput on dedicated channels.  For example, a
single channel in a two-way voice conversation usually occupies less than

half of the available bandwidth; for many data applications the traffic is

even more intermittent.  Cellular and satellite systems generally serve a

slowly changing set of active terminals with a relatively fixed traffic pat-

tern.  The inability to predict terminal traffic requirements accurately and

the need to handle a dynamic set of active terminals create a need for

more flexible forms of multiple access.
2.1.6.2  Demand-Assigned Multiple Access
One method of providing flexibility is the assignment of network
channels to remote terminals on demand.  In these systems a common
signaling channel is assigned to handle requests from transmitters for

network capacity.  Demand-assigned multiple access (DAMA) is very

efficient as long as the 
Òoverhead
Ó traffic required to assign channels is a
small percentage of the message traffic and as long as the message traffic

is fairly steady.  Otherwise two types of problems can arise.  First there is

a set-up delay, or latency period.  For transmissions of sufficient length

this is not a serious limitation, but for networks with a considerable
amount of short, interactive messages the delay and overhead of each

message make demand-based assignment impractical.
11
  Second, the
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStransmission of requests on the signaling channel is not possible when the
network is overloaded and the transmitter cannot communicate with the

hub station, effectively shifting the multiple-access problem from the data

channel to the signaling channel.
2.1.6.3  Random Access
When networks serve a wide variety of data rates and the traffic
consists of small messages that are roughly the same size as the overhead
messages of the access protocol, DAMA is not an efficient use of channel

resources.  In these cases a connection-free protocol, such as random-

access CDMA or ALOHA, is preferable.  The random-access CDMA ap-

proach requires complex receivers that can demodulate all possible

spreading codes.  In ALOHA random access, channel packets are stored

at each terminal and transmitted over a common channel to the hub sta-

tion; no attempt is made to synchronize transmissions from the various

users.  This technique has high reliability in moderate network traffic, but

the probability of a collision between packets from different users in-

creases with the traffic.  Therefore, such channels are usually sized to

operate at about 10 percent of the peak data rate.
12
Conventional ALOHA is a narrowband technology.  In wireless net-
works, ALOHA channels rarely operate at more than 10 kbps or 20 kbps

in terrestrial systems and 56 kbps in satellite systems.  Because ALOHA

can be viewed as a random-access version of TDMA, the same peak-

power constraints that limit a TDMA channel also apply to conventional

ALOHA channels.  Recent work on spread ALOHA, a combination of

ALOHA and spread-spectrum transmission, shows how these limits can

be overcome for high-data-rate applications.
Throughput is not necessarily the most appropriate performance mea-sure for a multiple-access channel.  In the case of power-limited satellite

channels or battery-operated transmitters, access efficiency is a more ap-

propriate measure.  The access efficiency of an ALOHA random-access

channel is the ratio of spectral link efficiency using the ALOHA protocol

to the spectral link efficiency of a continuously transmitting channel with

the same average power and total bandwidth.  The access efficiency of an

ALOHA channel approaches 1 (meaning no restrictions are needed on

throughput) when most users are idle and transactions are brief, as can be

the case for some data communications systems.  In other words, this

technique offers the highest throughput of any random-access protocol

under these conditions.
It is much easier to design an access protocol for a single type of
network traffic rather than for a range of traffic types.  All the major
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES75digital cellular standards designed for voice applications, use a DAMA
architecture with some form of ALOHA request channel superimposed

over a TDMA or CDMA channel structure.  The resulting throughput is

adequate for voice applications, but when a network handles data as well

as voice the connection-oriented architecture limits the channel through-

put.  It is difficult to size channels that are assigned on demand for a wide

and unpredictable range of user data rates.  New, highly flexible random-

access structures will probably be needed to enable the seamless integra-

tion of data services within a voice network as promised in some new

personal communications networks.
2.2  NETWORK ISSUES
2.2.1  Architecture
The choice of an architecture for a two-way wireless network involvesnumerous issues dealing with the most fundamental aspects of network

design.  The primary issue is whether to use a peer-to-peer or a base-

station-oriented network configuration.  In a peer-to-peer architecture,

communication flows directly among the nodes in the network and the

end-to-end process consists of one or more individual communication

links.  In a base-station-oriented architecture, communication flows from

network nodes to a single central hub.
The choice of a peer-to-peer or base-station-oriented architecture
depends on many factors.  Peer-to-peer architectures are more recon-

figurable and do not necessarily have a single point of failure, enabling

a more dynamic topology.  The multiple hops in the typical end-to-end

link offer the advantage of extended communication range, but if one of

the nodes fails then the localized link path needs to be reestablished.

Base-station-oriented architectures tend to be more reliable because

there is only one hop between the network node and central hub.  In

addition, this design tends to be more cost-efficient because centralized

functions at the hub station can control access, routing, and resource

allocation.  Another problem with peer-to-peer architecture is the sig-

nificant co-site interference that arises for multiple users in close prox-

imity to each other
Ña problem that can be averted in a base-station-
oriented architecture by the coordinated use of transmission frequencies

or time slots.
The wireless base-station-oriented architecture is exemplified by cel-
lular telephone systems, whereas the most common peer-to-peer architec-

ture for wireless systems is a multihop packet radio.  Fundamental differ-

ences between the two types of systems are indicated in Table 2-1.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.2.1.1  Cellular System Design
One of the biggest challenges in providing multimedia wireless ser-
vices is to maximize efficient use of the limited available bandwidth.
Cellular systems, which exploit the falloff in power at increased distances,

reuse the same frequency channel at spatially separated locations.  Fre-

quency reuse increases spectral efficiency but introduces co-channel in-

terference, which affects the achievable BER and data rate of each user.

The interference is small if the users operating at the same frequency are

far enough apart; however, area spectral efficiency (i.e., the data rate per

unit bandwidth per unit area) is maximized by packing the users as close

together as possible.  Thus, good cellular system design places users that

share the same channel at a separation distance such that the co-channel

interference is just below the maximum tolerable level for the required

BER and data rate.  Because co-channel interference is subject to shadow-

ing and multipath fading, the design of a static cellular system needs to

assume worst-case propagation conditions in determining this separation

distance.  System performance can be improved through dynamic re-

source allocation, which involves allocating power and bandwidth based

on propagation conditions, user demands, and system traffic; however,

the increases in spectral and power efficiency are achieved at the price of

increased system complexity.
In cellular systems, a given geographical area such as a city is divided
into nonoverlapping cells (see Figure 2-2) and different frequencies are

assigned to the cells.  For FDMA and TDMA, cells using the same fre-

quency are spatially separated such that their mutual interference is toler-

able.  Frequency reuse in FDMA and TDMA systems introduces co-chan-

nel interference in all cells using the same channel.  In CDMA, interference

can be introduced from all users within the same cell as well as from users

in other cells.
Regardless of the multiple-access technique used, area spectral effi-
ciency is maximized when the system is interference limited
Ñthat is,
TABLE 2-1  Comparison of Cellular and Multihop Packet
Radio Architectures
Feature
Cellular SystemMultihop Packet Radio
TopologyStatic
DynamicNumber of hopsOne
MultipleNetwork controlCentralized
DistributedLink distanceFixed (by cell size)Variable (
Òover the horizonÓ)xxxThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES77when the receiver noise power is much less than the interference power
and can be ignored.  The received SNR for each user is determined by the

amount of interference at the receiver; if the system is not interference

limited, then spectral efficiency could be further increased by allowing

additional users on the system or reusing the frequencies at reduced dis-

tances.The transmitter in each cell is connected to a base station and switch-
ing office, which allocates channels and controls power.  In analog cellu-

lar systems, the switching office also coordinates handoffs to neighboring

cells when a mobile terminal traverses a cell boundary.  In digital cellular

systems and low-tier systems, base stations and terminals play a more

active role in coordinating handoffs.  The spectral efficiency can be in-

creased by dividing each existing cell into several smaller cells because

more users can then be accommodated in the system.  However, reducing

the cell size increases the rate at which handoffs occur, sometimes affect-

ing higher-level protocols.  In general, if the rate of handoff increases,

then the rate of call dropping will increase proportionally.  Routing is also

more dynamic with small cells because routes need to be reestablished

whenever a handoff takes place.
FIGURE 2-2  In cellular systems each cell has a central hub (the base-station-
oriented design) and is assigned different frequencies, time slots, or codes, de-
pending on how users access the system.
BASESTATIONThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.2.1.2Packet Radio System Design
A packet radio system provides communications to fixed and mo-
bile network nodes that use radios to form the physical links (Lauer,
1995; Leiner et al., 1997).  The earliest such systems were the

ALOHANET, which operated at the University of Hawaii in the early

1970s, and the DARPA PRNet, a multihop peer-to-peer packet network

that operated in the late 1970s and early 1980s.  Commercial packet

radio networks have been built around single-hop base-station-oriented

architectures, as in the Ardis or Mobitex systems, and multihop peer-to-

peer architectures, as in the Metricom system (see Chapter 1, Section

1.6).  These networks can be constructed with fixed-location infrastruc-

ture elements (as in Metricom) or can achieve connectivity in a com-

pletely ad hoc manner.  In general, multihop ad hoc packet-radio net-

works can be set up, deployed, and redeployed rapidly.  These

characteristics are important to military operations.  However, multihop
ad hoc packet radio networks can pose difficulties in defense applica-

tions, because a peer-to-peer architecture does not correspond to the

military command structure.
Many of the challenges in packet radio system design are the same as
those for any wide-area wireless communications system.  These issues

include how best to deal with the fading characteristics of RF propagation

and whether to use a random or reservation access strategy.  Packet radio

networks also pose special challenges related to the dynamic nature of the

network topology.  The terrain, distance between nodes, antenna height,

and antenna directionality all influence whether network connectivity

can be established and maintained.  Physical connectivity in ad hoc packet

radios is more complex than in cellular systems because cell sites cannot

be surveyed in advance and may be situated in locations that are difficult

to access.  Furthermore, it is not economical (commercially at least) to use

large antennas or extensive antenna processing and directionality at each

peer-to-peer node; the network nodes are all more or less identical, highly

portable, and always moving, although additional repeaters can be added

within the system to improve performance.  Repeaters demodulate pack-

ets, remodulate them, and send them again.
Military packet radio systems typically operate at lower frequencies
than do cellular systems so as to cover large areas within the battlefield.

Active interference needs to be considered in system design, and trans-

mitter power is chosen not only to ensure successful reception at the

receiver but also to hide the network from adversaries.  Military packet

radio systems make extensive use of spread-spectrum methods for chan-

nel access and in general require a higher degree of flexibility in coding
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES79schemes than do commercial systems.  Preamble spreading codes (simple
versions of the data spreading codes used for synchronization or header

information) may be different from the codes used during the data por-

tion of the packet, and codes can be changed on a bit-by-bit basis to

reduce the probability of interference (a feature of second-generation
DARPA packet radios).  All transmitters use either a common preamble

code or a receiver-directed preamble code that directs the transmission to

a single node that is tuned to the specific code.  The latter approach makes

it possible for multiple packets to be in the air yet have a low probability

of interference.
2.2.2  Physical Resource Allocation
Any system using a fixed assignment of network resources needs to
be designed based on worst-case signal propagation and interference as-

sumptions.  A more efficient strategy is dynamic resource allocation, in

which channels, data rates, and power levels are assigned depending on

the current interference, propagation, and traffic conditions.  For cellular

systems, dynamic resource allocation includes assignment of channels to

base stations.  Dynamic channel allocation in cellular systems improves

channel efficiency by a factor of two or more, even when using simple

algorithms (Katzela and Naghshineh, 1996).  However, analyses of dy-

namic resource allocation to date have been based on fairly simplistic

system assumptions, such as fixed traffic intensity, homogenous user de-

mands, fixed reuse constraints, and static channels and users.  Little work

has been done on resource allocation strategies that consider simulta-

neous, random variations in traffic, propagation, and user mobility.  The

extent to which system performance can be improved under realistic con-

ditions remains an open and challenging research problem with respect

to both cellular and packet-radio architectures.  Previous research has

focused primarily on cellular systems; little attention has been devoted to

peer-to-peer networks.
An emerging and important research area focuses on reducing the
complexity of dynamic resource allocation, particularly in systems with

small cells and rapidly changing propagation conditions and user de-

mands.  Even under simplistic assumptions of fixed conditions, optimiz-

ing channel allocation is highly complex.  Current allocation procedures

are not easily generalized to incorporate power control, traffic classes

(e.g., multimedia), cell handoff, or user priorities.  In addition, the effi-

ciency of dynamic resource allocation is most pronounced under light

loading conditions.  Thus, the optimal dynamic resource allocation strat-

egy is also dependent on traffic conditions.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS2.2.3  Interoperability
For elements of a system to communicate, they must be compatible.
One way to achieve compatibility is to mandate a 
Òpoint design
Ó in which
all devices conform to the same standard.  As described in Chapter 1, this
approach was taken for first-generation cellular systems in the United

States and in second-generation systems in Europe.  As used in this re-

port, the term 
Òinteroperability
Ó refers to the capability of network ele-
ments that do not conform to the same standard to communicate.  Inter-

operability can be achieved in two ways using different enabling devices:

gateways and adapters.  In the compatibility context, a gateway is a de-

vice that conforms to more than one standard, whereas an adapter trans-

lates information formats between two standards.  A cable-ready televi-

sion set is an example of a gateway, and a set-top box is an example of an

adapter.With respect to military wireless communications systems, there will
be no convergence to a single technology in the foreseeable future, for

many reasons.   The number of incompatible systems will remain high,

and yet evolving military missions will require increasing communica-

tions between individuals and machines using different systems.  As a

consequence, interoperability among these systems will be essential.
In sophisticated multimedia networks such as the ones required for
military operations in the next century, interoperability is necessary at all

layers of a communication protocol.  The Internet approach to interoper-

ability is a narrow-waist protocol suite with compatibility at the middle

layers (TCP and IP) and diversity at higher (i.e., application) and lower

(i.e., physical) layers (Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,

1994).  Although this approach can be adopted in all types of communica-

tions systems, there are several physical-layer problems unique to wire-

less communications.  For example, wireless systems may operate in
different frequency bands and use different modulation and coding tech-

niques.  Multimode radios are gateways that address these problems.

The commercial dual-mode cellular telephone is an example of this type

of radio.
The software radio is a promising means of achieving interoperability
at the physical layer.  Software radio receivers digitize the RF signal and

implement most receiver functions by means of software running on gen-

eral-purpose hardware (see Section 2.4).  Similarly, transmitters synthe-

size waveforms in digital format and convert them to analog prior to

amplification.   A software radio can be programmed to be compatible

with a number of communications systems and provide interoperability

across the required data encoding, transmit waveforms and bandwidths,

timing, and clock accuracy of the individual modes.  Chapter 3 (Section
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES813.4.3.1) notes the initial success of experimental SpeakEASY radios in
implementing gateways between several military waveforms.   However,

current-generation software radios are limited in terms of the range of

radio waveforms they can handle.
The implementation of gateways and/or adapters raises the issue of
where they would best be situated in a communications system.  There

are various possibilities depending on network architecture.  In peer-to-

peer networks, the terminals need to be capable of implementing all coex-

isting technologies.  In this case any terminal would be capable of com-

municating with any other terminal within range; the disadvantage would
be the added cost, weight, and power drain relative to single-mode termi-

nals.  On the other hand, in base-station-oriented networks, it may be

possible to concentrate the tasks of interoperability in base stations.  This

approach has the disadvantage of disabling communications between ter-

minals when base stations are out of service.  This issue could be ad-

dressed in research on network architectures (see Chapter 4).
2.2.4  Routing and Mobility Management
2.2.4.1Multihop Routing
The routing of messages through a multihop packet-radio network
requires the identification of existing communication links and an assess-

ment of their relative quality.  Routing protocols perform these tasks.  The

best route is the one with the smallest number of hops providing accept-

able connectivity; the link quality can be determined by measuring signal

strength, SNR, or BER.  Poor link quality can be improved to some extent

through the use of higher transmission power, wider spreading codes,

aggressive hop-by-hop error correction, or retransmission schemes.  How-
ever, link capacity is also a function of the traffic on nearby links; it may

be necessary to route around nodes experiencing heavy congestion.
In general, network topologies vary rapidly in mobile packet radio
networks, with links constantly being lost and new ones established.
Therefore, the network management component needs to disseminate

connectivity information more rapidly than is necessary in wired net-

works.  The network also needs to be able to handle gracefully any net-

work partitions caused by link outages, which are more likely to occur in

mobile packet radio networks than in a conventional wired network.
Routing algorithms choose a hop-by-hop path based on information
about link connectivity.  The simplest scheme is flooding, in which a

packet is transmitted on all links from the source to neighboring nodes,

which then repeat the process.  Flooding is inefficient but can be the best

strategy when a network topology changes rapidly.  Another scheme,
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSconnection-oriented routing, maintains a sequence of hops for communica-
tions between a single source and specific destination in the network.  Given
rapid topology changes, network partitions, and large numbers of nodes,

keeping this information updated and available to all nodes is difficult at

best.  A third scheme is connectionless routing, which requires no knowl-

edge of end-to-end connections.  Packets are forwarded toward their desti-

nation, with local nodes adapting to changes in network topology.
Connection-oriented and connectionless approaches require that rout-ing information be distributed throughout the network.  In small net-

works this distribution was originally accomplished by a centralized rout-
ing server; by now, distributed algorithms with improved scaling

behavior have largely replaced centralized servers, especially in large

networks.  Each node independently determines the best hop in the direc-

tion of the destination, and updated routing tables are periodically ex-

changed among neighboring nodes.
Routing schemes have also been used that combine elements of the
centralized and distributed approaches.  For very large multihop packet

radio networks, such schemes impose a hierarchy on the network topol-

ogy, hiding changes in the distant parts of the network from local nodes

(the next-hop routes to distant network nodes are not likely to change as

rapidly as are routes within each cluster).  A combined strategy is to use a

centralized route server, known as a cluster head, to maintain routes

between clusters in the direction of 
Òborder radios.
ÓA final routing issue relates to packet forwarding, which is initiated
when several transmission attempts fail to deliver a message to the next

node.  In these cases a node engages in localized rerouting, broadcasting

the message to any node that can complete the route.  Packet forwarding

can cause flooding if multiple nodes hear the request and choose to for-

ward the packet.  The process can be optimized by filtering based on

overheard traffic:  If a node has a packet in its send queue and 
Òhears
Ó the
same packet being forwarded from a second node, then the first node

assumes that the packet has been sent and removes it from the queue.
2.2.4.2  Terminal Mobility
The mobile internetworking routing protocols (Mobile IP) were de-
signed to accommodate the mobility of Internet users.  There is some
disagreement concerning whether Mobile IP was originally designed for

an individual user moving from one fixed location to another (Myles et

al., 1995) or for on-the-move wireless operations.  In any case, the Internet

Engineering Task Force (IETF) has addressed the issue of full mobility,

and Mobile IP is now suited for highly mobile users.
13
  On the Internet,
every node (fixed or mobile) has a unique identifying address, its IP ad-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES83dress.  Mobile IP has to circumvent the association of IP addresses with
specific networks because mobile nodes can attach to and detach from

multiple networks as they roam.  Changing an IP address on the fly is not

always possible.  If a node has an open TCP connection when its IP ad-

dress changes, then the TCP connection will fail.  If the node requires an

accurate Domain Name System (DNS) entry, then the entry will need to

be updated as the address changes, and in today
Õs implementation of
DNS such an update can be very slow.
Communications take place between a sender and receiving mobile
host (MH).  In the Mobile IP specifications, every MH has a home network

and its IP address is called the home address.  A router called the home

agent, which resides in the MH
Õs home network, is responsible for inter-
cepting each packet destined for the home address of a roaming MH.  The

packet is placed inside another IP packet through a process called 
ÒIP-in-IP
encapsulation.
Ó  The source address in the encapsulating packet is that of
the home agent.  The packet is usually sent 
Òin care of
Ó another agent, the
foreign agent, which resides in the network in which the MH is roaming.

The packet is sent by conventional IP routing to the foreign agent, where

the contents (i.e., the original packets) are removed and delivered to the

MH.  The MH can transmit information directly to the sender but the sender
always directs its own communications to the home network.  The MH can

also request a locally assigned care-of IP address in its roaming domain by

invoking the dynamic host configuration protocol; this address could be

used by the home agent directly, eliminating the foreign agent.
When an MH enters a new mobile subnetwork it needs to obtain a
care-of address.  It can find a foreign agent using a process built on top of

the existing Internet control message protocol capabilities for router dis-

covery.  Once accepted by the local network, the MH registers its new

care-of address with its home agent.  All registration attempts need to be

carefully authenticated to prevent a malicious user from hijacking the

packets simply by furnishing another care-of address.  The Mobile IP

specifications use a message authentication code (similar to a digital sig-

nature) based on a secret key shared by the MH and home agent, typically

using a secure one-way function called MD5.  Only the MH that knows

the secret key can provide the digital signature expected by the home

agent.  Replay protection is required to prevent a malicious user from

falsely registering an MH with a stale care-of address.
The major performance challenge is to circumvent the indirect rout-
ing among the sender, home agent, and foreign agent.  This path can be

eliminated if the sender caches bindings between the MH
Õs home and
care-of addresses.  The management of these bindings is called route

optimization.
14
  For example, when a sender first sends a packet to an MH
through its home agent, the home agent could send a binding-update
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSmessage to the original sender.  Until the binding expires because of a time-
out, the sender can use the care-of address directly.  If the MH moves to a

new subnetwork, then it can ask its former foreign agent to forward packets

to the new care-of address while also alerting senders of that new address.
2.2.4.3  Wireless Overlay Networks
No single network technology can simultaneously offer wide-area cov-
erage, high bandwidth, and low latency.  In general, networks that span
small geographical areas (e.g., LANs) tend to support high bandwidth and

low latency, whereas networks that span large geographical areas (e.g.,

satellite networks) tend to support low bandwidth and high latency.  To

yield flexible connectivity over wide areas,  a wireless internetwork needs

to be formed from multiple wide-, medium-, and local-area networks inter-

connected by wired or wireless segments (Katz and Brewer, 1996).  This

internetwork is called a wireless overlay network because the WANs are

laid on top of the medium- and local-area networks to form a multilayered

network hierarchy.  A user operating within the LAN enjoys high band-

width and low latency, but when communicating outside the local cover-

age area the user accesses a wider-area network within the hierarchy, typi-

cally sacrificing some bandwidth or latency in the process.
Future mobile information systems will be built on heterogeneous
wireless overlay networks, extending traditional wired and internet-

worked processing ÒislandsÓ to hosts on the move over a wide area.  Over-
lay technologies are used in buildings (wireless LANs), in metropolitan

areas (packet radio), and regional areas (satellite).  The software radio,

with its capability to change frequencies and waveforms as needed, is a

critical enabling technology for overlay networks.
Handoffs may take place not only 
Òhorizontally
Ó within a single net-
work but also 
Òvertically
Ó between overlays.  If each overlay network
assigns the MH a different IP address, then Mobile IP needs to be ex-

tended to correlate all the addresses for one user.  Alternatively, the mo-

bile node can treat each new IP address as a new care-of address.  The

home agent maintains a table of bindings between the home and locally

assigned addresses.  The applications running on the MH may participate

in the choice of route.  For example, an application might specify that

high-priority traffic traverse an overlay with low latency.  Less-critical

traffic might travel over higher-latency connections.  Signal quality, BER,

and packet loss and retransmission need to be considered.  Under certain

conditions such as the transmission of urgent data, a slow-speed overlay

with a strong signal strength might be preferred to one with a higher

bandwidth but a weaker signal.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES852.2.5  Resource Discovery
New protocols are being developed to support convenient operations
by mobile users.  One example is the service location protocol, which
allows user agents to determine access information for generic network

services such as printing, faxing, schedule management, file system ac-

cess, and backup.  A directory agent delivers universal resource locators

(URLs) to user agents, which use the URLs to access service agents.  New

service agents can register or withdraw their URLs as needed.  Much of

the protocol research is geared toward enabling the identification of di-

rectory agents in unfamiliar environments.  Other strategies based on

modifications to directory services have been proposed as well.
2.2.6  Network Simulation and Modeling Tools
Network performance analysis can take three forms:  mathematical
analysis, experimental trials, or system simulation.  Mathematical analy-

ses can incorporate only a limited range of realistic phenomena, and field

trials are expensive as well as difficult to set up under repeatable condi-

tions.  Consequently simulation is often the best tool for optimizing sys-

tem design and predicting performance.
Network-level simulation tools are used to simulate the dynamic behav-
ior of routing, flow, and congestion-mitigation schemes in packet-switched

data networks.  These tools can model arbitrary network topologies, link-

error models, router scheduling algorithms, and traffic.
15
  Network simula-
tors have been used to investigate new link-layer algorithms for packet sched-
uling and retransmission, new mechanisms within routers for determining

local congestion conditions and sending this information to transmitters and

receivers, and transport-layer algorithms for retransmission and rate control.

Performance tools can also help troubleshoot problems in real networks by

collecting statistics about the throughput of the various nodes and links.  This

information can be used to identify bottlenecks and develop remedial strate-

gies such as changing the topology of the network.  Debugging tools enable

the protocol designer to capture detailed traces of network activity (McCanne

and Jacobson, 1993); these tools are invaluable for tracking down errors in

protocol implementation.
To model mobile networks accurately, simulators require special fea-
tures, some of which have yet to be developed.  They need to model the

nature of errors on the wireless link precisely because errors are not uni-

formly distributed but rather tend to cluster (Nguyen et al., 1996).  They

also need to model node mobility, especially in the case of packet radio

networks.  Existing simulation technology consists of good models of

radio propagation at microwave frequencies but only standard teletraffic
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSmodels and few abstract mobility models.  Some proprietary tools integrate
geographical modeling, propagation, and cellular networking behavior,

but no integrated tools are available commercially to predict the perfor-

mance of the next generation of wireless technologies, such as smart radios.
Similarly, existing tools can simulate the creation of relatively
narrowband waveforms at the transmitter and analyze the effects of radio

propagation on the received signal, but they cannot model the antenna

radiation or reception properties of a signal that spans more than 1 GHz

of spectrum.  No existing tool can model the propagation performance of

urban, suburban, rural, or free-space radiation of wideband signal-con-

taining components with diverse propagation characteristics.  No tool can

analyze the effects of the motion of network elements on the received

signal
Õs multipath characteristics, such as spectral nulls and Doppler shift
over wide bandwidths.  No widely available tools allow for the geo-

graphical or topological analysis of specific network deployments.  Fi-

nally, no analysis tool is sophisticated enough to examine the perfor-

mance of software radios or radio networks in the presence of interference
sources common to wideband mobile communications.  The evaluation

and optimization of mobile wireless networks would be enhanced by the

development of sophisticated, flexible models of communications traffic

and node mobility.
2.3  END-TO-END SYSTEM DESIGN ISSUES
Most end-to-end system design issues, such as security, design tools,
and interoperability with other systems, are relevant to any wireless ap-

plication (Katz, 1994).  However, some end-to-end design issues depend

on the application(s) to be supported by the network.  For example,

videoconferencing is an extremely challenging application for a wireless

system because of its high bandwidth requirement and strict constraints

on delayed end-to-end transmissions.  To support this application, the

capability to adapt to channel conditions, perhaps through a slight degra-

dation in image quality, might be built into the end-to-end system proto-

cols.  Similarly, many military command-and-control operations require

the capability to assign priorities to certain messages, and this flexibility

needs to be built into the system.  The following sections deal with three

key end-to-end design issues for wireless systems:  application-level ad-

aptations, quality of service (QoS), and system security.
2.3.1  Application-Level Adaptation
A system can adapt to the variability in mobile client applications in
three ways.  One approach is to exploit data-type-specific lossy (i.e., in-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES87volving some distortion) compression mechanisms and use data seman-
tics to determine how information can be compressed and prioritized en

route to the client.
16
  A second approach is on-the-fly adaptation involv-
ing the transcoding of data into a representation that can be handled by

the end application.  The third approach is to push the complexity away

from the mobile clients and servers into proxies, which are often used in

wired networks but are not currently optimized for wireless applications.
Introduced in response to security concerns, the proxy approach is a
new paradigm for distributed applications.  A proxy is an intermediary

that resides between the client and server
Ñoutside the client
Õs security
firewall
Ñto filter network packets on behalf of the client.  Proxies provide
a convenient place to change data representations en route to the client

(thereby mitigating the lossy, constrained bandwidths of wireless links),

perform type-specific compressions, cache data for rapid re-access, and

fetch data in anticipation of access.  By supporting the adaptation to net-

work variations in bandwidth, latency, and link error rates as well as to

hardware and software variations, proxies enable client applications run-

ning on limited-capability end nodes to appear as if they were running on

high-end, well-connected machines.  Low-end clients (e.g., PDAs) have

limited processing capabilities due to small displays and memory, rela-

tively slow processors, and limited-capability software and run-time en-

vironments.
2.3.2  Quality of Service
Quality of service refers to traffic-dependent performance metrics
Ñbandwidth, end-to-end latency, or likelihood of message loss
Ñthat a con-
nection must have or can tolerate for the type of data transmitted.  A

network
Õs admission-control mechanisms, which are invoked whenever a
new connection is initiated, provide assurance that QoS requirements will

be met; a new connection is aborted if its QoS requirements cannot be

met.  Attention to QoS issues is increasing because of at least two converg-

ing trends:  the growing market for applications (e.g., video) that require

real-time service, and the evident interest in using the Internet for a range

of activities that are critical to both the public and private sectors.
2.3.2.1  Approaches to Quality of Service
Within the Internet, three categories of QoS are currently defined:
guaranteed, predictive, and best-effort service.  Guaranteed service isachieved if the connection conforms to a well-specified traffic specifica-

tion.  If the network determines that it can support this traffic, then it

allows the connection to be established and guarantees that its require-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSments will be met.  Guarantees of this type are required when the applica-
tion needs tight, real-time coupling between the end points of the connec-

tion.  An example of guaranteed service is the telephone system, which is

designed to meet the level of perceived audio/speech quality, end-to-end

switching delays, and likelihood of call blocking required for telephone

calls.  Certain values for these metrics are determined and the network is

designed to offer the desired number of simultaneous connections.  An-

other example of guaranteed service is that provided by ATM, a transmis-

sion protocol that handles voice, data, and video.  If absolute guarantees

are too expensive, then it is often sufficient to provide predictive service,

indicating that the application
Õs requirements are highly likely to be met.
The Internet as it exists today does not provide explicit QoS to differ-
ent packet flows; instead it is based on a best-effort model that makes no

performance guarantees.  (Flows are groups of packets that share com-

mon characteristics, including the tolerated delay.)  Best-effort services

are appropriate for applications that do not demand real-time perfor-

mance and that can adapt gracefully to the bandwidth available in the

network.  Best-effort service tolerates simple network components and is

a good match for data transmitted in interactive bursts, interactive bulk

transfer, and asynchronous bulk transfer.  The common Internet data

transfer applications are sensitive to losses but tolerant of latency.  How-

ever, the reverse is true for emerging real-time Internet applications,
which are tolerant of losses but sensitive to latency.  The IETF is working

to provide guaranteed services on the Internet (Peterson and Davie, 1996;

Tanenbaum, 1996).
The Internet carries two broad classes of applications:  delay tolerant
and delay intolerant.  The former applications, such as file transfer, toler-

ate some packet losses and delays.  For these services, which are common

today, the network does not reserve resources or limit the number of

transfers in progress at any one time.  Instead, it shares the available

bandwidth among all the active applications as best it can.   This is the so-

called best-effort service.  Delay-intolerant applications require data that

is delivered with little or no delay.  For these applications, different ser-

vices are being developed.  The components of these services consist of

traffic and network descriptions, admission control procedures, resource

reservation protocols, and packet scheduling mechanisms.  These specifi-

cations are associated with flows.  Given a service specification, the net-

work can admit a new flow or deny access when the specifications exceed

what the network can provide.  The network can also police a flow to

ensure that it meets the traffic specification.
Real-time Internet applications are developed on top of the real-time
protocol (RTP).  With RTP, a node moderates its transmission rate based

on periodic reports of successfully received data at the receiver.  If the
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES89sender
Õs rate exceeds that which is reported as received, then the sending
rate is reduced.  Periodically the sender probes the network by attempting
to increase the rate to see if a higher rate can be supported.  In this way,

the sender and receiver adapt to the available bandwidth without requir-

ing any special support from the network itself.  The RTP protocol is

appropriate for real-time data streams, such as video and audio, that can

tolerate some losses.
The real-time Internet services proposed by the IETF use the resource
reservation protocol (RSVP), which enables dynamic changes in QoS and

permits receivers to specify different QoS requirements.
17
  The RSVP pro-
tocol is closely integrated with multicast services in which receivers de-

termine a path through the network on which senders distribute their

traffic specifications and receivers distribute their network service require-
ments.  These sender-directed path messages and receiver-directed reser-

vation messages are built on top of the existing multicast protocols.  Send-

ers and receivers are responsible for periodically signaling the network

about their changing specifications.  Once the reservations have been

made, the final step is to implement them in every router on the path from

sender to receiver through packet classification and scheduling.  The
router implementation achieves the performance specified by the net-

work end points.  The classification process maps packets on flows into

their associated reservation, and scheduling drives queue management to

ensure that the packets obtain their requested service.
Proponents of ATM networks view them as the foundation of inte-
grated voice, video, and data services because they combine flexibility

with performance guarantees.  The ATM approach involves breaking up

data into short packets of fixed size called cells, which are interspersed by

time division with data from other sources and delivered over trunk net-

works.  An ATM network can scale up to high data rates because it uses

fast switching and data multiplexing based on these fixed-format cells,

which contain 48 bytes of traffic combined with a 5-byte header defining

the virtual circuits and paths over which the data are to be transported.

The virtual circuits need to be established before data can flow.  In setting

up connections, the network makes resource allocation decisions and bal-

ances the traffic demands across network links, thereby separating data

and control flows and enabling switches to be simple and faster.
Two types of guaranteed service are available on ATM networks:
constant bit rate (CBR) and variable bit rate (VBR).  The CBR service is

appropriate for constant-rate data streams that demand consistency in

delay.  An example of such a data stream is telephone traffic that uses

constant-bit-rate encodings for audio and places bounds on delivery la-

tency.  The VBR service is appropriate for traffic patterns that have a fairly

sustained rate but also may feature short bursts of data at the peak trans-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSmission rate.  Burst-type traffic tolerates higher delays and higher varia-
tions in delay than does constant-rate traffic.  Two types of best-effort

traffic classes are available on ATM networks:  available bit rate, which

guarantees zero losses (but makes no other guarantees) if the source fol-

lows the traffic management signals delivered by the network; and unde-

fined bit rate, which provides no performance guarantees.
The connection orientation of ATM presents problems when dealing
with network mobility.  Movement between cells requires existing con-

nections to be reestablished:  Even brief transmissions invoke the full

latency of connection setup.  In addition, ATM is not appropriate for lossy

links because there is no agreed-upon mechanism for error recovery or

retransmission at the link layer. Considerable controversy exists as to

whether ATM will be used throughout a system or only at the link or

subnetwork level.  Full ATM connectivity, from one end of a system to the

other, is required to take advantage of the service guarantees.
18
  Many
believe that it will be necessary to run TCP/IP over ATM to ensure
interoperability across heterogeneous subnetworks.  Debate continues

over how to interface ATM
Õs performance guarantees with the emerging
Internet capabilities for predictive service.
Wireless communications introduce additional QoS issues.  The QoS
guarantees for expected loss rates, latencies, and bandwidths were devel-

oped based on the assumption that switched, fiber-optic wired networks

would be used.  Such networks feature low link-error rates, easily pre-

dicted link bandwidths, and QoS parameters that are largely determined

by how the queues are managed within the switches.  As a result, losses

are due almost entirely to congestion-related queue overflows.  Wireless

links, on the other hand, have high bit-error rates, high latencies due to

link layer retransmissions, and unpredictable link bandwidths.
19
  Fur-
thermore, the quality of a wireless link varies over time, and connections

can be lost completely.  Two wireless end nodes sharing the same link can

experience vastly different link bandwidths depending on their relative

proximity to the base station, location in a radio fade, or loss of receiver

synchronization in a multipath environment.  Link quality can also be

degraded by interference from a nearby transmitter.  In addition, hidden

terminals cause time-consuming back-off (i.e., waiting before resending)

that further degrades network performance.
Because link quality varies on small time scales, it is difficult to im-
prove a wireless link through agile error coding or increased transmit

power.  Moreover, attempts to improve a link for one user can adversely

affect others.  Guarantees are elusive in this complex environment.
20
  The
ATM end-to-end QoS model is difficult to implement if the limiting link is

wireless.  In general, however, approaches such as adaptive spreading

codes, FEC, and transmit-power control can be used at the media access
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES91control and link layers to improve higher protocol layers in a wireless
environment (Acampora, 1996).
2.3.2.2  Transport-Layer Issues
The most widely used reliable transport protocol is TCP, a connec-
tion-oriented protocol that combines congestion control with 
Òsliding-
window
Ó flow control at the sender and cumulative acknowledgments
from the receiver.  As each segment is received in sequence, the receiver
generates an acknowledgment indicating the number of bytes received.

In the current generation of TCP, congestion is controlled by the sender,

which maintains a variable called the congestion window that regulates

how much data the sender can have in flight across the network at any

one time.  The sender adjusts the congestion window in response to per-

ceived network conditions.
When a TCP connection first starts, or after a major congestion event,
the congestion window is set to one packet, which means the sender

cannot send a second packet until it receives an acknowledgement of the

first.  The sender then adjusts the congestion window by doubling it each

round-trip across the net.  This part of the algorithm is called slow-start.

Once a certain threshold is crossed, the congestion-avoidance phase is

triggered and the window size grows in increments of a single packet for

each round-trip.  The sender uses these mechanisms to probe the network

to discover how much data can be in flight.
A lost packet creates a gap in the sequence number of data arriving at
the receiver.  When this occurs, the receiver generates a duplicate ac-

knowledgment for the last segment received in order.  When a threshold

number of duplicate acknowledgments is received, the sender retrans-

mits the lost segment and halves the congestion window; this part of the

algorithm is known as fast retransmission and recovery.  A more serious

congestion event can cause the loss of so many packets that no duplicate

acknowledgments are generated by the receiver.  The sender detects and

corrects this situation using a timer.  The TCP protocol sets time-outs as a

function of the mean and standard deviation of the round-trip time.  If no

acknowledgment is received within this interval, then the sender retrans-

mits the first unacknowledged segment, sets its window to one packet,

and reenters the slow-start phase.  This event causes a major reduction in

throughput until the window opens and also can cause a silent period

until the timer expires.
Fast retransmission works well in many circumstances today.  How-
ever, specific issues arise in wireless systems.  When a packet is lost or

damaged because of bit errors on the wireless link, this loss is detected

and corrected by the fast-recovery algorithm.  However, fast retransmis-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSsion reduces the window size as a side effect, thus keeping throughput
low.  These problems can be mitigated through a TCP-aware link layer

(Balakrishnan et al., 1996), in which the base station triggers local retrans-

missions of lost segments.  By intercepting the duplicate acknowledg-

ments, the base station shields the sender from the effects of local losses

that would have the effect of shrinking the congestion window and re-

ducing throughput.  More seriously, burst errors on the wireless link can

cause the loss of several packets, which will trigger the slow-start algo-

rithm even though there is no congestion.
Asymmetric connections, in which the bandwidth in one direction far
exceeds that available for the opposite path, can present problems for

transport-layer connections because the effective bandwidth on the for-

ward path is limited by the amount of acknowledgment traffic that can be

sent along the reverse path.  An example of asymmetry is direct-broadcast

satellite, which sends data to the user at several hundred kilobits per

second but uses substantially smaller-bandwidth technologies (such as

conventional telephone or wide-area wireless) for the return path at tens

of kilobits per second.  Asymmetries also arise because of the nature of

data traffic patterns.  For example, Web access involves much more data

transmitted from servers to users than in the opposite direction.  Yet poor

performance on the acknowledgment path moderates the performance on

even a high-bandwidth forward path.  One solution to is to compress the

acknowledgment packets; another is to delay acknowledgments so that

each one acknowledges an expanded range of received data.
Asymmetries can undermine reliability in the application of TCP to
wireless links.  The TCP protocol can adapt the duration of its time-outs

as long as the round-trip time estimate is not highly variable.  Asymme-

tries in the connection bandwidth, coupled with differential loss rates and

congestion effects on the forward and reverse paths, increase the variabil-

ity in estimated round-trip time.  This means that when losses do occur,

the retransmission time-outs can become very large, significantly degrad-

ing a connection if losses occur often.
2.3.3  Security
Wireless communication systems are inherently less private than are
wired systems because the radio link can be intercepted without any

physical tap, undetected by the transmitter and receiver.  Wireless net-

works are therefore especially vulnerable to eavesdropping, usage fraud,

and activity monitoring, threats that will grow as wireless banking and

other commercial services become available.  In addition, both wired and

wireless networks need to be designed to maintain the integrity of data

and systems and assure the appropriate availability of services.  Thus,
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES93security is an important issue for both commercial and military applica-
tions.  For purposes of this discussion, which considers key aspects of the

information security challenge but is not comprehensive, the issues can

be divided into three categories:  network security, radio link security,

and hardware security.
21
Network security encompasses end-to-end encryption and measures
to prevent fraudulent network access and monitoring.  One user-oriented

framework distinguishes several levels of end-to-end encryption (Garg

and Wilkes, 1996).  Level 0 has no encryption, meaning that anyone with

a scanner and knowledge of the communication link design can intercept

a transmission.  Analog cellular telephones offer this level of security,

which has been a problem and has motivated security upgrades in the

digital cellular standards.
22
  Level 1 provides low-level security such that
individual conversations might take a year or more to decrypt.  This level

is probably secure enough for commercial telephony applications, pro-

vided that an equivalent effort would be needed to decrypt subsequent

conversations (
Òperfect forward secrecy
Ó).  Level 2 provides increased
(perhaps by a factor of 10) security for sensitive information related to

electronic commerce, mergers and acquisitions, and contract negotiations.
Level 3 provides the most stringent level of security, meeting government

and military communications requirements as defined by the appropriate

agencies.Radio link security prevents the interception of radio signals, ensur-
ing the privacy of user location information and, for military applications,

AJ and low-probability-of-detection-and-interference (LPD/I) capabili-

ties.  Link security was primarily a military concern before commercial

wireless communications became prevalent.  Military systems are de-

signed to avert the detection of radio signals, jamming of communication

links, and interception and decoding of messages.  Many military radios

are based on spread-spectrum technology, which provides both AJ and

LPD/I capabilities.  However, because knowledge of the spread-spec-

trum code would enable an adversary to intercept a spread signal, en-

cryption is usually applied as well to prevent signal interception and

message recovery.  Many military techniques for reducing interception

and detection are classified.
For commercial systems the primary link-security issue is privacy,
which is not typically assured.  Conversations on analog cellular tele-

phones are accessible to anyone with an FM scanner, as demonstrated by

recent publication of communications involving public figures.  More-

over, the location of a cellular user can be determined by triangulating the

signal from two or more base stations, a feature that has been exploited

successfully by law enforcement authorities.  It is difficult to prevent the

interception of commercial radio signals, not only because communica-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStions protocols are publicized in patents and standards but also because
most communications devices have a 
Òmaintenance
Ó mode for monitor-
ing calls (a capability intended for testing purposes that could also be

used to eavesdrop).
It is unlikely that commercial devices will ever require a level of
security equivalent to military systems and may not even provide the

Òhooks
Ó enabling the addition of LPD/I capabilities.  Similarly, although
the growing use of wireless systems and growing dependence on net-

worked communications have heightened concerns about the possible

denial of service in commercial contexts, there is probably greater toler-

ance for private-service outages than for jamming in a military situation

at this time.
Hardware security also has different implications for commercial and
military applications, although encryption keys typically need to be pro-

tected in both contexts.
23
  Commercial systems require sufficient security
to prevent the fraudulent use of information in the event of theft or loss,

and user databases need to be secured against unauthorized access.  The

military has similar requirements but at a much higher security level.  It

also has additional requirements:  Military devices need to be protected

so that opening them will not reveal any of the specialized hardware or

software technology.
2.4  HARDWARE ISSUES
Among the hardware issues that are critical to third-generation wire-
less systems, radio stands out as being central to the military mission.

The radio receiver consists of an antenna, RF amplifier, mixer, filters,

demodulator, and decoder (see Figure 2-3).  Radio signals are received by

the antenna, amplified, passed through the mixer and filters, demodu-

lated, and decoded.  Transmitters have similar architectures but the op-
FIGURE 2-3  A radio receiver has six basic components.  In transmit mode the
operations proceed in the reverse order.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES95erations are performed in reverse order:  The data are encoded, modu-
lated, passed through the filters and mixer, amplified, and transmitted

through the antenna.
Section 2.4.1 reviews antenna technology, which has become increas-
ingly sophisticated with the addition of adaptive capabilities.  Section 2.4.2

discusses other radio components, emphasizing the transition from analog

to digital technology and from single-purpose to multipurpose systems.

Traditional radios were designed for a single air interface (i.e., one modula-

tion type occupying a particular bandwidth).  Given the proliferation of

standards and the need for compatibility with older equipment, the general

trend in radio design is to build flexible systems that can handle multiple

air interfaces.  Section 2.4.3 discusses portable terminals.  In modern mobile

devices, the radio system is integrated with sophisticated user interfaces

and computing capabilities in lightweight, modular packages.  The design

of portable terminals relies on advanced microprocessors, displays, user

interface devices, power sources, and software.
2.4.1  Antennas
An antenna serves as the interface, or transducer, between the elec-
tronic circuitry of a transmitter or receiver and the medium through which
radio waves travel.  Classical antenna designs include simple stub or

Òwhip
Ó antennas such as those found on cellular telephones, as well as
massive, parallel panels that are aligned in phase to provide flexible elec-

tronic steering (examples include the phased-array radars used on some

warships).  While in transit between the transmitter and receiver, the RF

signals are subject to a variety of distortions (see Section 2.1.1.3).  In addi-

tion, they create interference for other communications and provide op-

portunities for interception.  To limit interception and interference and

also to conserve power, antennas can be designed so that the RF energy

radiates in only a particular direction, providing gain along the intended

direction and attenuation in undesired directions.
Various antenna structures have been developed to direct electro-
magnetic signals.  Receiving antennas also have directional properties:

The most common examples are rooftop television antennas that point in

the direction of the local television transmitter and satellite dishes that

point at the orbiting satellite.  Directional antennas in cellular-system base

stations focus power in a particular direction, thereby minimizing the

required transmitter power and significantly reducing the amount of in-

terference.  Directional antennas need to be positioned carefully.  Posi-

tioning is not difficult in local television broadcasting because both the

transmitter and receiver are stationary and a fixed, narrow beam works

well.  In cellular and personal communications systems, however, the
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStransmitter and receiver locations are mobile.  Therefore, most directional
antennas in mobile communications have a fairly large beam width (60 to

120 degrees).  Although narrower beams would enable the use of low-

power transmitters and reduce interference, many such beams would be

required to cover even a small service area, and mobile users would con-

stantly be moving from one beam to another.
User mobility is a key motivation behind the development of steerableantennas
Ñso-called smart or adaptive-array antennas
Ñthat can change
the shape and direction of their transmission beams depending on user

location.  A steerable transmitting antenna controls the phases of the elec-

tromagnetic signals generated at each of its numerous elements, thereby

changing the physical locations at which the wave-like signals add con-

structively (to create a beam) or destructively (to create a null).  Using

feedback control, an antenna beam can follow the movement of a mobile

unit.  Spot beams can be created by both the transmitting and receiving

antennas.  These technologies increase system capacity, reduce transmit-

ter power requirements and interference, and dramatically reduce the

likelihood of unwanted signal interception.  Future mobile systems will

pinpoint the relative positions of the transmitter and receiver with even

greater accuracy than is currently possible, making sophisticated loca-

tion-based services feasible.
The physical size of the elements in an antenna is related to the wave-
length of operation, which is inversely proportional to the transmission

frequency.  Thus, higher operating frequencies mean shorter wavelengths,

smaller antenna features, more elements per antenna, and the possibility

of more complicated and precise beam patterns.  Adaptive antennas are

already used in military operations, particularly at frequencies above 20

GHz, to accommodate very wideband signals used for communications,

tracking, or guidance.  Such antennas are composed of many elements

and are fully capable of electronic beam forming and steering.  Each ele-

ment is controlled electrically through changes in the properties of dielec-

tric materials; the antenna does not change physically and therefore needs

no moving parts.
Older communications systems have a number of shortcomings.  Some
have multiband capabilities but are expensive and bulky.  Commercial

applications for adaptive antennas are limited to relatively low-cost, single-

band units with limited flexibility in beam pattern.  Moreover, virtually all

existing adaptive antennas for mobile radio applications are designed for

use at base stations rather than mobile units.  The key technical challenges

in the design of adaptive antennas for military applications are to reduce

the size and cost of the RF and signal-processing technology and achieve

additional gain in a handset by designing three-dimensional instead of

planar designs.  The commercial sector is likely to need such designs in
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES97the future as new spectrum is allocated at higher frequencies (above 2
GHz) and multiband radios become available.  For the time being, the

DOD may need to fund its own R&D in this area.
2.4.2  Other Radio Components
The evolution of digital technology is transforming radios.  Other than
antennas, all the components of the radio system
ÑRF amplifier, mixer,
filter, demodulator, and decoder
Ñare amenable to either analog or digital
implementation.  Many commercial radios and other communications prod-

ucts already use programmable digital modules (see Table 2-2).
There are many advantages to replacing analog hardware with pro-
grammable digital technology, although trade-offs are involved.  As noted
above, digital technology offers inherent security advantages.  Another

benefit is time to market:  As with PCs, product development time can be

reduced because changes and improvements can be implemented through
software.  Digital technologies also make it easier to achieve temperature

stability and reliability and to manufacture, support, and test equipment.

Digital radios can be designed for performance peaks, whereas analog

radios de-optimize performance because the filters are detuned to make

the system easier to manufacture and tolerant of component variability.

Finally, digital components can reduce costs by providing increased func-

tionality per unit and reducing the need for multiple types of radios.
The design of wideband (i.e., multiband) digital radios has been en-
abled by rapid advances in microelectronics, including DSPs, A/D con-

verters, ASICs, and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs).  In new

radio architectures, referred to variously as software-defined radio, pro-

grammable radio, or simply software radio, analog functions such as tun-
TABLE 2-2  Use of Digital Components in Commercial
Communications Products
ProductRFa AmplifierMixerFilterDemodulatorDecoder
Car radio withAnalogAnalogAnalogAnalogAnalog
equalizerDirecTV receiverAnalogAnalogAnalogDigitalDigital
Dual-mode cell phoneAnalogAnalogDigitalDigitalDigital
PC telephone modemAnalogDigitalDigitalDigitalDigital
FDDIb modemDigitaln/an/aDigitalDigital
aRadio frequency.
bFiber-distributed data interface.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSing, filtering, demodulating, and decoding are replaced with software
directing the digital equivalents.  The mixers and filters can process mul-

tiple modulations spanning multiple bandwidths; the demodulation and

decoding processes are programmed; and modulation and coding are

usually performed using DSP chips.
The wideband A/D conversion of the software radio enables the
implementation in handsets of direct frequency conversion (i.e., eliminat-

ing the typical intermediate steps between the baseband and transmit

frequencies, thereby reducing noise and the need for filtering).  This de-

sign is not yet appropriate for commercial systems, because it is not fea-

sible at this point to service a large number of subscribers using such

receivers simultaneously.  In the handset, the RF amplifier is required to

obtain a reasonable noise figure and input intercept.  The anti-alias filter

selects which of the multiple subbands to digitize.  The wideband (multi-

band) digitizer converts all RF signals into a digital representation.  The

processor uses software to implement all legacy and future radio systems.

The processor is capable of implementing multiple simultaneous radios,

much like a PC can run multiple applications simultaneously.
The use of digital radio hardware still presents challenges and re-
quires trade-offs that may not be readily apparent.  A digitally imple-

mented radio needs to be at least as good as the analog radio it replaces in

terms of QoS parameters such as reception sensitivity or power.  This

challenge is being met:  Coding and decoding improvements, driven by

DSP advances, are making digital radio systems not only equal to analog

systems but also better.  However, four limiting technologies need to be

developed further if wideband (i.e., multiband) software radios are to

become a practical reality:  advanced A/D converters, DSP chips, filters,

and RF amplifier components.
2.4.2.1  Analog-to-Digital Converters
The key enabling component, and the most complex and misunder-
stood element of wideband software radios, is the A/D converter.  Most
A/D converters are characterized by maximum clock rate and number of

output bits, digital metrics similar to those used to characterize micropro-

cessors or memory devices.  However, because signal quality is key, A/D

converters are better characterized using analog characteristics such as

SNR, signal range free from spurious noise, and usable bandwidth

(known as Nyquist bandwidth).  The use of these metrics helps ensure

that the critical A/D transition can be accomplished with minimum deg-

radation in signal quality.
An A/D converter can be implemented in many different architec-
tures; the three significant modern architectures are known as flash (or
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES99parallel), subranging, and sigma-delta.  The choice involves trade-offs
between the accuracy and conversion rates. The flash A/D uses the most

hardware and power but also operates at the fastest sampling rates and

produces the largest usable Nyquist bandwidth.  These converters are

generally inadequate because of a lack of dynamic range.  Subranging

A/D converters are slower but offer both the bandwidth and dynamic

range needed for software radios.  Sigma-delta A/D converters generally

have very low sample rates and are appropriate for narrowband applica-

tions.  It is not clear at this stage which technology can be improved most

readily to provide the requisite low-power converters with high dynamic

range that process bits as rapidly as possible.  A demonstration of ultrafast
A/D converters was planned as part of the DOD-funded Millennium

program.  The commercial sector is also performing R&D in this area and

is likely to produce advances that would be appropriate for military ap-

plications.
2.4.2.2  Digital Signal Processors
For the past few decades semiconductor manufacturing has followed
Moore
Õs Law, which predicts that the number of devices on an IC will
double every 18 months.  This trend is directly related to the steady reduc-
tions in the minimum feature size, or linewidth, that can be manufactured

in large volumes.  The Semiconductor Industry Association road map calls

for the production of devices with more than a billion transistors by the

year 2010.  Such densities could enable entire systems to be built on a few or

even a single chip.  Indeed, software radio architectures may be imple-

mented increasingly in small numbers of ICs (see Figure 2-4).
FIGURE 2-4  Future  wideband (i.e., multiband) software radios may implement
some functions, such as analog-to-digital conversion and signal processing, in
single integrated circuits.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSThe several general-purpose, programmable DSPs now on the market
are primarily a customized segment of the IC industry.  Although DSP
speed is improving every year, single-chip performance is still very lim-

ited for software radio applications.  High speed can be achieved with

large arrays of DSPs but the size, weight, power, and cost of this design

are not attractive for small or handheld radio applications.  Because filters

are critical to the performance of a software radio, gains could be achieved

through the use of integrated FIR-filtering ICs.  These devices, developed

very recently, could perform the processing function at a small fraction of

the complexity and cost of a programmable DSP.
24
  Regardless, the rapid
commercial advances in signal processing technology are likely to pro-

duce chips that meet military needs.
2.4.2.3  Filters
Filters influence not only a radio
Õs signal-processing speed but also its
sensitivity, dynamic range, and capability to avert co-site interference.
Their importance is reflected in their physical presence:  Filters constitute

25 percent of the volume of a typical software radio, in part because

several different filters are needed (i.e., for receive preselectors, amplifier

output, local oscillators, and mixers).  Improvements in frequency-tuning

range and selectivity as well as miniaturization would be helpful, espe-

cially for application in handheld devices.  The commercial sector contin-

ues to rely on older technology (e.g., mechanical filters are used in cellular

telephone systems) whereas the military has unique needs to reduce co-

site interference, both within software radios and across multisystem plat-
forms, and cover wide frequency ranges.  Existing radios that span wide

frequency ranges require combined filters made of new materials that

have remarkably flexible and adaptive electrical properties, far beyond

older static inductors and capacitors.  The new materials and modern

filter fabrication techniques will lead to new and smaller implementa-

tions of wideband filtering based on the fundamentals of transmission-

line  techniques.  Thus, filters may merit a significant military R&D in-

vestment.2.4.2.4  Radio Frequency Amplifiers
The commercial sector is designing ultralinear amplifiers that will
process many signals from multiple transmitters and add them coher-
ently to achieve good fidelity.  These designs will improve power effi-

ciency and consume less space than traditional amplifiers.  However, the

commercial sector is unlikely to produce multiband amplifiers, which

will be very expensive, anytime soon.  Alternative materials might offer
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES101advantages in the design of future military systems and could be a topic
for DOD-funded research.
The most important recent development in RF technology is the re-
emergence of semiconductors (i.e., silicon) as an alternative to the semi-

insulator materials (e.g., gallium arsenide) traditionally used for RF de-

vice manufacturing.  Semiconductors offer two advantages.  First, they

form a natural ground plane on an IC such that microwave devices can be

fabricated much closer together, resulting in smaller chips and enabling

the design of circuits that cost less and support higher frequencies and

performance than do conventional circuits.  Second, semiconductors cost

less than semi-insulators because they are produced in higher volumes

(they are also used in the most advanced CMOS microprocessors and

random-access memory [RAM] chips).
As a consequence, silicon is now being used in moderate-performanceRF front ends for cellular and personal communication systems.  Further,

a new technology involving the implantation of germanium atoms in

silicon to create heterojunction bipolar transistors promises an extremely

low cost, silicon-based approach for RF (30 MHz to 2 GHz) and micro-

wave (2 GHz to 40 GHz and above) analog front ends and power amplifi-

ers.2.4.3  Portable Terminal Design
The small size and portability of wireless communicators provide
obvious benefits for users but also introduce challenges for system de-

signers because they limit display, processing, power, and storage capa-

bilities.  The following subsections review the limitations and the new

technologies designed to overcome them.  The commercial sector is mak-

ing rapid advances in all these areas that the DOD can exploit to good

advantage.
2.4.3.1Displays, User Interfaces, and Input Devices
Small, highly portable devices contain relatively low quality displays.
There are three reasons for this.  First, portable devices have limited physi-cal space and power available for the display.  Second, display pixels

cannot be smaller than the resolving limit of the human eye, meaning that

the number of pixels in a given display (i.e., the resolution) is limited.  In

addition, bright colors can be produced only if there is sufficient power

for backlights and display elements; otherwise the display is dim and

monochrome.  For these reasons the user interface of a portable device

needs to be designed for monochrome presentations in a very small screen
area
Ña significant impediment to the display of video or high-quality
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSimages.  Nevertheless, significant market forces are fueling a trend to-
ward ubiquitous information displays, and commercial displays offering

high resolution, full color, and reduced power requirements are likely to

be developed.
Because portable devices lack the space for standard keyboards, icon-
based interfaces and pen-based input have been considered as alterna-

tives.  In some devices the keyboard is replaced with a small number of

function-specific buttons.  These devices still support functionally specific

virtual keyboards, which are displayed on a touch screen and can be

operated by applying pressure to the keys with a stylus.  The pen-based

devices either support handwriting recognition or simply capture pen

strokes (
Òdigital ink
Ó).
Ideally, mobile communication devices will be able to send images
from remote sites.  This capability will be enabled by charge-coupled

devices (CCDs)
25
 and CMOS camera chips.  These chips are already used
in commercial camcorders and have become inexpensive and widespread

as a result.  Highly integrated cameras have been declining in price, and

such a camera is integrated into at least one state-of-the-art Japanese PDA.2.4.3.2  Processors
The successful development of low-power devices with long battery
life has placed limits on the raw performance of embedded processors
because processing speed and clock cycle directly influence power con-

sumption.  New metrics are therefore required to measure the perfor-

mance of processors for portable applications:  millions of instructions

per second (MIPS) per watt, a measure of the impact on battery life and

heat dissipation in highly integrated systems; MIPS per square milli-
meter, a measure of the silicon manufacturing costs of the processor; and

bytes per task, a measure of the amount of memory that devices need to

incorporate to perform signal-processing functions.  Because consumers

are demanding highly integrated yet portable computing devices, the

commercial sector is performing R&D with the aim of increasing proces-

sor capabilities while also reducing power requirements.
2.4.3.3  Batteries
The commercial sector has made tremendous strides in battery tech-
nology in recent years because it plays a role in many technologies, rang-
ing from surgical implants to electric cars.  Nickel cadmium (NiCd) bat-

teries are the most widely used rechargeable batteries, found in many

consumer electronic devices.  Most laptop computers now use nickel metal
hydride batteries, which have slightly better energy storage per weight
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES103and substantially improved energy storage per volume.  Lithium ion(LiIon) batteries are used in some new portable products, such as small

cellular telephones.  The energy-storage capacity of LiIon batteries is more
than twice that of NiCd technology by both weight and volume.  Lithium

polymer (LiPoly) batteries are about 10 percent more efficient than are

LiIon batteries.  Both LiIon and LiPoly batteries use solid electrolytes,

making it possible to form the battery into arbitrary shapes, a significant

improvement over other battery technologies.
2.4.3.4  Storage
The disk-drive capacity of information processing devices continues
to increase while physical size shrinks, but the 2.5-inch disk widely used
in notebook and laptop computers is still too large for handheld devices.

In PDAs the disk is replaced by RAM in the form of battery-backed-up

static RAM and flash RAM on personal computer multiple component

interface access (PCMCIA, or just PC) cards, which can cost 30 times more

than disk storage per megabyte.  Commercial R&D in this area is produc-

ing steady, impressive advances that are likely to meet military needs.
2.5  SUMMARY
The design of wireless communications systems presents countless
challenges.  Some solutions are available and many more are on the hori-

zon.  Although the review presented in this chapter is general in nature,

consideration of this information in the context of DOD
Õs needs suggests
a number of areas deserving careful attention in the design of future

military systems.
Specifically, network architecture is a fundamental issue that defines
all other aspects of the system design.  The basic choice is between a peer-

to-peer and base-station-oriented design, but there are also other ques-

tions related to how infrastructure elements are connected and the nature

of communications with other networks.  The commercial and defense

sectors have differed in their choice of network architectures in the past

and continue to have some different needs and concerns.  The selection of

an optimal military network design could be assisted by simulation and

modeling.  However, current tools are inadequate to the task of modeling

an untethered communications system that uses wideband signals and

advanced components such as software radios.
The DOD also has unique needs for interoperability and security of
communications systems, although commercial concerns about system

integrity and service availability are growing.  The evolution of software

radios will enable interoperability among advanced and legacy systems,
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSbut this technology presents co-site interference problems that will re-
quire new solutions.  Similarly, the available AJ and LPD/I technologies

will need to be complemented with security advances that accommodate

global, heterogeneous communications systems and multiple security lev-

els.  The emergence of wideband, programmable radios for military ap-

plications will also depend on advances in hardware components such as

antennas, which need to be designed for mobile units, and filters, which

need to be miniaturized and designed for wideband applications.
These issues are examined further in Chapter 3, which explores the
opportunities for synergy between the commercial and military sectors in

the development of advanced wireless communications systems.
NOTES1.These error rates are associated with the link layer of the OSI model and
are commonly accepted as tolerable for these applications.  At higher levels of theOSI model the use of error-correction protocols can improve the rates.2.These definitions apply only to unmodulated waveforms.  Modulation
changes the phase and frequency with time (see Section 2.1.3) such that the defi-
nitions are no longer accurate.3.There are numerous path loss models that conform to a variety of propa-
gation mechanisms, including free space, reflection, diffraction, scattering, or
some combination of these (Rappaport, 1996).
4.The relationship is L = 
Pr/Pt
 = K/
f2dn, where 
Pr
 is received power,
 Pt
 is
transmitter power,
 f is the center frequency of the transmitted signal, and K is a
constant that depends on the average path loss at a reference distance
 d0 from thetransmitter (
d0 is the far field of the antenna, typically 1 m for indoor environ-
ments and 0.1
Ð1 km for outdoor environments).  The exponent
 n is the path loss
exponent.5.This analysis is based on the assumption that the channel is changing
slowly enough to allow for adaptation, and that the channel fading can be esti-mated accurately at the receiver and this information fed back to the transmitterwith minimal delay.6.A RAKE receiver produces a coherent sum of individual multipath com-
ponents of the received signal.  The components can be weighted based on their
signal strength to maximize the SNR of the RAKE output.  The sum provides an
estimate of the transmit signal.  A RAKE receiver is essentially another form ofdiversity because the spreading code induces a time diversity on the transmittedsignal such that independent multipath components can be resolved.
7.If multiple systems share the same bandwidth without any channel access
coordination and are not interoperable, then some technique is still needed to
enable efficient operations.  Etiquette rules permit incompatible systems to coex-
ist when using the same bandwidth (whereas interoperability requires standard-izationÑagreement on all waveforms and protocols before systems are built and
deployed).  The Wireless Information Network Forum, an industry group, has
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES105defined etiquette rules for the unlicensed personal communications bands and
has taken the same basic approach for the 60-GHz spectrum allocation
 (Steer,
1994)
.  The key elements of etiquette rules are (1) listen before transmitting to
ensure that the transmitter is the only user of the spectrum, thereby minimizing

the possibility of interfering with other spectrum users; (2) limit transmission
time to allow others to use the spectrum in a fair manner; and (3) limit transmitter

power so as not to interfere with users in a nearby spectrum.
8.For many networks, including voice-oriented cellular networks, the num-
ber of transmitters active at any one time is much smaller than the total number

of possible transmitters that need be recognized by the hub station.  The unpre-
dictable and dynamic nature of the set of active transmitters clearly precludes the
fixed assignment of separate channels to each transmitter.
9.Simultaneous detection of multiple users is not currently possible because
of the increased complexity required in the receiver.  Multiuser detection schemes

also require low BERs because bits that are incorrectly detected are subtracted

from the signals of other users, possibly causing those signals to be decoded in
error as well.
10.These analyses are based on simplifying assumptions about the hardware
and communications environment; many of these assumptions would break

down in a real operating environment.  Moreover, it is not known which tech-
nique has a higher spectral efficiency in flat or frequency-selective fading, par-

ticularly when countermeasures to fading are used.
11.Techniques are available to avert the delay.  For example, a certain num-
ber of packet slots can be allocated for unreserved transmissions using a conten-

tion scheme.  The successful sending of a packet in this slot is taken as a request

for a reserved slot (or two) in the next round-trip.  As long as the slots are used
this reservation continues to be available, and as long as there is capacity the
reservation is allowed to grow.  But the reservation is abandoned as soon as the

sender does not use the slot.  This approach involves no delay (except for conten-
tion failures on the first packet), poses contention issues only for the first packet
in a burst, and matches the natural behavior of the TCP slow-start phase (which

is described later in this chapter).  However, for applications that alternate a short
message in each direction (e.g., transaction processing) the procedure still pro-
duces latency equal to one round-trip for each message, and, assuming fixed-

length slots and a perfect fit between the data to be transmitted and a slot, has a
fundamental throughput limit of 33 percent.  If the transmission is smaller than a
slot, then the throughput will be even lower (and lower still in many realistic

applications with short transaction times).  If the information to be transmitted is
less than or even comparable to the amount of information required to set up the
DAMA resources, then efficiency will be compromised.
12.Assuming that a collision results in the loss of two packets, the maximum
throughput in an ALOHA channel is about 18 percent of the peak data rate if the

probability of a collision is to be reduced to a level acceptable to the user.  Vari-

ous modifications of ALOHA channels, such as slotted ALOHA or CSMA/CD,
can increase efficiency, but they also impose restrictions on data transmission.
13.The latency of Mobile IP is typically much less than a second
Ñthe time it
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStakes for one round-trip between the foreign agent and home agent, or perhaps
two round-trips counting the time for message receipt verification.
14.Route optimization is an enhancement to the base specification for Mobile
IP and has not to date reached an equivalent level of standardization within the

IETF.  Mobile IP is a proposed standard (RFC 2002
Ð2006), whereas route optimi-
zation has yet to be standardized or shown to be interoperable in multiple imple-
mentations.15.A typical simulator accepts as input a description of network topology,
protocols, workload, and control parameters.  The output includes a variety of

statistics, such as the number of packets sent by each source of data, the queuing
delay at each queuing point, and the number of dropped and retransmitted pack-
ets.  Visualization packages have been developed to allow the simulator
Õs dy-
namic execution history to be made visible to the network designer.  The simula-
tors are designed in such a way that they can modified easily by users.
16.Recent research has investigated the adaptation of compression algo-
rithms to a channel of varying quality (i.e., a channel with fading or varying noise

or interference levels).  Such adaptation can reduce distortion significantly.  This
design is based on the idea that, because the transmission rate is constant, this

rate needs to be divided between the compression algorithm and the channel
code.  The optimal way to divide the transmission rate and minimize distortion is
the following:  On a channel with high SNR, no channel coding is needed, and all

the rate is allocated to the compression scheme; as the channel quality degrades,
more of the rate is allocated to the channel coding to remove most of the effects of
channel errors.  However, joint compression and channel coding creates some

problems.  First, this approach requires that the compression algorithms, which

typically sit at the application layer, have access to information about the link
layer, which means that the layer separation of the open-systems interconnection
model breaks down.  Second, the design can become very complicated.  It is often

easier to design the compression algorithms and the channel coding indepen-
dently and then 
Òglue
Ó them together (the compression and coding communities
prefer this approach because they have developed separate languages and per-
spectives, which make it difficult for them to work together).  Some future cellu-
lar systems will implement a crude form of this joint design using 
Òvocoders
Ó(compression schemes for voice) that operate at multiple rates.  If the channel has
a high SNR, then the higher-rate vocoder (which performs poorly at low SNRs) is
used, and the vocoder rate is decreased as the channel quality decreases.
17.The Internet community is carrying forward two proposals for real-time
service:  Guaranteed service provides per-flow hard guarantees (i.e., no statistical

aggregation or probabilistic bounds), whereas controlled-load service provides a
probabilistic bound based on aggregation of a number of real-time flows into one

scheduling class.  Although guaranteed service provides a delay bound that is
computed in advance, controlled load provides a bound that is stable but not
explicitly computed.  The application must adapt to the service it receives.  Both

are set up using RSVP.  The soft and hard states differ in terms of what happens
when a route fails.  In ATM the connection is cleared and no traffic is delivered
until a new connection is established.  In Internet/RSVP the packets start flowing

once the routing tables have found a new route, but only with default QoS until
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LIMITS, TRADE-OFFS, AND CHALLENGES107RSVP reestablishes the state.  In both cases the new request may fail if there is not
enough capacity after the failure.
18.The Wireless ATM Working Group of the ATM Forum (an industry
group) is addressing the problems of end user mobility.  This effort may be the

only avenue for extending ATM to the end user.
19.Latencies in the wireless channel are not only high but also variable over
time because of fluctuations in retransmission.  Forward error correction can miti-
gate this problem somewhat but imposes a penalty even when the channel qual-
ity is good.
20.Because of the error characteristics of wireless links, some of the QoS
issues need to be addressed locally at the link layer rather than from an end-to-

end perspective.  The DARPA PRNet had a strategy of accomplishing enough at

the link level that TCP could handle the remaining reliability issues.  However, this
approach requires interaction between the link layer and higher layers (e.g., if the
link layer needs to implement a stronger channel code, then its transmission rate

may be reduced or its delay increased).  In addition, the wireless channel may be so
degraded that little can be done at the link level to improve matters.  There needs to
be a way to cope with this situation through higher-layer protocols.
21.Software security is another category but it is not unique to wireless com-
munications and therefore is not addressed here.
22.Some security concerns are being alleviated in the transition from analog
to digital systems, which offer an inherent advantage because the meaning of a
pattern of 1s and 0s cannot be casually discerned.
23.For example, systems based on the GSM standard keep the key in a sepa-
rate smart card, not in the telephone.
24.For example, most contemporary software radios use commercial filters
by Graychip, Inc., or Harris Corp. for highly programmable channel access to
FDMA, TDMA, and CDMA systems with the low size, weight, and power of

ASICs.25.A CCD detector turns light into an electric charge, which is then trans-
formed into the binary code recognized by computers.  Some commercial cam-

eras use this technology, but they remain expensive.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS1083Commercial-Defense Synergy in
Wireless Communications
Wireless communications technology development is a complex pro-
cess that includes interactions between the commercial and military sec-
tors.  An understanding of these interactions, including the opportunities

for and barriers to synergy, is crucial to an evaluation of the potential for

expanded military use of commercial products.  Building on the historical

and technical foundation provided earlier in this report, this chapter iden-

tifies broader organizational and R&D issues that need to be addressed to

ensure that the DOD fields affordable, state-of-the-art untethered com-

munications systems that meet future military needs.
Wireless technologies are often transferred among government, in-
dustry, and academia.  Such interactions take place through multiple

mechanisms, sometimes in a continuing cycle from the commercial to the

defense sector and back again (see Box 3-1).  The synergy can evolve

either during the initial research or after technologies are developed.  For

example, the DODÕs funding of basic academic research on wireless tech-

nologies and networking (currently through the DARPA GloMo program)

creates an active technology base for use in both military and commercial

industries.  Similarly, there is overlap within companies that have both

commercial and defense divisions.  Most large corporations also support

academic research to gain access to important new concepts.
This chapter examines how this synergistic process might be lever-
aged to meet future military needs in untethered communications.  Sec-

tion 3.1 provides a brief overview of military use of commercial wireless

products.  Section 3.2 identifies the motivations and opportunities for
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS109commercial-defense synergy in the development of wireless technology.
Section 3.3 outlines the barriers to synergy posed by mismatches between

commercial capabilities and military needs and operating requirements.

Section 3.4 examines three broad issues that need to be addressed in the

design of future wireless systems for defense applications.  Section 3.5

reviews the relevant defense technology policy issues.
3.1  OVERVIEW
Myriad wireless technologies have originated within the government.Satellite programs initiated by the federal government in the early 1960s

produced technologies that were quickly adopted for commercial use,

starting with INTELSAT in 1965 in the United States and other countries

in the 1970s.  Another important government-initiated technology was

packet switching, developed by DARPA (then known as ARPA) in the

late 1960s.  This advance led to commercial and military packet-switched

systems worldwide as well as to the Internet.  The government also led

the work on advanced coding techniques (for recovering data from deep-

space probes), spread-spectrum techniques, signal and data encryption,

and more recently on-board digital processing.  All of these technologies

have been adopted by commercial enterprises.
1BOX 3-1Handie-Talkies Serve Both Military and Commercial NeedsIn 1940 Motorola developed the first handheld two-way radio, the Handie-Talkie, a 2.3-kg AM unit with a range of 1.6 to 4.8 km.  Within three weeks of U.S.
entry into World War II, Handie-Talkie production exceeded 50 units a day; by1945 more than 130,000 units had been built.  In 1942 MotorolaÕs design for the
worldÕs first portable FM two-way radio, the SCR-300 backpack unit, won a compe-tition to replace an older Army Signal Corps radio, the Òwalkie-talkie.Ó  The SCR-300 weighed almost 16 kg, had an average range of 16 to 32 km, and could be
tuned to various frequencies in the 40Ð48 MHz band.  Motorola police radios wereused in the ArmyÕs first radio relay system for behind-the-lines communications andits first radio teletype hookup.  After the war, Motorola introduced the first commer-

cially available portable radiophones, the Handie-Talkie radio line.  A fully transis-torized, VHF pocket transmitter version was developed in 1960.  A fully transistor-
ized, portable two-way radio was developed in 1962; its weight of approximately 1
kg was reduced by almost half in 1969.  These devices have evolved into Motoro-laÕs current line of cellular telephones.  Component technologies from commercialcommunications equipment are now designed into future generations of military
equipment, thus furthering the ongoing cycle of commercial-defense synergy.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSConversely, the U.S. military uses many commercial communications
products.  The military uses a variety of commercial systems, including
satellites developed in the mid-1970s to transfer weather data to com-

puter processing centers and disseminate the processed data; commercial

satellites and land-based services to transport military-encrypted com-

munications links; VSAT networks operating over commercial satellites

to disseminate logistical and weather data; satellite video teleconferenc-

ing networks to provide training and distance learning to the National

Guard and reserve units and for telemedicine applications; and access-

management approaches such as TDMA.
The ongoing synergy between the commercial and defense sectors is
readily apparent in satellite communications.  The introduction of com-

mercial satellite communications in 1965 was limited to very small satel-

lite payloads and required very large Earth stations to receive the very

weak signals (e.g., INTELSAT Earth stations required antennas 100 feet

in diameter).  A 1971 experiment clearly demonstrated the feasibility of

providing satellite communications
Ñincluding digital voice, data, and
fax services
Ñto ships at sea.  However, the business aspects of such
services were not strong enough to justify the required investment in

satellite and ground control systems.  Subsequent events led to a con-

tract between COMSAT, an international industry consortium, and the

Navy to provide a GEO satellite system with an added commercial L-

band package for ship-to-shore use.  This agreement eventually led to

INMARSAT, now widely used not only by large ships (e.g., tankers,

cruise ships) but also by pleasure craft and mobile users around the

world, who can transmit and receive data and voice via low-cost, brief-

case-sized terminals.  Terminals are also used on transoceanic airline

routes for navigation, control, and passenger telephone calls.  An

INMARSAT spin-off, ICO, is building a MEO mobile telecommunica-

tions system using 12 satellites.
Similarly, the introduction of commercial DBS sparked military inter-
est in developing the GBS to satisfy broadband data requirements in all

environments, including the battlefield, ships, and logistics.  The architec-

tures of Ka-band (superhigh frequency, or SHF), high-speed interactive

systems planned for commercial operation by the year 2000 will have an

impact on the ultimate GBS design in the near future.  Ultrasmall-aper-

ture terminals in these systems will be able to transmit several megabits

per second and receive 100 Mbps from a 24-satellite constellation.  The

GBS has been designed to leverage the current DBS satellites through

modifications such as moveable spot beams and different frequency

bands.The opportunities for defense use of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
products depend in part on the particular characteristics of a military
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS111operation.  For the purpose of analyzing communications requirements,
military activities can be divided into the following four categories:
¥Non-mission-critical operations 
require general communications in-
frastructure to provide logistics, training, entertainment, and general ad-

ministration.  For these activities, the military has either purchased COTS

systems or leased services operated over commercial carrier systems.  For

example, the Army Training and Doctrine Command uses a commercial

teleconferencing system based on a VSAT to provide training to the Na-

tional Guard as well as telemedicine services.
¥Limited peacekeeping missions,
 such as the Bosnia deployment, can
feature a mix of COTS communications equipment (primarily VSATs and

video teleconferencing) and military systems.
¥Regional conflicts,
 such as Desert Storm, can feature a mix of COTS
and military systems depending on the threat to commercial assets.  Con-

flicts of this type seem likely to benefit from the use of emerging COTS

systems (or derivations) such as satellite-based personal communications

and broadcast data satellites.
¥Strategic/global conflict requires the use of ÒsurvivableÓ militarycommunications systems whatever the cost, implying reduced use of

COTS systems.
3.2  MOTIVATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY
Two key factors currently motivate the DOD to seek commercial prod-ucts and services.  First, the size of the business and consumer markets

and the nature of many commercial practices help achieve economies of

scale at many levels.  Second, commercial approaches to R&D reduce

cycle time such that advances in technical performance can be integrated

into field operations in a timely manner.  The DOD therefore has both

economic and functional reasons to adopt commercial products and ap-

proaches when they meet
Ñor could be adapted to meet
Ñdefense com-
munications requirements.  The commercial equipment is likely to cost

much less overall than would equivalent defense-unique systems.  Fur-

thermore, because commercial industry evolves very rapidly in response

to a competitive marketplace, the DOD can leverage commercial develop-

ments to field equipment that offers advantages in size, weight, power,

bandwidth, or performance much more rapidly than is possible using

traditional defense procurement practices.
Economies of scale are extremely important in the development and
deployment of commercial products.  Firms seek a balance of cost and

quantity when deciding whether and how to enter business or consumer

markets.  As examples, business products such as VSATs are built in
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSvolumes of thousands per month, and consumer products such as
DirecTV (see Box 3-2) are manufactured in quantities of hundreds of thou-

sands per month.  The cost-quantity relationship forced the semiconduc-

tor industry, which originally evolved to support military and space ap-

plications, to switch to a commercial focus.  As shown in Figure 3-1, the

commercial market for semiconductors soared, whereas the defense share

declined.  In 1975 worldwide military purchases of semiconductors to-

taled $700 million, approximately 17 percent of the global market

(INSTAT/SIA Information Services, 1997).  At that time all major semi-

conductor manufacturers had military-quality product lines, particularly

for high-reliability and extreme-temperature applications.  By 1995 the

military share of the market had dropped to less than 1 percent (INSTAT/

SIA Information Services, 1997).  Most major semiconductor manufactur-

ers have announced the phasing out or termination of military product

lines.  Now military contractors must use either commercially available

parts or obsolete, but military-quality, semiconductor parts.
The commercial sector far outpaces the defense sector in production
rates and volumes, not only for final products but also for subsystems and

components.  The largest DOD acquisition of communications equipment

is the SINCGARS radio:  The DOD has purchased 75,000 units over 10
BOX 3-2DirecTV Receivers: An Example of the Volume-Cost RelationshipA DirecTV receiver consists of an 18-inch antenna and a sophisticated mecha-nism for receiving a 40-Mbps, digitally mutiplexed data stream.  With more than 1million units sold in the first year, these receivers are among the fastest-growing newproduct lines in the consumer electronics industry.  DirecTV receivers were intro-
duced at a list price of $700; after 2.5 million units were sold, the price dropped bynearly 50 percent because of competitive market pressures and economies of scale.Impressed by the capability of such a small receiver system, the Navy and otherservices determined that DirecTV technology could be adapted to meet the militaryÕs
broadband transmission requirements.  However, the quantity needed by the mili-taryÑhundreds of terminalsÑis significantly smaller than the commercial market.  If
a DirecTV-like receiver were developed as a stand-alone military product, then thecost per unit might be hundreds of times higher than the commercial price becausethe development, tooling, and manufacturing-setup expenses would be amortized
over a smaller production base and optimized for smaller production volumes.  Three
years after DirecTV was announced, the services were still working to define a mil-itary version.  Had the features necessary to support military needs been considered
before the product design was finalized, the DOD could have taken advantage of thecost reductions enabled by the market growth.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS113years of production.  In contrast, commercial production of land-based
mobile radios is in the range of 400,000 units per month, and cellular

radios are produced in volumes exceeding 2.5 million units per month for

the largest suppliers.  To meet such market demands a typical cellular

telephone factory might produce 5,000 telephones a day.  Another factor

distinguishing the two sectors is the open, competitive environment of

commercial production.  The market pressure for improved quality, pric-

ing, and other features is felt by all commercial competitors, whereas the

defense market has typically been limited to a few and sometimes just one

contractor.The next four subsections examine economies of scale manifested in
several areas of commercial technology development:  design, produc-

tion, maintenance, and training.  The fifth subsection reviews how cycle

time can be reduced, thereby moving technical advances into the field

quickly and also lowering costs over the life of a product.
3.2.1  Design Reuse
Commercial communications equipment typically is produced with a
basic design that has a 2- to 5-year life span.  The components used in that

design are selected in the 1 or 2 years just prior to product introduction

and typically represent the then-current state of the art in performance

and cost effectiveness.  Thus, during the product life the components
FIGURE 3-1  The world military share of the world semiconductor market dropped
from 17 percent to 1 percent between 1975 and 1995 (the line graph, which corre-
sponds to the scale on the right).  During the same time period, the commercial
market soared from $4.2 billion to $144 billion (the left bar graph for each decade)

while the military market grew only slightly (the right bar graph for each decade).
SOURCE:  Joseph Neal, Commercial Plus Technology Operations, Motorola, Inc.
Reproduced from Bradley (1996), with permission from the Semiconductor In-

dustry Association and World Semiconductor Trade Statistics.
1975198519950204060
80100
120
140
160
18011441.8240.74.20020406
08
10
12
14
16
18Military % of World Semiconductor MarketWorld Semiconductor Market ($B)The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSremain cost-effective for the suppliers and are manufactured using state-
of-the-art, cost-effective manufacturing facilities.  Manufacturers typically
anticipate new features in the market by modifying the design to use new

components after 2 years of production.  They also use components and

manufacturing processes that are within a generation of the then-current

state of the art, thereby operating close to the optimum level of cost effec-

tiveness.  By contrast, military equipment is often outdated:  SINCGARS

was designed more than 10 years ago, for example.
Commercial firms achieve the initial economies of scale through de-
sign reuse.  The use of previous hardware and software designs can often

save 50 to 80 percent of development time because detailed design docu-

mentation can be readily reproduced and design weaknesses can be

largely eliminated using experience as a guide.  Although the design cycle

is not a major contributor to the economic cost of a commercial product, it

is typically a large part of defense deployment cost.  The DOD typically

does not reuse hardware designs, instead relying on independent 
Òstove-
pipe
Ó systems, which are optimized to solve a specific problem.  Some
efforts have been made to create software libraries for reuse.  Increased

reliance on common building blocks could significantly reduce design

cycle time (see Section 3.2.5).
3.2.2  Production Learning Curve
The learning curve is a statistical tool used to predict production costs
and plan and control production.  The curve is based on the assumption

that there is a relationship between the time required to build a unit and

the number of units that have been built; specifically, the learning process

reduces the time needed to produce a unit as the cumulative number of

units produced rises.  It follows, then, that the less time it takes to build a

unit, the lower the cost of that unit.  If the cost of producing a unit follows

an 80 percent learning curve, then there will be a 20 percent reduction in

cost per unit each time the total number of units produced doubles.  In the

example shown in Figure 3-2, the first unit took 100 hours to build and the

second unit took 80 hours, or 80 percent of the time and cost involved in

building the first unit.  The 10th unit required 48 hours, and the 20th unit

required 80 percent of that effort, or 38 hours.  The major factors that

affect the cost of production are the initial cost, or the starting point of the

curve, and the rate of improvement or learning, or the slope of the curve

(Anderlohr, 1969).
The implication of the learning curve is that large volumes of stan-
dardized items, produced continuously (i.e., without significant hiatuses),
reduce the cost per unit.  Heeding this message, commercial production is

fairly continuous, fluctuating somewhat with the demands of the market
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS115but generally changing processes gradually and with few interruptions.
Although customized versions of products are increasingly in demand,

the basic platform is usually consistent and the adaptations are minimal.

By contrast, defense programs frequently begin with the building of only

a few units, perhaps a few hundred, to determine feasibility or fulfill a

limited need.  Often these units are produced in numerous small batches

with interruptions between the production cycles.
Cost management is practiced throughout the design and production
of commercial products.  For example, production volume typically needs
to be known before detailed designs can be completed.  The component

costs, labor costs, and investments in labor-saving manufacturing devices

are factored into the final design of a consumer electronic device.  Large

production volumes enable the manufacturing of designs that would not

be viable at smaller volumes.  A significant example is the fabrication of

customized ICs with many functions that normally would be imple-

mented in separate ICs.  The large volume reduces the overall cost of

components, parts, and assembly, even after the nonrecurring investments
are taken into account.  Another example is the design of electronic equip-

ment for cost-effective manufacturing.  These designs typically feature

modules that snap together and minimal numbers of wiring bundles,

fasteners, moving parts, and different part types.  Costs are reduced fur-

ther through incremental production changes.  During the repetitive com-

mercial design and production cycles, the boundaries between system,

subsystem, unit, and component begin to blur as automation enables
larger and larger subsystems to be treated as components.  In this way,

what was once a high-technology system (e.g., computer memory) be-

comes a commodity part.
Following the lead of the commercial sector, the DOD might achieve
some economies of scale in production by revising its procurement prac-
FIGURE 3-2  As more units are produced, manufacturing costs per unit decline
steadily.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONStices to make large-volume purchases of basic COTS communications
equipment for entire departments at one time.  Some isolated efforts have

been made in this regard, but there are ample opportunities to expand

this approach.
3.2.3  Maintenance and Logistics Support
Economies of scale can be achieved in the maintenance of equipment
after it has been developed and fielded.  Equipment occasionally fails in

the field because of design defects, manufacturing defects, worn-out

mechanisms, lightning or power surges, or simply heavy use.  Sometimes

fielded equipment is upgraded during maintenance procedures to add

new features or functions.
In the commercial sector field-failure data are typically analyzed on
highly automated equipment, which can trace failures to specific modules

and components and automatically update design and component his-

tory databases, including any links to environmental factors.  Design up-

dates are inserted into the manufacturing process throughout the com-

mercial life of a product, thereby improving its robustness.  After

approximately one year of production, experience with field failures of-

ten has produced the feedback necessary to eliminate most design de-

fects, reduce manufacturing defects to a level consistent with the current

state of the art, and generally achieve the best product possible within

price constraints.
Consumers rarely, if ever, pay for the maintenance or repair of low-
cost communications equipment.  Rather, warranties and service con-

tracts are often viewed as a necessity in maintaining complex products

that are not easily repaired; products are often replaced if they need re-

pairs after the warranty expires.  Viewing warranties as insurance poli-

cies, or guaranteed streams of income, specialty maintenance companies

have emerged to provide a variety of maintenance tasks, both on site and

at the factory.
In the defense sector, communications equipment is often maintained
by the acquiring agency rather than the manufacturer, typically at greater

expense.  Typically a module is replaced and the equipment is retested, a

strategy that usually finds the primary defect but sometimes misses mar-

ginal problems elsewhere.  Large numbers of spare components need to

be kept available, either in replacement modules or in component form

such that modules can be manufactured, throughout the useful service

life of the system.  The supply of spares is often threatened when, because

of the small production volume, the supplier no longer finds the compo-

nent profitable to produce.  When this occurs the manufacturer usually

notifies customers of an 
Òend-of-life buyout.
Ó  The customers then try to
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS117project future needs and purchase enough components to satisfy them
(not always at competitive prices). The DOD is known for keeping com-

munications equipment in service far beyond the life span of equivalent

commercial technology; typically, military systems are removed from ser-

vice only after catastrophic failure.  Defense equipment is often kept in

use for 20 years, whereas component suppliers often set product lifetimes

at less than 8 years; thus, the military needs to stockpile approximately 10

years
Õ worth of components.  Under normal circumstances, the DOD as-
sumes that 25 percent of its equipment will need to be refurbished at

some point.
The additional maintenance costs associated with traditional defense
acquisition could be reduced if manufacturers
Ñwho can efficiently ana-
lyze all field failures, suggest redesign enhancements, and redesign com-

ponents and modules to enhance cost effectiveness and other features
Ñprovided for maintenance and logistics support when appropriate.  In

addition, a reevaluation of military equipment maintenance practices may

be warranted in light of the capabilities of advanced communications and

transportation systems.  Defense acquisition systems have historically

provided logistics support for rapid equipment repair (i.e., within a few

minutes of field failure) anywhere in the world by staging replacement

modules near locations where critical equipment is in use.  Such an ap-

proach may no longer be necessary.
3.2.4  Training
The commercial sector achieves additional economies of scale in train-ing.  The expense of user, logistics, and support training is built into the

cost of new product introductions, and training is subsequently converted

from expensive formats (i.e., personal, face-to-face support) to videotape,

interactive CD-ROM manuals, on-line help, and literature.  By contrast,

the training of defense maintenance and logistics support personnel of-

fers few economies of scale.  Training materials are developed, but they

are neither as detailed nor as widely distributed as are commercial manu-

als.  Indeed, defense support training can remain somewhat diffused and

superficial because the military uses so many types of equipment and

relatively small numbers of each type.  As the DOD purchases more COTS
products, the use of commercial training materials might be appropriate.
3.2.5  Cycle Time
Commercial product design cycles, which usually last from one to
four years, are set by competitive pressures:  The first company to market

a product with a new feature can reap large increases in market share and
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSprofitability.
2  A new commercial communications product is released
every few months.  Manufacturers therefore begin to field test and opti-
mize the features of products before the designs are completed, accelerat-

ing the development process by several years.  This environment fosters

the introduction of new and improved technologies at a very rapid pace,

often at a low incremental cost to consumers.  Companies gain additional

reductions in cycle time by designing products to accommodate new fea-

tures on each new production run, often every six months.
3  These ad-
vanced commercial technologies are then available for rapid insertion

into commercial or defense applications.
The military product design cycle is much slower.  It begins when a
contract is awarded and ends with delivery of the final product, which is

not field tested or optimized until the design is completed.  The developer

does not have sufficient control over systems integration, testing, and

evaluation to perform concurrent engineering that would reduce overall

cycle time.  Further delays are imposed because training, logistics, mar-

keting, and distribution processes are not generally developed concur-

rently with manufacturing tooling equipment as they are in commercial

systems.A key design feature affecting cycle time is the ease of upgrading
equipment.  Commercial baseline products are designed to accommodate

hardware and software extensions throughout the planned lifetime of the

product.  This is critical because of the high cost of the wireless infrastruc-

ture.  The longevity of the infrastructure depends on a complex trade-off

between the equipment offered by vendors and the pace of change in

services.  Typically service providers have a detailed road map that iden-

tifies when new services will be offered; these services are selected based

on the equipment available at a reasonable cost and the market demand

for a profitable service.
Commercial upgrades to accommodate new services and changes in
market direction are generally implemented through software updates

rather than more-costly hardware changes.  Therefore, software plays a

growing role in product development and cycle-time planning.  Software

is also often used to correct hardware problems, such as designs that were

oversimplified to meet a price point.  In such cases new software require-

ments are discovered late in the product development cycle, meaning that

software is the last element to be developed and may be installed either

just before or even after production.  Yet software updates need to be

thoroughly tested and tolerant of all environmental and loading factors.

As a result, the software development process is now of great interest.

The quality and timely release of software as well as software-defined

infrastructure services are therefore becoming critical factors in the com-

mercial communications industry.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS119Military radios, by contrast, are typically optimized to meet a single
specification rather than designed for easy upgrading.  Moreover, when
upgrades are possible they usually can be implemented only by the origi-

nal vendor.  An exception is SpeakEASY, which was designed to support

hardware and software extensions through its open architecture.  Emerg-

ing military requirements (e.g., interoperability, open architecture) are

driving the trend toward more flexible systems such as software radios.

With the role of software expanding in both sectors, the commercial expe-

rience in software management may offer lessons for the DOD.
Both sectors are concerned about retaining the use of legacy equip-
ment.  As the complexity and cost of each new generation of infrastruc-

ture rise, the effects of obsolescence become more important to system

planners, investors, and consumers.  Concepts such as backward compat-

ibility, while ill defined, have a very pragmatic meaning in the consumer

electronics business:   A technological advance should not result in denial

of service to owners of older systems.  Backward compatibility is also

important to the military, which is likely to continue using legacy equip-

ment for some time to come.
3.3  BARRIERS TO COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY
Although many defense communication needs can be met with com-
mercially available equipment, a variety of barriers prevent a complete

match across all systems.  For example, commercial-defense synergy is

not appropriate in the development of some highly specialized or classi-

fied command-and-control systems.  There are organizational limitations

as well.  Traditional government acquisition has led to a large number of

stovepipe systems, which are developed by a single contractor, meaning

that other contractors cannot compete for follow-on development or pro-

duction.There are additional concerns regarding industry
Õs current capability
to meet the unique requirements of some military systems.  In the wake of

cutbacks in some procurement programs, many defense communications

suppliers have begun to develop a commercial orientation to preserve

their technology and manufacturing base.  Commercial applications are

attractive not only because of the vast market but also because they are

not subject to federal and defense acquisition regulations:  The supplier

benefits from simplified accounting and has greater freedom to structure

the details of contractual agreements.  In the past, an increase in contracts

was sufficient to rebuild capacity following a period of reduced defense

spending.  Now, however, action might be necessary to ensure that criti-

cal design and manufacturing capabilities are not lost altogether.
In view of the need to maintain surge capacity for those times when
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSsudden military action is needed,
4 the declining industrial interest in mili-
tary communications systems makes it all the more important to under-
stand
Ñand either overcome or accommodate
Ñthe barriers to commercial-
defense synergy.  These barriers include the risks of military dependence

on the commercial sector, the contrasting approaches to making trade-offs

between cost and complexity, and differences in communications infra-

structures.3.3.1  Risks of Dependence on Commercial Technologies
The DOD assumes certain risks when using commercial technologies.
Most importantly, significant military use of commercial technology in-

creases the possibility that a potential adversary could have or gain de-

tailed knowledge of the systems.  In the case of computer networks, the

defense infrastructure is built almost entirely of widely available comput-

ers, software, and networking components.  An adversary could exploit the

known weaknesses of these components, a possibility that has prompted

efforts to improve network robustness.  Any weaknesses in the commercial

communications infrastructure might be vulnerable to similar exploitation.
One solution is to use communications equipment that is unavailable
to potential adversaries.  Such products include those subject to U.S. export

controls, which are intended to keep certain advanced technology products

and weapons systems away from designated hostile countries.  Several

types of advanced commercial communications technologies, including
those involving extensive computations or spread-spectrum techniques,

fall into this category.  It is difficult to gauge the impact of international

technical awareness of military effectiveness because technology is only

one of several influences (the others include strategy, tactics, training, and

weaponry).  Critics of export controls contend that many affected technolo-

gies are readily available from offshore sources and that the controls serve

only to reduce sales for U.S. manufacturers and provide evidence of who is

acquiring these commodities.
5  But with the rapid evolution of commercial
wireless technologies, especially software-based systems that could be con-

verted to implement new waveforms or military countermeasure capabili-

ties, there is also an argument for strengthening controls on the export of

certain advanced communications technologies.  Although the issue is be-

yond the purview of this committee, a review of export controls may be

warranted.Another risk of commercial dependence is the sometimes-hidden dif-
ficulty of making what seem initially to be simple modifications to COTS

systems.  End-to-end encryption or AJ technologies, for example, might

be added to a commercial system to meet military security needs.  How-

ever, given the high commercial production rates, such modifications are
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS121often very difficult to implement.  For example, the key interface signals
or connections could be embedded in an IC and unavailable for special-

ized wired connection to an add-on feature.  The safest strategy for the

DOD is to use a common baseline technology and common components

but pursue a separate design effort.  In addition, the DOD could partici-

pate in standards-setting activities to encourage the development of base-

line commercial equipment designed to accommodate the addition of

militarily useful features.
A third concern is the availability of commercial systems in wartime.
Many of the largest satellite networks, including those shared by the U.S.

military, are owned or operated by international consortia.  Although

these providers are reliable partners in peacetime, whether they would

give DOD priority or expanded bandwidth during times of conflict is

unclear.  Such preferential service could be hampered by the operators
Õneed to serve other customers or possible unwillingness to provide sup-

port in a controversial conflict.
3.3.2  Trade-offs Between Cost and Complexity
Perhaps the most obvious barrier to direct commercial-defense syn-
ergy lies in the contrasting strategies used to make trade-offs between

system cost and complexity.  As a potential user of commercial services

the DOD has certain expectations, many of which are requirements if it is

to fulfill its mission.  In a number of dimensions, these expectations are at

odds with the criteria used by commercial communications services in

designing and deploying their products.  Simply stated, the military has

some extraordinary needs, whereas the commercial sector tends to focus

on delivering reliable but ordinary service.
3.3.2.1  Performance Issues
For example, the military expects to use leading-edge technology.
The present analysis is based on the assumption that the DOD cannot
achieve its mission with technology that is inferior to that of an adversary.

It is also assumed that every adversary
Õs technology is state of the art.  But
commercial communications services are rarely based on the most ad-

vanced technology available.  Rather,  providers deploy technology based

primarily on its cost effectiveness and affordability, that is, whether cus-

tomers are willing to pay for the capability.
6  Over time, production vol-
umes increase and costs decline, but the initial costs of an advanced tech-

nology can be a barrier to its commercial application.
The DOD also requires that certain functional capabilities (assuming
they are technologically feasible) be deployed in any location where the
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSmilitary needs to operate.  Military operations are extraordinary events in
which communications traffic is unpredictable, driven by the characteris-

tics of the individual operation.  Yet the cost of an inability to communi-

cate can be very high, and so the probability of such a breakdown needs

to be kept very low.  By contrast, commercial communications providers

have limited resources and cannot cover every service area that could be

profitable.  Commercial systems are designed to serve a particular area

for many years with slow changes in technologies, features, and volumes.

To minimize life-cycle costs, such systems are based on fixed facilities that

cannot be deployed or shifted rapidly to meet an immediate demand.

Commercial wireless systems are generally engineered to meet the peak

traffic requirements of the average business day.  They are not designed

to meet the requirements of extraordinary events under emergency con-

ditions, even regular and predictable ones.
7Similarly, commercial and defense equipment differ in their tolerance
for unusual environmental conditions.  Military units are likely to en-

counter extreme environments such as jungles, deserts, or polar regions

and be subjected to the harsh conditions of battle.  Therefore, regardless

of the added cost and system complexity, defense communications equip-

ment needs to be designed and built to tolerate extreme temperatures,

submersion, high levels of shock, explosions, and vibration.  By contrast,

commercial manufacturers and consumers are unlikely to incur addi-

tional expenses for equipment that operates under extreme conditions.  In

fact, consumers often favor the least expensive product over one with the

best performance, warranty, survivability, and advanced features.  Con-

sumer products such as telephones are designed to survive reasonable

levels of wear and tear and perform under moderate environmental con-

ditions.3.3.2.2  Quality and Testing
Military communications equipment can be highly complex and pose
difficult testing and diagnostic challenges.  For example, a military sys-
tem can encompass networks of computers, each running a real-time suite
of applications in support of a system-level application.  When a safety or

mission-critical function is involved, elaborate procedures are followed to

provide for multiple redundancies, failure detection, independent soft-

ware development, and cross-checking to ensure reliability.  But exhaus-

tive testing to identify problems that have an extremely low probability of

occurrence (e.g., once every few hundred thousand instructions) may not

be cost-effective if there are no safety implications or critical effects on

performance.  In cases that may not justify exhaustive testing, new work

in formal methods (i.e., mathematical techniques that obviate the need to
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS123test every possible situation) holds promise for further reducing the like-
lihood of rare anomalies.
There is a widespread perception that defense equipment is tested
much more thoroughly than are commercial products.  In truth, commer-

cial testing procedures vary widely but can be quite rigorous.  For ex-

ample, manufacturers of industrial-grade communications products have

largely adopted high levels of integrated quality control.  In the semicon-

ductor industry, firms expend significant resources even after a chip is

designed to create an exhaustive test pattern capable of catching both

design and manufacturing flaws.
8  Many vendors have adopted processes
that are comparable in function to those required for defense equipment,

although the conditions are likely to be less extreme.
9  Likewise, commer-
cial electronics systems have improved in recent years because consumers

now demand unprecedented quality and reliability, even under environ-

mental conditions that just a few years ago would have been considered

strictly military grade.  Table 3-1 displays the stringent test parameters for

one modern commercial product, a car radio.  Drivers now view the

performance of a radio as reflecting on the quality of the vehicle.  As a

result, most of the environmental qualification tests for a car radio are

actually comparable to tests conducted on a high-performance Navy jet

fighter.As a result of these trends, some commercial products may be tested
thoroughly enough to meet defense needs without further testing under

military conditions.  In some cases, it may not be cost-effective for the

military to test and inspect commercial components already shown to

have very low failure rates.  This is most likely to be the case for equip-

ment that has few moving parts and is designed for human use under

extreme conditions.
TABLE 3-1  Commercial and Military Testing Parameters
Environmental Test ParameterDelco AM/FM RadioHughes F-14 Radar
Low-temperature storage40 C62 CHigh-temperature storage 85 
C 95 CHigh-temperature endurance 70 
CNot testedStill-air operation 35 CNot testedLow-temperature operation40 C18 CHigh-temperature operation 70 
C 71 CRandom vibration0.05 G per hertz0.015 G per hertzShock20 G per 11 milliseconds15 
G per 11 millisecondsHumidity90% @ 65 C85% @ 71 CPower/temperature cycling1,000 cycles
Not testedExplosionNot testedTestedxxxThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS3.3.3  Infrastructure Differences
The differing expectations of defense and commercial customers af-
fect communications infrastructures.  Cellular customers want to be able
to make calls whenever they wish.  Military users have much more com-

plex needs for security, LPD/I capabilities, concealment of network func-

tions, message priority and preemption, tolerance of severe environmen-

tal conditions, and, perhaps most crucially, the capability to work without

any fixed infrastructure.  These needs generally preclude the use of anten-

nas on fixed towers, highly engineered site installations, site-specific an-

tenna selection, microwave links to central switching offices, and

preplanned routing tables for switches.  (Exceptions include permanent

posts and fortifications and a considerable amount of mobile infrastruc-

ture mounted on trucks, trains, and large aircraft.)
In operations other than war, the use of existing local communica-
tions infrastructure (where available) can offer tremendous cost and per-

formance advantages.  It remains crucial, however, to provide military-

grade security when using cellular communications or other wireless data
services; such security measures need to be interoperable with the U.S.-

based military communications infrastructure, including the Secure Ter-

minal Unit III (STU III; the government standard in secure telephony) and

related systems, and the array of secure networking products (e.g., the

network encryption system [NES] equipment for strategic defense net-

works).
10
  The DOD is addressing these issues through the CONDOR
program, which is developing a cryptography module for cellular tele-

phones used by the military (commercial versions are already on the

market, and additional spin-offs are likely).  The system will be inter-

operable with STU III.  The security of local infrastructures remains an

issue, however, as does the continuing need for interoperability among

defense networks.
11
In regions lacking a local communications infrastructure, substitutes
will soon be available.  The Iridium, Teledesic, and GBS satellite systems

will provide worldwide communications.  The military could also use

unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs; special aircraft that can fly along a

programmed set of waypoints and perform programmed tasks) as high-

altitude platforms for communications and reconnaissance services.

Among their advantages, UAVs weigh less than manned aircraft (leaving

more room for payload) and have no need to carry life-support systems

such as oxygen and emergency ejection equipment.  The UAVs could

serve as relays between wideband satellite links and battlefield communi-

cations systems, carry sensors, jam or otherwise attack enemy informa-

tion systems, and even provide positioning information in the event that

the GPS is shut down during hostilities to prevent its use by adversaries.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS125The high-altitude endurance system (a UAV-based airborne sensor sys-
tem) and the airborne communications node (ACN)
12
 UAV-based plat-
form are designed to be cost-effective, multipurpose platforms delivering

C4I capabilities.
3.4  DESIGNING WIRELESS SYSTEMS FOR
MILITARY APPLICATIONS
As noted previously in this report, some features required in defense
communications equipment are not generally available in standard com-

munications products and could be difficult to add.  Some advanced fea-

tures, such as LPD/I and AJ waveforms, interoperability with the DOD
Õsnearly two dozen legacy waveforms, or highly specialized spreading wave-

forms, may be attainable only in specialized military systems such as the

SpeakEASY software radio.  The following sections discuss the design of

future wireless systems for defense applications, focusing on three key

issues:  network architecture; security; and multimode, multiband systems.

Some commercial products could be adapted to meet defense needs in

these areas, but specialized military research will likely be needed.
3.4.1  Network Architecture
3.4.1.1  Network Design Issues
Most commercial communications infrastructures use a base-station-
oriented architecture, in which communication flows between a base sta-

tion (equipped with a well-sited antenna and a high-power transmitter)

and wireless terminals.  Cellular, paging, trunked radio, and various data

radio services use this model.  This design is not entirely appropriate for

military communications infrastructures, which need to allow for immedi-

ate deployment with no set-up time, no siting advantages, minimal an-

tenna advantages, and continuous movement of all network participants.
The DARPA GloMo program has focused on peer-to-peer, multihop
packet radio networks.  However, there are valid questions about the

suitability of a peer-to-peer model for military command-and-control hi-

erarchies as well as the RF link penalty paid by this design.
13
  The GloMoperspective was expanded recently to include other architectures, but the

program has never assessed all the possible choices, even though network

architecture forms the basis of any telecommunications system.  Among

the issues to be addressed are peer-to-peer versus base-station-oriented

design, connection-oriented versus connection-free architecture, single-

channel (e.g., Ethernet) versus two-channel structures, bandwidth issues,

and protocol selection.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSFor example, the choice of a connection-free architecture is particu-
larly important for applications that are intermittent in content, as is typi-
cally the case in battlefield situations.  (The inefficiencies of a connection-

oriented architecture are discussed in Chapter 2, Sections 2.1.6.2 and
2.1.6.3.)  The choice of a two-channel architecture can be particularly im-

portant if, as is often the case in military applications, much more data are

delivered to a client than are received from the client.  This design enables

maps and situational-awareness data, for example, to be disseminated in

a battlefield without any multiple-access penalty to an unlimited number

of receivers.  Meanwhile, location information, such as identification and

coordinates, can be sent from many field areas in short, spread-spectrum

bursts over a separate multiple-access channel.
Numerous research issues need to be resolved before a military topol-
ogy with optimum performance and overhead can be defined.  Continu-

ing R&D and demonstration projects over the next decade will help de-

fine the basis for commercially successful standards, which may or may

not suit military needs.  Current commercial systems treat each applica-

tion separately, whereas the military probably needs to take an integrated

approach.  However, many commercial designs, such as the following

eight examples, could have military applications.  These designs would

need to be analyzed and perhaps modified before their application to

military systems.  Even so, the effort would likely yield a considerable

savings to the DOD.
Enterprise Networks.  Enterprise networks are being deployed worldwide
based on standards such as ATM, X.25 (a standard interface for packet
network access), frame relay (a potential successor to X.25), and TCP/IP.

The products include comprehensive WAN solutions that encompass
multiple technologies such as LAN/WAN interconnections, dynamic

routing, accounting, statistical information, and performance monitoring.

Some new architectures unite connection-oriented WANs with connec-

tion-free LANs over both narrow and broadband channels.  Critical ques-

tions remain to be answered about the suitability of this technology in the

battlefield environment; these are issues that could be addressed as part

of a broader assessment of military network architectures.  System plan-

ners need to minimize the vulnerability of centralized control points and

determine the bandwidth required to distribute routing information up-

dates on degraded channels as units move around the battlefield.
Cellular Telephone Systems.  Commercial cellular networks consist of both
analog and digital systems conforming to various standards.  With cell
sizes of up to 10 km, these systems can cover a broad area, sometimes

including wireless local loop service.  The technical feasibility of using
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS127cellular systems in a battlefield environment requires further study.  For
example, cellular systems introduce special complexities because of the

need to hand off transmissions between cells.  Performing a handoff when

system coverage may be incomplete over the theater is an elaborate pro-

cess; equally complex are the rules for assessing when a handoff might be

advantageous in light of possible jamming.  Furthermore, mechanisms

still need to be developed for authorizing access in a mobile tactical net-

work.  In cellular systems, these activities are performed in the cellular

mobile switching office using the home location register.
Low-Tier Systems. 
 In contrast to cellular systems, low-tier systems use
low-power microcells of up to a few hundred meters in radius, small
rather than tower-mounted antennas, and 32,000-bps voice coding for

high quality and low delay.  These systems are designed to serve users

moving at pedestrian speeds.  They are also suited to wireless local-loop

applications because the round-trip delay is under 2 milliseconds, the

quality of speech is comparable to that for wired services, and the short

distances between hub stations and users generally result in low fade

levels.  Given these features, low-tier technologies could play a role in

military communications.
Authentication and roaming capabilities are also provided in current-
generation PACS and PHS systems.  Packet-transfer protocols are being

developed that will enable low-tier systems to serve as the transport
mechanism for a wireless LAN while simultaneously carrying voice traf-

fic.  Commercially, the most successful low-tier system is PHS, which

serves several million subscribers in Japan.  The PACS system, developed

in the United States, has not attracted significant markets to date but is the

focus of active R&D efforts.  Areas of investigation include techniques to

incorporate flexible antennas and channel equalization to extend the range
of PACS systems, especially to high-speed mobile applications.  To deter-

mine the applicability of PACS and other low-tier systems in the battle-

field environment, system planners need to address various issues, in-

cluding security, antennas, adaptive waveforms, and operating range.
Radio LANs.
  The PACS system provides a protocol that is ideal for wire-
less LAN applications.  The PACS packet channel (PPC) protocol pro-
vides the user with a variable bandwidth and asynchronous, asymmetri-

cal data service at rates up to 256 kbps per radio port.  The PPC converts

the physical layer of PACS from a circuit-switched protocol to a packet-

switched protocol consistent with TCP/IP.  The current voice-PACS ar-

chitecture is capable of circuit-switched connections, with a radio port

control unit at the hub providing connectivity into the public telephone

system.  The radio LAN PACS has a distributed hub architecture, appear-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSing to the user like a device connected to a wired LAN, when in fact it is
connected to a radio transmitter.  A radio port can be configured to pro-

vide packet data on some time slots and voice on other time slots.  Radio

ports are small units that are easy to install, require no special towers, and

can support up to 238 users each.  The LAN PACS system can provide a

quick, efficient means of installing a wireless LAN.  The PACS technology

is an open standard, which makes it easy to obtain equipment.
Local Multipoint Distribution System and Related Technologies.  Ka-band(SHF) frequencies are now being used in wireless cable connections link-
ing end users, urban fiber loops, and local telecommunications bypass

companies.  The frequencies involved are the 18
Ð19 GHz band, known as
the digital electronic message exchange; the 27.5
Ð30 GHz band, known as
the local multipoint distribution system (LMDS), which is used in some

locations as a one-way television delivery system (
Òwireless cable
Ó); and
the 38
Ð40 GHz band, which can be used for line-of-sight (LOS) data trans-
mission at rates of up to 155 Mbps.  The last band is used extensively in

Europe for backhaul transmissions of personal-communications signals

from base stations to mobile switching centers.  Because LMDS and re-

lated systems offer high throughput, they could be useful to the military

in short-range (approximately 5 km), nonmobile elements of untethered

communications systems.  Further study is required, however, because

the system would require a high SNR to be demodulated correctly and

might not be suitable in the presence of jamming.
Line-of-Sight Relays.
  The introduction of wireless cable systems has led to
the development of high-speed LOS relays.  These devices provide wide-
band access through a remote hub in areas lacking direct LOS access to a

primary hub station.  The relays generally operate at low power because

the antennas pointing in both directions (i.e., toward the primary hub and

the users) are parabolic dishes with very narrow beam widths rather than

the sectorized antennas used in wireless cable systems.  Among other

advantages, LOS relays operate continuously and therefore do not re-

quire burst-mode modulation.  Systems based on relays are actually sim-

pler in design than are wireless point-to-multipoint systems.
Satellite Networks.  
The DOD currently takes advantage of VSAT and tele-
phony Earth stations for information gathering and two-way, transac-
tion-oriented traffic.  Approximately 40 hubs exist around the world,
which could be used to backhaul PACS or cellular wireless nets deployed

in the field.  Regional and global mobile-personal-communications sys-

tems (e.g., Iridium, ICO, Globalstar) are being developed for deployment

around the year 2000.  These systems are being designed to operate in
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS129either L-band (UHF) or S-band (UHF/SHF) frequencies.  Broadband Ka-
band satellites (e.g., Teledesic) are being designed to use high-speed, in-

teractive, low-cost Earth terminals.
Satellite traffic service levels for LEO and MEO systems tend to run
an average of 0.05 to 0.2 erlangs (i.e., the channel is occupied 20 percent of

the time) per square kilometer.  Planned systems are expected to have

spot-beam capabilities that will increase traffic service levels by several

orders of magnitude, but DOD battlefield communications needs will

likely exceed the service level of any single system.  Because the link

margin varies with the square of the range, shorter links provide greater

advantage.  Therefore, battlefield communications services will need to

be supported with a hierarchy of links that graduate in altitude according

to the transmission distance.  Satellite communications will play a role

but many types of systems will be required, including handheld units,

vehicular and aeronautical platforms, and high-altitude UAVs.
Network Management Systems. 
 Network managers enable a central con-
troller to monitor and change system parameters using standard soft-
ware, graphical user interfaces, and relational databases.  The controller

isolates faults, produces status summaries, keeps usage statistics, and

changes configurations.  As these functions become standardized, the

DOD could adopt commercial network management systems as a means

of simplifying enterprise network operations.
3.4.1.2  Bandwidth Requirements
Battlefield communications currently consist mostly of voice and a
very limited amount of text-message traffic.  Communications equipment
is not broadly available to individual soldiers below the noncommissioned
officer ranks.
14
  Approximately 10 percent of soldiers now have voice
communications, and only satellites, certain aircraft, and smart missiles

carry sensors for still imagery or video.
The digitized battlefield of the future is based on the concept, verified
by the Gulf War, that extensive real-time data gathering and surveillance

can improve situational awareness and battle management.  Military com-

manders want an accurate, real-time image of the total battlefield that

indicates the positions of friendly and enemy forces; provides still and

video images as well as data from infrared, radar, and other sensors; and

is integrated with communications systems to ensure that the right infor-

mation is distributed wherever needed.  The realization of this vision will

require significantly higher bandwidth, both on a link-by-link basis and

in the aggregate (bits per second per cubic kilometer), than is now pos-

sible on the battlefield.  Indeed, assuming that all future ground troops
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSare equipped with communications and image sensors, there will be or-
der-of-magnitude increases in both the numbers of users and the band-

width required for imagery, as the data will flow higher and farther in the

military hierarchy than voice typically does.  Moreover, users will not be

willing to spend half an hour delivering a single image, nor will their

batteries tolerate such loads.  New systems will be needed to provide

higher bandwidth and hierarchically sensitive store-and-forward net-
working that will minimize the power required to transmit wideband

signals.The commercial sector has focused primarily on providing as many
narrowband voice channels as possible.  Wideband applications such as

remote surveillance systems are becoming common in the industrial sector,

and video-on-demand and video games are potential commercial markets.

But unless substantial markets emerge for high-bandwidth services, the

commercial sector will be slow to produce high-bandwidth wireless com-

munications products that exploit the results of the third-generation R&D

efforts described in Chapter 1.  Military system planners have one advan-

tage over their commercial counterparts in that mobile soldiers often oper-

ate within a short distance of a vehicle.  In the digitized battlefield concept,
many military vehicles could be equipped with radio equipment that can

serve as high-power repeaters and may have very-high-gain antennas rela-

tive to those on the handheld units.  Although practical levels of transmit

power and antenna gain depend on the carrier frequency used, the avail-

ability of well-equipped vehicle platforms will make it feasible to transmit

imagery to and from soldiers with handheld units.
The DOD
Õs combined requirements for real-time data traffic and high
bandwidth suggest that ATM technology, which is expected to be popu-

lar commercially, might be appropriate for battlefield systems, at least

within the wired network.  This technology operates at high bit rates

through fiber-optic interconnections.  Fixed-size data units (53-byte cells)

facilitate efficient switching while connection-based semantics (i.e., vir-

tual circuits) enable bandwidth to be allocated before a connection route

is established.  In addition, ATM switches can provide sophisticated

mechanisms for choosing how to multiplex flows, thus offering a variety

of QoS levels for different types of traffic.  Finally, ATM supports message

priority, queue management, and admission control mechanisms to yield

performance guarantees.
The seamless integration of ATM and TCP/IP technology into the
wireless battlefield communications architecture would not be a trivial

undertaking.
15
  Gateway functions will likely be provided at hierarchical
RAPs, nodes that provide a variety of cross-networking, repeater, and

other information services.  The implementation issues are widely de-

bated in the network community (and extensively studied in the ATM
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS131Forum) because ATM
Õs mechanisms for end-to-end QoS cannot be sup-
ported directly by current Internet protocols.  An ATM-only solution is
also problematic for many reasons, most significantly because it is impos-

sible to guarantee QoS for wireless systems in motion (the link margin is

continually changing and the signal can be lost completely).
16
  Thus, wire-
less-link-level protocols of increased sophistication will be needed to en-

sure that data can be delivered successfully across the link while still

meeting the QoS guarantees given during connection setup.  The com-

mercial sector is likely to resolve these technical problems eventually, but

the DOD would do well to stay close to these debates to ensure that its

interests are represented.  Support for research and prototype develop-

ment, coupled with testing of emerging technologies in battlefield exer-

cises, could be useful government roles.
The use of GBS services will enable the direct delivery of wideband
services to the battlefield and provide terminal integration opportunities

for the 
Òsmart push, smart pull
Ó concept (in which the warfighter receives
customized data in a timely fashion without expending much effort to

define the needs).  Real-time, in-theater sensors will provide more recent

information and more immediate task assignments than will DOD
Õs satel-
lite assets; thus the realistic information flow model is within the battlefield,

with copies back to the Pentagon.
17
  In the Army
Õs vision for the digitized
battlefield of the future, bandwidth is allocated not only up and down the

command hierarchy but also horizontally to cooperating formations.
3.4.1.3  Source Coding
In current voice coding technology, speech is compressed with many
different compression algorithms to bit rates ranging from 300 to 64,000
bps.  Voice quality and compression factors have improved over two

decades of research to the point that, in moving voice traffic, linear pre-

dictive coding (LPC) and other voice coding technologies enable com-

pression ratios of 26 to 1.  Even greater compression is possible to provide

additional LPI and AJ advantages but at the cost of reduced speech qual-

ity and increased delay.   Encoding of data has also been reduced to a

well-known process, thereby providing a standardized method (e.g., us-

ing the Lempel-Ziv algorithm [Ziv and Lempel, 1978]) for both commer-

cial and defense applications.
There is now great interest in coding of not only voice but also sound,
images, and video.  Reasonable-quality compressed video suitable for

conferencing applications can be achieved with video encoders and de-

coders operating at 64 to 128 kbps, the equivalent of a dozen digital voice

channels in commercial cellular systems.  Videoconferencing will require

substantially higher bandwidth and will need to demonstrate operational
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSeffectiveness if it is to be used extensively on the battlefield.  Similarly,
high-resolution still or sensor images (e.g., a small image of 480 
 640
pixels at 30 bits per pixel) will require representations of well over a

megabyte, far exceeding the capabilities of existing tactical radios such as

SINCGARS, which transmits data at about 2.4 kbps (requiring an hour to

transmit the image just described).
Standards are under development and chip sets for standardized imple-mentation have recently become available for defense and commercial pur-

poses.  The most notable standards are the joint picture experts group

(JPEG) and motion picture experts group (MPEG), which encode images,

including the high-energy, low-frequency components.  Image coding was

developed for military reconnaissance but is also used in full-scale video

teleconferencing; many military users are mobile and communicate through
wireless links, whereas commercial users are stationary and connected by

fixed, high-quality transmission systems.  (Commercial-defense synergy is

a tradition in source coding, as described in Box 3-3.)  Image coding and

video source coding technologies can compress a typical still image by a

ratio of up to 100 to 1; newer technologies offer up to four times the com-

pression of deployed systems.
BOX 3-3Commercial-Defense Synergy in Source CodingSource coding technologies have often been shared by the commercial and de-fense sectors.  An early example was Sigsaly, a World War II voice communications
system that relied on a tractor trailer full of security equipment (which today wouldbe referred to as a channel bank ÒvocoderÓ). After the war, AT&T explored manycommercial spin-offs of this technology, leading to the spectrograph and several
technologies for voice coding.  Source coding became more sophisticated as semi-conductor technology replaced vacuum tubes and greater functionality was achieved
in a smaller package and at lower cost.  One result was continuously variable slope

delta modulation, widely adopted in defense and civil government applications for
secure communications.  The next major step was the development of linear predic-tive coding (LPC), which uses a mathematical model of a voice signal and enables
speech to be represented at 2,400 bps, a rate low enough to be combined withavailable modems to provide real-time, secure voice communications over dial-uptelephone lines.  This discovery was widely used in secure defense communication
in the form of the STU III telephone, which continues to feature this data rate.  Exten-sions to the LPC source coding technology developed to the point that the speechquality at low bit rates was acceptable for commercial purposes.  These approaches
were adopted in several digital cellular communication standards, combined withmultiple access techniques, and used to develop unique standards.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS133Compression ratios and image quality are likely to improve with time,but the evolution of the commercial technologies has been constrained by
the wide proliferation of the JPEG and MPEG standards and the tools

built around these standards.  Furthermore, commercial data and video

coding standards have not yet evolved to be robust in the presence of the

bit errors introduced by wireless transmissions.  Continued improvements
in source coding technologies are needed so that the bit rate required for

faithful reproduction of information can be limited and the DOD can

control the growth of its bandwidth requirements.  An additional concern

is the vulnerability of commercial source codes to jamming, an issue that

could be addressed by research on adaptive waveforms.
The extent to which the DOD will use compression and decompres-
sion techniques to reduce its bandwidth requirements is unknown, and so

it is difficult to predict the impact of advanced data file compression.

However, because imagery represents a large component of the data traf-

fic supporting defense activities, at least some benefits are likely.  There

would be some costs involved:  New software would be needed for work-

stations, and new compression technology would need to be deployed

into sensor assets.
18
  But as the use of advanced collaborative planning
and intelligent databases grows, specialized or localized compression
strategies on database file transfers will help control the pressure for ad-

ditional communications bandwidth.
3.4.1.4  Highly Adaptive Systems
Advanced modulation and smart radio technologies offer the prom-
ise of flexible, dynamically changing communications systems that can
adapt to almost any conditions.  Such systems will be able to select modu-

lation, spreading code, and FEC and interleaving algorithms that will

perform optimally in any environment
Ñeven in the presence of noise,
jamming, or interference
Ñwhile also meeting QoS requirements for de-
lay as well as data rate requirements.  When applications can detect pre-

vailing channel conditions and the radio system and external networking

options can support adaptation, the user can gain at least an order-of-

magnitude improvement in range, bandwidth, and AJ or LPI capabilities.
Ongoing research in this area has several shortcomings from the mili-
tary perspective.  The commercial sector is pursuing extensive R&D but

its interest in adaptive systems is motivated by profit (e.g., accommodat-

ing more users per hertz), whereas the military seeks functional advan-

tages such as increased interoperability and AJ capabilities.  The DOD

also supports research on adaptive systems, in part through the GloMo

program, but the technologies are generally not demonstrated and tested

under military conditions.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSFor example, existing network protocols are generally designed for
static configurations and high-quality broadband links.  In packet radio
networks, discovery algorithms (which identify neighbors as each radio

moves about on a network) determine the proper store-and-forward se-

quence for moving communications traffic toward specific destinations.

These algorithms are now being developed, assessed, and standardized.

To minimize overhead and streamline the discovery process, routing in-

formation servers are provided by the network that mobile units can

query to determine who is connected and select the latest optimized rout-

ing paths to a specific destination.  These algorithms have not been tested

in military networks where mobility and network survivability under

degraded channel conditions are of primary importance.  The relative

amount of overhead in a highly dynamic environment
Ñincluding de-
graded channels
Ñneeds to be modeled in more detail.
Military systems will benefit further if source coding, cryptography,
and antenna beam performance can also be adapted to prevailing channel

conditions.  The TCP/IP suite tries to deliver data without errors.  In

wireless military applications it is likely to be preferable to trade off bit

errors (and the delay tolerated by the application) against the quality of

representation of the original information.  In voice applications, for ex-

ample, users are often willing to tolerate occasional distortions of isolated

words (but not entire sentences) but are intolerant of delay.  Reconnais-

sance systems may require that no transmission errors will be acceptable,

whereas other image delivery systems may allow a moderate number of

localized image distortions, in exchange for more rapid delivery.
3.4.2  Security
Communications and network security have attracted attention re-
cently under the umbrella of information warfare issues.  Enhancements

can be made readily in the wired infrastructure but are more difficult in

wireless networks, especially packet radio systems for which protocols

are still in the formative stages.  Commercial and defense communica-

tions networks face different threats.  Commercial providers are most

concerned about the fraudulent use (theft) of service, whereas users of

these systems are most anxious about improper access to and manipula-

tion of their data.  The military, which is often both provider and user,

seeks to protect all aspects of its communications
Ñnot only the message
but also the source and destination information, the inner workings of its

equipment, and even the existence of a network.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS1353.4.2.1  Availability of Service
The commercial and military sectors have different concerns with
respect to service availability.  For commercial systems the primary issue
is interference among users.  This type of interference is well modeled,

usually has stationary properties, and can be countered with thoroughly

studied solutions.  Hostile jamming in a military conflict creates a totally

different type of interference, which cannot be mitigated using ordinary

approaches.  Hostile jamming can create a situation in which no usable,

undistorted parts of a message are received.  Other forms of jamming

include intentional disruption of key information bits in messages, play-

back of old messages that are no longer relevant, or transmission of noise

sequences to trigger false receiver actions.
A determined electronic attack on a military communications network
could not be countered by any existing commercial equipment or any

simple modifications to such equipment.  Furthermore, it is unlikely that

any future commercial system could satisfy military AJ requirements to the

degree offered by defense-unique systems.  Current military systems with

AJ capability include the SINCGARS and Have Quick radios and MILSTAR

satellite system.  Because equipment used for jamming is becoming easier

for potential adversaries to obtain, there is a growing need for development

of advanced AJ techniques such as nulling and scanning antennas, spread-

spectrum modulation, approved secure-spreading codes, elaborate error

detection and correction, time-stamped messages, adaptive jammer-sens-

ing techniques, and adaptive jammer-responding modems.
Access to commercial communications networks generally cannot be
denied to segments of the population that have the proper equipment

and, if necessary, are willing to pay for service.  This feature is unattrac-

tive to military planners, who would prefer that communications systems

offer normal service to friendly customers while blocking access by ad-

versaries.  Weather broadcasting, for example, is a vital part of tactical

planning, yet most standard commercial systems cannot simultaneously

guarantee the delivery of weather reports to critical commercial services

while denying such reports to the enemy.  A variety of technical ap-

proaches, similar to those used to control access to DirecTV and DirecPC,

are available to safeguard broadcast digital data.  Cryptographic codes

and secret information exchanged in advance can enable selective access

to some broadcast information.
3.4.2.2  Confidentiality and Integrity
Defense systems secure both the message data and, in a separate
process, the routing information.  Existing security systems cannot pre-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSvent an adversary from detecting the presence of military communica-
tions.  Information about the battlefield, important targets, and plans of

interest can be inferred based on the volume of communications to and

from particular locations, and much can be learned about routine military

activities from the modeling of communications traffic.  As stealth air-

craft, ships, and other vehicles are deployed, it is critical to guard against

the detection of these platforms based on their radio communications.
The DOD uses LPD/I systems to hide the evidence of radio transmis-
sions.  These systems rely on unusual transmission frequencies, spread-

spectrum techniques, narrow-beam antennas, low-power transmission,

or very brief messages.  By reducing an adversary
Õs awareness of trans-
missions, LPD/I systems also minimize jamming efforts and their impact.

Communications systems with these features can be of great value in

many military applications because they deprive adversaries of informa-

tion about deployment of troops, routine versus unusual operations, the

communications hierarchy, and level of alertness or activity.  However,

advanced LPD/I communications techniques have not been strongly sup-

ported in recent years.
Commercial systems offer considerably less protection.  For example,
cellular communications can be easily detected, jammed, or demodulated

and user location can be pinpointed readily.  Equally vulnerable are com-

mercial CDMA systems, which are based on direct-sequence spread spec-

trum with published spreading codes and do not provide LPD/I capabili-

ties.  Current digital wireless standards make provisions for privacy and

authentication to block unauthorized use, but cellular wireless standards

make no provisions for traffic security, meaning that information about

the routing, content, and significance of the data can be intercepted.  Sig-

naling information is sent in the clear, although the identity of the caller is

protected by an identification number known only to the user and the

system (or is temporarily assigned by the system if the user is roaming to

a new location).  In packet-switching protocols, ATM, frame relay (an

interface for packet network access), and fiber-optic networks, all ad-

dressing and signaling information is left unprotected so that switching

or routing equipment can also read and interpret addressing, routing

priorities, and other information contained in the headers.
Commercial service providers are not expected to expend significant
resources to harden commercial infrastructures against attack, although

they want to prevent losses resulting from fraud.  Careful design strate-

gies will be required to deter both fraudulent use and attacks, threats that

will be nearly indistinguishable on a mobile packet data network.  The

growing use of such networks will motivate commercial research aimed

at solving these problems.  Yet even if the commercial sector achieves

significant security advances, the DOD is likely to prefer at least some of
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS137its own approaches because COTS technologies would be readily avail-
able to adversaries.
One area where military R&D could be helpful is encryption, which
protects voice, data, or video in an information frame or packet.  A typical

encryption system for real-time communications involves a cipher that

encrypts the relevant bit stream one bit at a time.  The decryption process

requires both the relevant decryption key as well as synchronization be-

tween the sending and receiving process.  (Synchronization refers to the

assurance that a particular bit being decrypted in fact corresponds to the

bit that was originally encrypted and sent to the receiver.)  In principle,

synchronization requires only knowledge of the starting point of the in-

coming bit stream, but in practice, establishing and maintaining synchro-

nization throughout the duration of the transmission is complex.  Current

cryptographic systems are often inefficient because the synchronization

consumes bandwidth and because synchronization may be performed

packet by packet.  (Any user of the STU-III secure telephone system can

attest to the time it takes to achieve end-to-end synchronization.)  The

design of improved synchronization algorithms would streamline the se-

curity system and free up bandwidth for other uses.
3.4.3  Multimode, Multiband Communications
Interoperability has long been a goal of military systems.  There are
more than 17 different U.S. defense communications networks, and the

sharing of messages among them requires the deployment of many

unique information gateways or bridges.  Furthermore, compatibility
among U.S., North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), European, and

United Nations systems is increasingly important to military operations.

For example, one report on the Bosnia Implementation Force notes that

close air support missions can involve British Harriers, NATO E3-A (air-

borne warning and control system) aircraft, Norwegian forward air con-

trollers, and Swedish-led brigades (Allard, 1996).  The establishment of

fully interoperable radio networks will require multimode, multiband

communications capabilities, which are the focus of several DOD-funded

research and demonstration programs.
The military ideal of a multimode, multiband radio implementing
many different waveforms over a broad frequency domain does not have

a commercial counterpart, although commercial technology that would

support multiple standards is being explored under the European RACE

and ACTS efforts.  Existing multimode commercial systems have at most

six different types of waveforms, each one generally restricted to a nar-

row frequency range, sufficient to access all of the wireless services that

an international traveler is likely to need.  The commercial sector is un-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSlikely to support additional waveforms because of the costs involved,
whereas the military would almost certainly pay for them to gain the

added functional flexibility.
3.4.3.1  Software-Defined Radio
Software radios are evolving in both the defense and commercial
sectors.  The military version is intended to enable interoperability among
defense networks, reduce logistics support costs, and provide the capabil-

ity to add new functions to fielded equipment through software updates.19The  commercial work is driven by the need to accommodate the large

number of standards used in mobile telephony.  The design of common

hardware for a wide range of applications would offer convenience to

consumers and simplify manufacturing; however, the ultimate popular-

ity of these systems will depend on whether they prove to be cost com-

petitive with multiple dedicated implementations.
Several DOD-funded experimental models have been built.  In field
demonstrations, SpeakEASY was shown to be capable of receiving com-

munications from the Air Force and translating them for the receivers and

networks used by Army ground forces.  The four-channel radio is com-

patible with some legacy waveforms and spans frequencies from 2 MHz

to 2 GHz.  The ACE, JCIT, and Millennium programs are not yet com-

pleted.  Software radios are also being designed under the GloMo pro-

gram to have adaptive interference-rejection capabilities.  It is not yet

clear whether any of these systems will offer the performance and cost

effectiveness needed to initiate a production program.
Most commercial dual-mode digital cellular and personal-communi-
cations units can implement multiple transmission and reception formats

using DSP software.  Information about commercial radios still in devel-

opment is typically not publicly available.  There are undoubtedly plans

to make software radios, which will likely be less flexible than are mili-

tary versions.  The commercial radios may contain software that is not

intended to be changed after manufacturing.  Furthermore, they will likely
not offer the frequency range, extent of waveform synthesis, or sophisti-

cated security expected for military applications.
Meanwhile, the commercial sector has focused intensive R&D efforts
on various radio components to achieve incremental, practical advances.

The DOD can expect to take advantage of the rapid commercial progress

in many components
ÑA/D converters, DSP chips, RF amplifiers, display
elements, processors, batteries, and storage devices
Ñwhich will probably
drop in price over the next several years.  However, as discussed in Chap-

ter 2 (Section 2.4), the DOD will likely need to develop its own specialized

filters that can accommodate a broad range of frequencies and band-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS139widths, as well as antennas that offer both frequency and beam-shape
agility.When all the functions of a radio are defined by software, the 
Òintelli-
gence
Ó and network services offered by the radio can be extended to
greatly enhance military applications and perhaps eventually lead to in-

telligent radio services in commercial applications as well.  Smart radios

(i.e., radios capable of optimizing frequency, modulation, and protocols

for a given purpose and signal environment) can incorporate the rules

learned by an experienced communications specialist.  Many simple rules

define how to minimize interference.  These rules can be applied in real-

time, packet-based communications systems much more effectively than

in traditional voice systems.  Through real-time evaluation of each com-

munication link and the spectrum in which the system operates, new

levels of intelligence can be achieved to avoid jamming or to optimize

transmissions under a wide variety of conditions (e.g., by minimizing

battery drain, reducing traffic in the vicinity of hostile jamming activities,

maximizing bandwidth or network capacity).
The introduction of the multimode software radio creates a signifi-
cant opportunity for the convergence of many different systems and func-

tions.  Traditional defense platforms have separate systems for communi-

cation, navigation, identification, data exchange, signals intelligence,

electronic warfare, and other functions.  A software radio could be rap-

idly configured to perform any of these functions in any combination

required.  This convergence of technology will reduce the numbers of

military systems procured while also increasing the cost effectiveness and

utility of equipment.  The resulting lightweight, agile platforms will be

capable of rapid response to support the small units of fast-moving mili-

tary forces now evolving.  The increased availability, utility, and power of

radio devices will create a new paradigm for military communications

(see Table 3-2).
3.4.3.2  Co-Site Interference
Co-site interference, which is already a problem for military commu-
nications platforms, will worsen with the introduction of multimode,
multiband radios unless new mitigation approaches are developed.   Cur-

rent technology designed to reduce the effects of co-site interference on

radio performance is quite limited.  Power combiners can connect up to

five transmitters to a single antenna, but only if the frequencies are suffi-

ciently separated.  Receive co-site filters can suppress the carrier of co-

located transmitters, but broadband signals are not suppressed ad-

equately, and the broadband noise of transmit power amplifiers is not

suppressed sufficiently at frequencies near the transmitting frequency.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSRadios are a precious resource.Hardware developed decades agoremains in low-rate production with
high unit cost.  Radios are rationed toone or fewer per platoon.Legacy radios.  Radios are standardizedbut there are too many standards, allbased on legacy hardware.  Fewradios are compatible with other
radios even within the U.S. inventory.The problem is amplified when theAllied and multinational radio
systems are considered.Manual mode and frequency selection.Radio operators select frequencies and
modes based on commandinstructions.  Radio units are oftenmanually turned off (e.g., ÒradiosilenceÓ) and communications cease.Communications van complex.  All thevarious radios need to be housed in

large communications vans, which are

scarce resources.Radio as a communicator.  Each radiohas one channel for voice or
messaging.Development lead time.  Radioupgrades and developments are
measured in years.Individual radio units.  Communicationis point to point on a single link that
is limited by output power,sensitivity, and waveformpropagation.Closed, proprietary architecture.  Fullyfunctional Òblack box.ÓRadios are a ubiquitous resource.  Likecomputing, communications will
become so inexpensive that it will be
widely available.  As with computers,new radios are implemented as
applications software running on
standard platforms.Interoperability.  Radio waveforms,bandwidths, channels, modulations,

error correction, and cryptography areall implemented in software.  Even
legacy systems are implemented insoftware, which might even bedownloaded over the air.Connectivity.  The radio decides whichmodulation, frequency, and power
level is best based on ÒRF situationawarenessÓ (the need to remaincovert), the available resources, and
the amount of data that need to betransmitted.ÒPalm topÓ communications complex.Multibands, multimodes, andmultichannels are on a card;
connectivity is achieved byÒclevernessÓ and resource allocation,not brute-force transmit power and
antennas.Radio as a sensor.  Each radio has manychannels.  Some can be programmed
and used in networks for intelligencecollection and emission location by
triangulation.Rapid prototyping and deployment.New features and upgrades areimplemented in software, with 
ÒfewÓhardware changes required.Communications network.  The full setof protocols, including TCP/IP
message routing, is implemented.Whole groups of units work togetherto achieve connectivity.Open architecture.  Standard interfacesand packaging are the norm, with
plug-and-play hardware and software
modules.TABLE 3-2Current and Emerging Military Communications Paradigms
Current Paradigm
Emerging Paradigm
xxxThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS141Moreover, receive co-site filters become complex when the number of co-
site transmitters is three or more, and receiver noise performance is de-

graded, resulting in reduced transmission range and an increased error

floor.  Co-site problems extend to antenna beam shape, which changes

when antennas are used in close proximity to each other or to metallic

structures.  Because of the unique conditions on military communications

platforms, R&D in this area will likely need to be supported by the DOD.
3.5  DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY POLICY ISSUES
The government influences private-sector technology development
in a variety of ways.  The instruments of government policy include indi-

rect methods, such as investment tax credits, or direct methods such as

federal funding for R&D and technology testbeds.  Sometimes these poli-

cies are implemented to accelerate the development of strategically im-

portant technologies; at other times the motive is to ensure that equip-

ment will be available for procurement by the government in a timely

fashion.Government policies supporting the development of appropriate de-
fense technologies have always been a special case.  In the past, when

defense requirements generally guided private-sector technology ad-

vances (e.g., transistorized components), federal investments in R&D were
not controversial.  Now that sophisticated consumer and industrial prod-

ucts are developed independent of defense requirements, the need for

federal investments may seem less pressing.  However, the DOD needs to

maintain a competitive advantage over potential adversaries with respect

to warfare capabilities, including communications systems.  The technol-

ogy policy issue for the future is how to encourage innovations in elec-

tronics and communications technology that will dominate world mar-

kets while also ensuring that the U.S. military retains capabilities that

exceed those of potential adversaries.
3.5.1  Implications of Changes in Military Tactics
The Gulf War demonstrated the way in which high technology per-
meates warfare.  Advanced sensing, imaging, and targeting capabilities in

the Patriot missile defense system, stealth aircraft, and other systems pro-

vided extensive advantages for U.S. forces.  For example, Patriot missiles

were aimed using surveillance satellites controlled from the United States.
Liftoffs from Iraq were observed by these satellites within seconds, and

critical targeting information was relayed through controllers in Colo-

rado to the front-line Patriot batteries.  This orchestrated activity demon-

strated the capabilities of the U.S. military
Õs existing global communica-
tions network, which required the support of high-bandwidth data links
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSto move sensor information both to and from the theater of action.  But the
Gulf War experience also suggests that communications advances are

needed to enable rapid infrastructure deployment, logistics enhance-

ments, and increased protection of technologies to prevent their exploita-

tion by adversaries.
3.5.2  Rapid Infrastructure Deployment
During the ground war, the mobile forces moved so quickly that the
communications infrastructure could not keep up with the front lines.

Future communications systems will likely need to be rapidly deployable

(and redeployable) so that they can keep pace with rapidly developing

battles.  Because Iraq did not react when U.S. troops first began arriving in

Saudi Arabia, the coalition forces were able to build up an overwhelming

combat strength in the Middle East as well as the logistical stockpile

needed to pursue vigorous modern warfare.  Adversaries in future wars

are unlikely to be so accommodating, meaning that forces will need to be

projected rapidly from the U.S mainland.  Future conflicts are likely to be

Òcome as you are,
Ó and communications infrastructures will need to sup-
port immediate action.
The recognition of this need has heightened interest in 
Òinstant infra-
structures
Ó based on satellite communications and mobile elements.  The
RAP has been proposed as a basis for a moveable front-line infrastructure

with sophisticated, on-the-move antenna systems able to maintain high-

bandwidth, point-to-point links with the rear-area infrastructure.  To
avoid the latencies inherent in satellite communications, hybrid systems

that consist of DBS downlinks and UAV uplinks are being investigated.

In general, these systems are viewed as backups to the terrestrial trunk

linkages.Continued military R&D investments will probably be needed be-
cause there seems to be little commercial interest in moveable infrastruc-

tures.  One example of a commercial system with moveable elements is

the Metricom multihop packet radio network, which operates in the unli-

censed ISM bands in the San Francisco Bay and Washington, D.C., metro-

politan areas.  Although the infrastructure radios are in fixed locations,

the multihop architecture makes it possible to add coverage in an incre-

mental fashion through the addition of relay radios within the service

area; bandwidth can be added also.
3.5.3  Logistics
Future military communications systems will need new features cor-
responding to the reduced size of U.S. forces.  Current planning provides
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS143forces that are only sufficient to fight two regional conflicts at the same
time.  Instead of stationing so many troops overseas in areas of high

tension, a split-base approach will be used, with advanced echelons over-

seas and the bulk of the forces on the U.S mainland.  This approach will

require high-quality, high-bandwidth connectivity worldwide, complete

with access extensions that can be rapidly deployed, torn down, and rees-

tablished as troops move.
Logistics tracking and management will be especially critical, given
the growing need to transport materiel from the United States to the scene

of the conflict.  Many commercial systems are available.  For example,

OmniTRACS makes it possible to track vehicles continuously as they

move and to plan routes efficiently.  Package delivery services such as

UPS and Federal Express have deployed sophisticated logistics systems

for tagging packages and tracking them en route while also providing

user-friendly on-line services that enable shippers to find their shipments.

Wireless LANs were originally developed partly for warehousing appli-

cations.  Finally, wireless tagging technology could provide the DOD

with automatic inventory and location-identification capabilities, provid-

ing the basis for a complete logistical information system that could track

the location of every item shipped.
3.5.4  Preparing for Unsophisticated Adversaries
There is some uncertainty about the technical requirements for com-
munications during future confrontations with unsophisticated adversar-

ies.  Recent U.S. actions in Haiti and Somalia are examples of these types of

operations, which may become more common as the United States plays an

expanding role in peacekeeping and peacemaking missions.  These coun-

tries tend to have little modern communications infrastructure, although

this situation is changing as worldwide markets evolve for advanced tech-

nology.  When deployed in less-developed countries, the U.S. military could

bring along state-of-the-art commercial infrastructure technology.  These

systems would need to be shipped, installed, and operational within days,

with military systems sufficing in the meantime.  The commercial systems

could transport the bulk of noncritical traffic, making it accessible to a

smaller number of military-specific systems in the field.
In many ways, peacekeeping and other nontraditional military opera-
tions are similar to law enforcement activities, and many of the same

communications issues need to be addressed.  Even an unsophisticated

adversary could disrupt service to U.S. forces using commercial systems.

For example, cellular infrastructure is difficult to hide and could easily be

targeted for sabotage.  Although stealth and LPD are not always critical to

defense communications, steps need to be taken to prevent adversaries
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSfrom learning of upcoming operations, performing traffic analyses, and
intercepting specific types of communications traffic.  The basic security

and authentication mechanisms in the latest commercial systems can re-

duce interception by the technically unsophisticated; they are sufficient

for nontactical communications traffic such as logistics support.  Military-

specific systems will continue to be needed for transmissions that require

complete security.
The DOD might need cooperation and technical information from
U.S. or foreign manufacturers so as to monitor the traffic of adversaries,

track specific telephones, or infiltrate existing communications systems in

particular countries.  The U.S. military therefore needs to maintain a tech-

nical awareness of foreign-made equipment, perhaps as part of the effort

to demonstrate, test, and procure COTS wireless technology (see Sections

3.2 and 3.3).
3.5.5  Preparing for Sophisticated Adversaries
Sophisticated communications technology is rapidly becoming a com-modity.  During the Gulf War some military specifications and procure-

ment procedures were abandoned in an effort to get new capabilities,

such as GPS, into the hands of the troops.  Any adversary could buy the

same sophisticated technologies; the threat is measured by how much the

adversary can afford.  Indeed, one of the implications of the Gulf War as

a model for future conflicts is that the United States might not prepare

sufficiently to recognize or defend against sophisticated adversaries.
A sophisticated adversary can be defined as one with the technical
capability to build advanced communications systems or the financial

resources to purchase what it needs on the global arms market.  The

greatest immediate threats are countries that can buy technologies from

the countries that make them; for instance, the SCUD missiles used by

Iraq in the Gulf War were based on the Chinese Silkworm missile.
To maintain a competitive advantage against these adversaries, the
U.S. military could add military-specific modifications, such as security

or waveform hiding, on top of commercial core systems.  The military can

leverage many commercial technologies, among them advanced ICs, DSP

chips, and protocols.  The advantage gained will depend on how these

capabilities are integrated into defense systems and the choice and perfor-

mance of the added military-specific capabilities.
3.6  SUMMARY
The DOD has many reasons to use commercial communications prod-ucts and practices whenever possible, building on a long tradition of
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS145synergy between the two sectors.  Many COTS technologies offer cost and
performance advantages, and their quality is better than ever.  The econo-

mies of scale achieved in mass production provide additional benefits

and lessons that can also be exploited by the military.  The selective use of

commercial products and practices in DOD systems could help accom-

modate growing needs for global, untethered communications systems in

spite of declining defense budgets.
However, the military will continue to have some unique needs that
cannot be met by consumer products, or even future commercial R&D

programs, because the motivations and interests of the two sectors differ.

The DOD has unusual needs in three fundamental areas:  network archi-

tecture, which influences all other aspects of a communications system;

security, which encompasses confidentiality, data and system integrity,

and service availability; and multimode, multiband systems, which can

enable interoperability among diverse systems.  The DOD needs to exam-

ine its needs in these areas carefully and probably pursue its own R&D in

selected technology areas.  All of these issues are addressed further in

Chapter 4.
NOTES1.For example, advanced coding (Cacciamani, 1970, 1971, 1973) has been
used in commercial satellite communications since the early 1970s for both dataand highly compressed digital imaging, enabling the use of antennas on the or-der of 18 inches in diameter for digitally compressed video signals with link
BERs less than 10Ð9.  The best known of these technologies is probably CDMA,
which has been widely adopted for cellular and personal communications sys-

tems worldwide.  Encryption, along with data mining and RF fingerprinting, is

increasingly being used to protect against fraudulent use in cellular systems,video entertainment subscription receivers, and business data.  Finally, on-board
digital processing will be used in the planned mobile telecommunications satel-

lite and high-speed data satellites such as Teledesic.
2.A short lead time in a growing market can result in a large increase in
market share.  In addition, because prices can fall quickly after a new product is

introduced, the first to market is often the only competitor to make a substantial
profit.  Yet a release date is often difficult to predict.  Companies can be punished
by the market if they fail to meet predicted release dates, as often happens, for

example, with software upgrades.
3.The internal design cycle may actually be much longer because the basic
equipment architecture is more likely to be on a two-year design cycle paced by

the evolution of new semiconductor components.  During the baseline design
cycle of up to four years, anywhere from one to four design teams may be work-
ing on the next baseline architecture.
4.Many U.S. commercial wireless communications suppliers include divi-
sions that have historically been involved in defense work.  Within these compa-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSnies, cross-fertilization between the defense-related and commercial units may
provide a mechanism for meeting military surge needs using the company
Õs com-mercial products.  However, this type of crossover is not always straightforwardbecause of the differences between defense and commercial markets.5.For example, current regulations regarding processors, A/D converters,
and cryptography appear to reflect technologies that are nearly a decade old.
The advent of common high-performance microprocessors enables the wide-spread development and use of cryptographic algorithms, which are often dis-
tributed on the Internet.  The export of A/D converters is limited to technology of

less than 8 bits, but advanced sigma-delta technology has only 1 bit (noise shap-
ing and DSP techniques are used to increase dynamic range).  Thus, the number
of bits no longer seems like a useful metric for A/D converters; the metrics used

to evaluate microprocessors seem equally outdated.
6.This is a simplified description of the decision-making process.  More
precisely, throughout the design, fabrication, and deployment of commercial
products, trade-offs are made among performance requirements, standards re-
quirements, cost goals, and design approaches to define a product that would be
the most attractive and competitive in the marketplace.  International, national,

and regional standards determine many commercial design parameters, includ-
ing off-axis emission from an antenna, maximum power flux radiated to Earth
from a satellite, the capability of system users to coordinate or coexist with other

users of a frequency band in the same geographic location, and numerous electri-
cal safety regulations (e.g., related to wiring, batteries, radiation hazards, and
chemical exposure).
7.Customers understand and expect this and are generally not willing to pay
for a capacity that sits idle most of the time.  Even during the busiest hour of the
average business dayÑconditions that the systems are engineered to handleÑthereis a measurable probability of blockage that is calculated based on customer will-
ingness to pay.  Because the cost of a blocked call is usually only the effort required
to try again shortly, there is little incentive to reduce the probability of blockage to
zero.  An interesting demonstration of the customer
Õs acceptance of blockage and
delay is the phenomenal growth of the Internet, where service is provided on a
best-effort rather than guaranteed basis (although data services continue to come
under increasing pressure for better service access).8.Intel Corp., which after marketing its Pentium microprocessor found a
design flaw in the precision of certain mathematical operations, uses a test suite
comprising of billions of instructions to validate each possible instruction, regis-
ter, arithmetic function, interrupt process, and instruction trap as well as se-quences of events to prevent any surprises in complex applications.  Only now
are academic researchers considering more sophisticated theoretical techniques

for dealing with testing processes of such enormous complexity.  This research is
critical to the future success of complex systems.
9.For example, commercial processes might take place at temperatures rang-
ing from 0 to 50 degrees Celsius (
C) rather than 
55 to 125 
C as in military
processes.  Or, commercial processes might involve 30 
G of force rather than
1,000 
G.
10.The NES is an encryption system certified by the National Security Agency
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMERCIAL-DEFENSE SYNERGY IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS147that enables clusters of defense computer networks to interconnect through the
unclassified Internet.  The NES provides high levels of assurance that a system
communicates only with other systems that have comparable security levels.
11.Several military initiatives, including the Multilevel Information Systems
Security Initiative and the DOD Goal Security Architecture, are intended to deal

with various aspects of infrastructure in an effort to enable interoperability among
systems.  However, these programs have yet to field functions that enable com-
munication between independent defense networks.
12.The ACN is designed to provide hierarchical communications over a broad
theater of operations.  Cross-linking and networking will enable various networks

to communicate and access services through satellite links worldwide.  The ACN
will also serve as a repeater, picking up signals and rebroadcasting them over

and around terrain obstacles, thereby extending the range of low-power equip-
ment used on the ground.
13.In a base-station-oriented architecture, a greater investment is ordinarily
made in the base station than in terminals.  In such a network, both the transmit

and receive link equations can benefit from the improved performance of larger
antennas, more powerful transmitters, and more sensitive receivers.  In typical

systems the link advantage relative to the peer-to-peer design is approximately
10 dB.
14.Security is an issue in equipment deployment:  The use of systems with
cryptographic security requires procedures for securing clearances and equip-

ment controls.
15.The TCP/IP protocol suite would need to be supported on top of ATM
because the DOD has identified TCP/IP as the means for ensuring interoper-
ability across heterogeneous military networks and because the entire system is
unlikely to be constructed from native ATM technology.
16.An additional drawback is ATM
Õs strong connection orientation, whichmakes it difficult to support mobility because existing connections need to be bro-

ken and reconstructed repeatedly.  Furthermore, the ATM cell (i.e., data packet)
structure was designed for the extremely low BERs of fiber-optic communications,

whereas a radio fade can persist for several cell durations, making it difficult to use
standard coding techniques to improve link quality.  The loss of even a small num-
ber of ATM cells in a highly stressed network can dramatically reduce packet
throughput.17.The importance of distilling source information prior to transmission over a
network is well understood in the commercial sector but remains an issue for the

military, especially the Army, where communications, command-and-control, andintelligence functions are separate.  There is no financial incentive on the part of thecommand-and-control and intelligence communities to spend resources to distill
data at the source.  Often the problem is passed off to the communications commu-
nity, which is forced to transmit whatever is provided.  For example, in situation
awareness (SA) reports, positions are reported every 12 seconds regardless of mo-

tion.  As a result the communications system is overloaded with SA reports.  A
more efficient approach would be to project positions based on direction and veloc-
ity and only send reports when the trajectory or velocity changes.  But such an

approach would require the development of software at a cost to the command-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSand-control community.  Instead the practice has been to blame the communica-
tions system for failing to support the traffic load.  This situation would never
arise in the commercial cellular industry, where providers take a systems ap-

proach and make trade-offs between bandwidth costs and source compression
costs.18.Mobile code, such as Java, might eliminate the need to agree on a com-
pression standard because the delivery of executable code (along with the trans-

mitted data) would allow the receiver to adapt to the sender
Õs coding scheme.
19.An alternative approach would be to implement new functions in ASIC
chips, which offer efficiencies in terms of power consumption.  However, this

approach would not provide an open architecture and might not be adaptable to
future radio waveforms.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1491494Conclusions and Recommendations
The history and challenges of wireless communications, as outlined
in previous chapters, suggest a variety of strategies that could be pursued
to fulfill the vision for untethered military communications systems.  This

chapter summarizes and integrates key points made in the preceding

chapters to provide a set of 12 recommendations directed to the DOD and

DARPA.  Organizational changes are recommended that would provide

an environment conducive to the development and military application

of state-of-the-art commercial technology.  To meet defense-unique needs,
specialized R&D and demonstration efforts are recommended that focus

on various aspects of wireless technology, from the highest network level

down to individual components.
4.1  HISTORY AND CHALLENGES OF WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS
Voracious consumer demand is stimulating many advances in com-
mercial wireless communications technology, particularly cellular and

cordless telephones.  The portfolio of wireless services now available in

the commercial marketplace includes a wide range of telephony, paging,

and data applications delivered over a variety of service offerings ranging

from land mobile radio to cellular to satellite communications.  Each ser-

vice offers a unique combination of coverage region, bandwidth,

subscriber equipment properties, and connectivity.  In the aggregate, com-
mercial wireless capabilities are considerable, yet many technical chal-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSlenges remain.  The cost of wireless voice systems needs to be reduced
and their quality improved.  Specialized wireless data networks have not

taken off as yet, perhaps because they are not powerful enough or be-

cause mass market applications have yet to emerge.  Considerable re-

search to address these and other issues is under way, both in the United

States and overseas.  Industry road maps suggest that, by early in the

twenty-first century, commercial wireless communications will meet the

long-term goal of enabling users to communicate Òanytime, anywhere.Ó
The DOD uses a variety of wireless systems that are based on 1970s and
1980s technology and designed to serve specific needs.  The DOD no longer

drives the evolution of state-of-the-art communications technology but still

needs access to it, perhaps more than ever.  As threats to peace  change from

global to regional conflict, a transformation is taking place in military roles,

missions, and communications needs.  The vision for military communica-

tions stresses C
4I and the protection of the lives of U.S. personnel, who will
be based principally in the United States but will need to be prepared to

move quickly throughout the world to carry out a variety of missions,

including noncombat roles such as peacekeeping and humanitarian re-

sponse.  Such missions are nontraditional in the sense that coordination

with foreign partners may be essential, whereas national survival will not

be at risk as was anticipated during the Cold War.  In addition, the need for

U.S.-based logistical support will grow, and new systems will be required

to counter terrorism.  Thus the accurate, timely transmission of information

will be perhaps more essential than ever in meeting military objectives.

Effective global communications systems will be critical.
The civilian and military sectors have a long history of interaction in
the design and deployment of wireless communications technology.  In

the Gulf War, DOD used commercial wireless equipment such as GPS

receivers and found that the performance was comparable to that of equip-
ment designed explicitly to meet military needs.  Yet current commercial

technologies and practices cannot meet all military needs.  For example,

the military cannot tolerate the long lead timesÑon the order of months

to yearsÑthat are typical in the building of commercial communications

infrastructures.  Commercial wireless companies carry out elaborate ad-

vance planning and measurement operations, whereas the military re-

quires networks that can be organized quickly and can adapt rapidly to

changing operating conditions (including spectrum availability).  These

networks will also have to be compatible with other military communica-

tions systems, both new and old.
Differences between military and commercial needs also have impli-
cations for network architecture.  Commercial research on integrated (i.e.,

multimedia) systems is oriented toward network architectures based on

the base-station-oriented model.  It is not clear whether that approach or
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
151the peer-to-peer design will be more appropriate in future military set-
tings.  Previous DARPA research on packet radio networks has encom-

passed base-station-oriented, peer-to-peer, and multihop networks.
The evolution of technology is also influenced by organizational dif-
ferences between the two sectors that encompass market drivers, acquisi-

tion practices, and maintenance and repair arrangements.  Commercial

R&D and manufacturing are oriented toward mass markets of tens of

millions of units.  Adding functionality to designs has to be justified by

consumer demand.  By contrast, military equipment is designed to pro-

vide the functions required to fulfill missions.  The number of units pro-

duced is tiny relative to commercial markets.  Commercial customers

acquire equipment and subscribe to services as they are ready to use

them, expect effective function within minutes, and rely on equipment

manufacturers for repairs.  The military acquires equipment on a contin-

gency basis, operates its own repair facilities, and is prepared to train its

personnel to use communications systems.
Many research efforts are under way to realize the commercial and
military visions for wireless communications.  Fueled by the success of

cellular communications and projections of ever-expanding markets for

wireless services, the commercial sector is pushing ahead in various ar-

eas.  One objective is to enable portable devices to communicate at the

high bit rates needed for advanced information services.  Another objec-

tive is to advance the state of the art for software radios as a means of

fostering economies of scale in R&D and manufacturing in a world of

diverse and changing technical standards.  By using multiple types of

operating software, such radios can serve as single hardware platforms

capable of transmitting and receiving signals that conform to a variety of

standards.  Meanwhile, DOD is taking a dual approach to wireless tech-

nology development by both conducting its own research, focusing pri-

marily on components, while also relying increasingly on commercial

technologies to ensure interoperability and systems integration.  The

DARPA GloMo program has initiated a broad range of coordinated R&D

efforts that will provide enabling technologies for future military sys-

tems.  Among the commercial technologies that the military expects to

use are Internet protocols and ATM.
These observations lead to the following general conclusions:
¥A large gap remains between public expectations for mobile com-
munications (
Òanytime, anywhere
Ó) and the available technology.
¥Over the next 10 years or so, market forces will fill this gap by
developing new technologies for commercial wireless communications.
¥The military thus has much to gain from positioning itself to use
COTS communications equipment to the greatest extent possible.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS¥Some military needs for wireless communications technologies willexceed or differ significantly from anticipated commercial developments.
For example, the military has unique concerns with respect to network

design, security, interoperability, and multimode/multiband systems.
¥The commercial sector has its own incentives to produce advanced
communications devices, components, and subsystems as well as com-

plete systems.  To use commercial technologies effectively, the DOD will

have to take special measures to promote the development and acquisi-

tion of COTS products that can be integrated into systems that meet spe-

cialized military requirements.
These conclusions provide the basis for the recommendations pre-
sented in the remainder of this chapter.  The 12 recommendations are

organized in a hierarchical order from the general to the specific.  The first

three focus on organizational changes, or meta-issues, that need to be

addressed by DOD to help align military requirements with commercial

products and services and provide an environment conducive to the ab-

sorption of state-of-the-art technologies.  The other nine recommenda-

tions identify R&D projects that should be carried out by DARPA to

advance the synergy between military and commercial systems while

also meeting specialized military needs that will exceed anticipated com-

mercial developments.  The R&D recommendations are presented in or-

der of priority, reflecting the committee
Õs view that high-level systems
issues are of paramount importance.  The recommended research ex-

cludes subjects that will be adequately covered by the commercial sector.
4.2  STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT
1.The DOD should participate in standards-setting activities for
wireless communications technologies and systems.
With commercial demand for wireless technology growing world-
wide and DOD budgets flat or falling, incentives for future commercial-

military synergy need to be provided by the military side.  Consequently

the defense community needs to gain a deep understanding of technol-

ogy trends so as to obtain advance notice of new concepts and influence

the development of cost-effective equipment that meets military needs.

Although new technologies can originate in diverse settings that include

industry, academia, and nonmilitary government laboratories, the fea-

tures of available equipment are determined to a large extent in the pro-

cess of standards setting.
Current R&D and standards activities are focused on enhancing wire-
less communications technology to make it possible to move many types
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
153of information (including data, video, and images) to and from portable
wireless devices.  Although this work is certain to produce new technol-

ogy, the commercial deployment of these innovations is not assured.  The

availability of innovative technology in the marketplace depends on busi-

ness, social, and government policy factors.  Military planners need to

maintain a continuing awareness of the difference between what is pos-

sible technically and what is available in the market to meet military

needs.Because military requirements often exceed those of the commercial
market, opportunities for the DOD to use commercial products depend

on equipment details, which are reflected in standards.  Such details might
be of little initial interest to consumers.  Yet the defense community is

often ahead of industry in recognizing features that will eventually be

important to all users; if these needs are not addressed in the standards-

setting processes then they might have to be met later in commercial

settings at great cost, both financially and in terms of network perfor-

mance.  An example is the poor state of network security in analog cellu-

lar systems, an issue not considered in the initial design process.  Newer

digital systems help alleviate this problem, but adding security features

to older equipment remains an expensive and difficult challenge.  The

military, by contrast, always plans for system security in advance.
Standards also influence whether 
Òhooks
Ó or interfaces are designed
into commercial technologies to enable modifications that would meet

specialized military needs.  By participating in the standards process,

government agencies will make it possible to embed standard devices in

military-specific system architectures and generally promote a capability

for cost-effective systems integration.
The DOD could influence standards setting by participating in activi-
ties such as the ATM Forum, the IETF, and the Multimode Multiband

Information Transfer System Forum.  Effective participation will be con-

strained by the rules governing standards organizations and by the abili-

ties of DOD management and participating individuals to influence tech-

nical decisions and political processes.  They will need to understand how

standards for wireless communications are established, a complex pro-

cess that has influenced the very different evolutionary paths of wireless

technologies in the United States, Europe, and Japan.  In addition, the

DOD could benefit from the analysis, simulation, and laboratory testing

of candidate technologies to support defense interests in the establish-

ment of specific standards.  These activities could reveal the limits of

some technologies that would not be apparent in more benign commer-

cial settings but are likely to be of long-term significance to consumers.

By conducting such tests and sharing the results with the commercial

sector, defense agencies will improve the chances that adopted standards
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSwill serve immediate military needs and also benefit the commercial sec-
tor in the long run.  Participation in standards creation could ultimately

prove to be more cost-effective than commissioning equipment explicitly

designed to meet military needs.
4.3  DEMONSTRATION AND TESTING RATHER
THAN DEVELOPMENT
2.The DOD should pursue a vigorous process of technology dem-
onstration and testing prior to development and procurement.  In par-

ticular, the focus should be on system concepts based on commercial

technologies and specialized military enhancements.
As the defense budget is reduced, less money will be available for
major procurements.  Nevertheless, an inventory of advanced technolo-

gies can be maintained and deployed as needed if military equipment is

adapted whenever possible from commercial technologies.  Examples of

this strategy include the Condor project, in which DOD is supporting the

development of a cryptography module on top of the cellular telephony

system, and the Army
Õs plans for the digitized battlefield.  The Condor
project is focusing on core noncommercial technologies such as on-the-

move, high-bandwidth, phased-array antenna technology.  The Army
Õsdigitized battlefield network will include switches, routers, and hubs
based on commercially available technology.  The Army is not building

its own ATM switches, which are widely available in the private sector,

but instead is developing high-speed encryptors and decryptors that are

compatible with commercial switches.
Military planners need to understand the thrust of commercial devel-
opments and identify critical technologies that are unlikely to emerge
Ñ
soon enough or ever
Ñfrom the commercial sector. These technologies
need to be developed by the DOD.  For all other elements of wireless

systems, new commercial developments need to be tested and evaluated

on a continuing basis in military exercises to determine and verify their

suitability for military use.  Resources available to support this approach

include the federal defense laboratories, which can provide a critical
bridge between the military
Õs operational needs and private technology
development, and the defense industry, which is well equipped to col-

laborate in the development of prototype military-specific equipment.  In

addition, both the DOD and industry will continue to rely heavily on U.S.

colleges, universities, and technical schools to provide competent engi-

neers, technicians, programmers, operations staff, and scientists as well as

key technological breakthroughs and innovative ideas vital to U.S. mili-

tary and commercial competitiveness.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
155The DOD
Õs technology demonstration and testing efforts need to take
into account the unique communications needs of each military service.
A mechanism is needed to help integrate the requirements of these vary-

ing systems and find a common architecture that would cost-effectively

support the majority of those requirements.  This task might be carried

out by an R&D subunit such as DARPA or an existing Pentagon-level

joint program office.  In the past the military has focused on one radio

subsystem at a time, with the result that interoperability has been mini-

mal.  The vision of the future calls for the development of an overall

system concept with a standard set of multimedia protocols and wave-

forms to assure interoperability at all echelons, with individual radios

specified and procured to work within this architecture.
4.4  PROCUREMENT
3.The DOD should plan a new approach to procurement that will
identify how commercial infrastructure systems and subscriber equip-

ment can best be used for military purposes and how to purchase com-

mercial equipment in the most productive way.
The DOD needs to develop models to analyze how best to use com-
mercial systems and equipment.  For example, a planning system could

be created to keep track of commercial communications infrastructure

and service access points within a given geographical region.  Such a

system needs to be comprehensive, monitoring telephony, data, micro-

wave, satellite, and fiber-optic services.  The analysis could suggest the

most effective means of information delivery for each source-destination

pair, identifying the gateways and networking software required for

interoperability and backup paths.  This information could be used for

planning or real-time robust network management, performance optimi-

zation, and repair.
A system is also needed to evaluate the potential for defense equip-
ment based on commercial technology by comparing the cost-effective-

ness and performance of legacy hardware to those of COTS products.  In

many cases COTS components may represent improvements for the mili-

tary in terms of cost-effectiveness, power effectiveness, or other impor-

tant features.  The planning system needs to be capable of determining

how to apply these internal components to anticipated defense applica-

tions.  As part of this process the DOD needs to develop the expertise

necessary to translate its operational needs into requirements for com-

mercially available equipment.
Once the DOD identifies how best to use commercial technologies,
cost-efficient acquisition strategies need to be pursued.  Government-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSwide purchases might achieve greater economies of scale than would
purchases by individual military services.  The DOD could use this op-

portunity to become a more effective customer.  Government acquisitions

often add specialized requirements that prohibit commercial suppliers

from offering bulk rates.  As an alternative, DOD could explore how to

purchase bulk quantities of standardized equipment and then separately

acquire enhancements that align a system with military requirements.  It

might also be possible for designated agencies to acquire equipment and

then distribute it to other government users.  For example, the Army

Signal Corps could acquire all DOD communications equipment and pro-

vide for all maintenance and upgrades on the basis of annual agreements.

Consolidated purchasing might enable cost-effective reliance on commer-

cial providers for maintenance, logistics, and training.
The DOD can also foster commercial-defense synergy by allowing
multiple vendors to build subsystems that meet open hardware and soft-

ware interface standards and by selecting, from the field of possible ven-

dors, those most capable of creating an ongoing competitive production

over a long, sustained product life.  When procurement programs keep at

least three vendors competitive over the course of the system, the compe-

tition encourages the evolution of advanced features and improvements

in cost-effectiveness.  The STU III is an example of a fully competitive

acquisition in which three vendors competed for production of several

hundred thousand secure telephones.  In this controlled market, each

vendor was required to meet open interoperability standards, but each

was also allowed to implement unique features and functions to attract

market share and compete on price.  Each competitor
Õs model updates
kept the other competitors busy matching features and prices, a process

that benefited both the users and the government while also motivating

ongoing technology insertion.  The SpeakEASY radio is another example

of open system architecture.  An 
Òopen system forum
Ó allows contractors
to participate in setting hardware and software standards that specify

open interfaces between system components.
4.5  MODELING AND SIMULATION
4.DARPA should build on current research in modeling and simu-
lation to incorporate the communications traffic, mobility of network

elements, and radio propagation encountered in mobile military infor-

mation networks.
The performance of wireless communications systems depends on
three phenomena:  communications traffic, mobility of network elements,

and radio propagation.  Accurate assumptions about these phenomena
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
157need to be made if the DOD is to design, deploy, and operate effective
systems.  Modeling and simulation are the best available tools for opti-

mizing system design and predicting performance.
Various commercial packages are available for simulating communi-
cations systems consisting of established components and subsystems.

The quality of the results they produce depends on the accuracy of the

models of traffic, mobility, and radio propagation that they incorporate.

Good models of narrowband radio propagation are available.  However,

models that incorporate site-specific characteristics of buildings, terrain,

and foliage are not commercially mature, and there are no radio propaga-

tion models that incorporate adaptive antennas.  Furthermore, available

Òteletraffic
Ó models apply to only a few simplified conditions, and mobil-
ity models are confined to abstract formulations (e.g., fluid flow, Brown-

ian motion) that have not been validated with reference to practical con-

ditions.  As a consequence, existing tools cannot provide realistic analyses

of complex DOD systems.  Much more is needed, especially in the site-

specific channel modeling, traffic, and mobility areas, to provide military

planners with the tools necessary to rapidly deploy wireless systems in

battlefield scenarios in a wide range of modern theaters (e.g., built-up

urban areas).  DARPA should stimulate research to derive and validate

models of wireless channel effects using modern modem and antenna

technology so that appropriate protocols, applications program interfaces,
and optimization algorithms can be developed.
Research leading to techniques for accelerating the run-time of com-
plex wireless system simulations would benefit the military and commer-

cial sectors alike.  Simulation of communications systems is often performed
by signal-processing workstation tools, which enable programmers to de-

fine a complex communication system by connecting icons representing

predefined building blocks.  This approach enables programming to be

automated, but the resulting simulation code is often inefficient to run.

DARPA research in this area could build on the impressive progress al-

ready made in the S3 program using parallel processors to simulate com-

munications systems.  This program includes a wireless component that

could be enhanced to simulate the traffic, mobility, and radio propagation

conditions of military communications.
DARPA could also establish libraries of code representing communi-
cations waveforms, protocols, source coding techniques, and network in-

terfaces.  This research would accelerate system design while also reduc-

ing the expense of simulation software maintenance, which typically costs
10 times more than software creation because of the longer time frame

involved and rapid advances in technology.  Research on system devel-

opment and maintenance methods will help identify the most effective

strategy.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSFinally, integrated tools are needed to assess the performance of the
subsystem elements of a software radio operating within a large-scale
network in motion over a broad geographic area.  These tools would

enable researchers to explore network quality, connectivity, stability with

respect to multiple performance criteria, and unexpected problems.  Some
research groups are developing their own tools to investigate specific

aspects of performance.  DARPA could attempt to provide an integrated

capability built on a common application interface that would reveal the

effects of each system component on the performance of the entire sys-

tem.  This capability would enable the optimization of an entire system

rather than just the individual components.
4.6  NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
5.DARPA should initiate research to produce network architec-
tures that incorporate commercial products in a manner that meets mili-

tary requirements.
The performance of a wireless communications system depends in
large part on the coordination of network elements.  The architecture of a

network defines these elements, identifies pairs of network elements that

communicate directly, and specifies the protocols for that communica-

tion.  Architectures for wireless systems differ according to how terminal

modems are connected (peer-to-peer versus base-station-oriented design),
how infrastructure elements are connected (hierarchical versus distrib-

uted), and the nature of communications with other networks.  Given the

special needs of military wireless communications networks, designers

need to adopt a system architecture that takes maximum advantage of the

capabilities of commercial devices and subsystems yet also provides

unique interfaces and protocols as dictated by military needs.  DARPA

research in this area is likely to reveal new network architectures that use

commercial products and services in an innovative way to serve military

aims and make it possible to gracefully absorb new technology at the

subsystem and component level.
Within a new network architecture, many key issues remain to be
resolved with respect to protocols for wideband data services.  Current

commercial systems treat each application (e.g., Internet, telephony, video
dial tone) separately instead of taking an integrated approach.  Recent

discussions of nomadicity underscore the importance of considering wire-

less and mobile components and conditions as part of heterogeneous and

interoperating network contexts.  Military wideband packet radios, which
are designed from the outset for integrated information services, could

provide a useful model for future commercial developments.  However,
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
159research is needed to determine network topologies and protocols that
make full use of the capabilities of advanced radios.
In creating a new network architecture, protocols and algorithms needto be optimized to meet the objectives of military operations.  This is a

complex task.  As an example of the complex interdependence of algo-

rithms and architecture, the design of effective routing techniques needs

to aim for the following objectives:
¥Routing to maximize data rate, with minimum transport delay and
minimum delay variance;
¥LPD/AJ routing around vulnerable spots;
¥Routing for priority assignment and allocation of resources;
¥Routing for battery power conservation;
¥Routing for congestion avoidance;
¥Routing for access to servers for specific real-time applications;
and¥Routing to avoid anticipated propagation anomalies.
The difficulty of achieving all these objectives is compounded by the need

to run several different applications on mobile terminals at any given

time.  Therefore, the routing protocol needs to process each packet indi-

vidually to meet the QoS objective of the transmitting application.
In a mobile wireless network it should not be necessary for every
terminal to assume the size, weight, power, or cost burdens associated

with critical network services such as database servers, image servers,

speech recognition and synthesis, transcoding, transcrypting, position lo-

cation, and health and safety reporting.  Research on network architecture

can identify the best way to distribute services among network elements

with the aim of minimizing the weight and power consumption of de-

vices carried by personnel.
4.7  NETWORK SECURITY
6.DARPA should conduct research aimed at understanding and
bridging the differences between security needs in commercial and

military networks.
The commercial sector is developing a variety of data networking
products and services that are likely to be integrated into single-hop base-

station-oriented architectures.  However, as noted in Chapter 3, the re-

quirements for security in commercial networks are likely to be different

from those in defense applications.  For example, troops on the ground or

ships at sea that do not wish to disclose their location require high
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSLPD/I performance levels, a requirement not faced by most commercial
users.  These differences need to be understood and accommodated if the

military is to make use of commercial wireless technologies.
Research is needed to improve the information-processing features of
encryption techniques.  For example, the end-to-end encryption of all

traffic would obviate the need for interfaces or bridges between interact-

ing systems.  However, current end-to-end encryption algorithms require

considerable network overhead to establish the cryptographic synchroni-

zation.  DARPA could seek improved methods of end-to-end crypto-

graphic synchronization through multiple networks with lower overhead

than is currently possible.  With such methods, the time required to estab-

lish cryptographic synchronization between active network members

would be reduced significantly.
DARPA also needs to design network protocols that allow for com-
monality of hardware and software interfaces as well as security differ-

ences that meet the needs of all applications.  These protocols need to

provide multilevel security, long identified as important for defense com-

munications.  The concept entails the shared use of a network by indi-

viduals with differing authorization to access information of differing

levels of sensitivity.  Multilevel security implies the management of ac-

cess to computing and communications systems and to information trans-

mitted or stored in those systems commensurate with individuals
Õ autho-
rization.  In general, the design and implementation of multilevel security

systems have been imperfect, and wireless and mobile applications com-

pound the challenge.
4.8  HIGH-DENSITY COMMUNICATIONS PLATFORMS
7.DARPA should conduct research aimed at reducing co-site inter-
ference.
Military ships, combat aircraft, UAVs, and mobile battlefield systems
all operate a variety of communications systems in close proximity to one

another.  The placement of numerous radios in the same general location

typically results in interference and many compromises.  Current technol-

ogy designed to reduce the effects of co-site interference on radio perfor-

mance is quite limited.  For example, power combiners can connect up to

five transmitters to a single antenna, but only if the frequencies are suffi-

ciently separated.  Receive co-site filters can suppress the carrier of co-

located transmitters, but broadband signals are not suppressed adequately.
DARPA needs to catalog the co-site environment of military platforms,
identify both common and unusual problems, and design more effective
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
161solutions that are useful over a broad spectrum, such as 2 MHz to 2 GHz.
Specific co-site problems that require attention include the following:
¥The performance of an antenna changes when it is used near an-
other antenna or metallic structure, and it no longer provides the ex-

pected beam shape.
¥Electronic equipment emits low levels of RF radiation from inter-
nal local oscillators and data buses
Ñsignals that represent interference to
other radio receivers.
¥Radio receivers transmit a small amount of the local oscillator fre-
quency used to tune the radio, causing interference that is particularly

problematic if the local oscillator is dithered, hopped, or modulated.
¥Radios transmit signals not only on the intended carrier frequency
and modulation but also (in an attenuated fashion) on carrier harmonics,

intermodulation distortion products, intermediate frequencies, up-con-

version local oscillator frequencies, and the broadband noise of each
power amplifier stage.
This R&D would be timely because the full deployment of software
radios operating in broad frequency ranges will depend on the develop-

ment of techniques to overcome co-site interference and high-power in-

band interference.  When serving several subscribers in the same band

and mode at the same time, SINCGARS radios would experience signifi-

cant interference.  Significant technical challenges are associated with co-

site interference generated within the software radio itself.  Additional

issues arise in the effort to enhance mobility of forces.  For example,

consolidating multiple mechanized vehicles will produce a single com-

mand track, which now has six SINCGARS radios and the usual prob-

lems associated with multimode radios, regardless of whether the radio

architecture is analog, digital, or software based.
Research is also needed to minimize the interference caused by the
spurious emissions (spurs) and harmonics of co-site transmitters and re-

ceivers.  When many radios are co-located or networked, it might be

possible for each transmitter-receiver pair to agree on a common fre-

quency plan to minimize spurs and harmonics or on common filtering

plans to minimize co-site degradation.  Additional research topics could

include time and frequency management (to prioritize transmissions) and

reception time slots (to minimize the impact of transmissions likely to

cause interference to other receive channels).  Such research would need

to take into account the interleaving and coding present in each channel

and the likelihood of interference.  Finally, a new generation of highly

linear filters is needed with improved agility and a wider range of operat-

ing frequency than is currently possible.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONS4.9  SOFTWARE RADIOS
8.DARPA should carry out research and demonstration projects
designed to field software radio technology for military applications.
Software radio is a far more versatile technology than the term 
Òra-
dio
Ó implies.  These radios can operate as part of a network and perform
a vast array of electronic and computational functions (e.g., database man-agement, transcryption) through the downloading of software.  A net-

worked radio can function in ways not envisioned when the component

is manufactured.  In a military scenario, some radios can function as

active interrogators while others act in a passive manner, undetected but

coordinated by active units.  Similarly, software radios can perform ser-

vices that until now were unique to each application.
A software radio could be a leading part of the C
4I infrastructure:
With appropriate software it could be applied to signal intelligence, elec-

tronic intelligence, communications navigation and identification, elec-

tronic warfare, information warfare, electronic countermeasures, missile

tracking, guidance, or commercial paging or telephony.  The cost-effec-

tiveness of software radios increases with the number of available soft-

ware functions, the ease of performing new tasks, and the ease of cooper-

ating with other network systems to accomplish larger tasks.  The multiple
roles that can be played by software radios could have an impact on

DOD
Õs organizational structure, as services provided by individual orga-
nizations and procurements are combined in one system.
Commercial software radios are likely to have more limited capabili-
ties (e.g., changing signals and bandwidth on a single frequency) than are

military versions, which are being designed to span large frequency

ranges and implement many legacy waveforms.  However, the commer-

cial sector is achieving rapid advances in many software-radio compo-

nents, such as A/D converters, DSP chips, RF amplifiers, displays, batter-

ies, and data-storage devices.  The DOD can use these COTS products to

good advantage.  At the same time, DARPA needs to undertake special-

ized R&D focusing on antennas (Sections 4.10) and filters (Section 4.12)

for military applications.  Exploratory research on novel components and

designs could also be beneficial (Section 4.13).  In addition, to identify any

necessary improvements and make optimal use of this promising tech-

nology, DARPA needs to demonstrate software radio technology on de-

fense platforms where density, power, and weight are critical.
4.10  SMART ANTENNAS
9.DARPA should conduct the research needed to adapt smart an-
tennas for mobile military applications.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
163Commercial applications for smart, adaptive antennas are limited to
relatively low-cost and unsophisticated single-band units with limited
flexibility in beam pattern.  Moreover, virtually all existing adaptive an-

tennas for mobile radio applications are designed for use at base stations

rather than mobile units.  Military applications require antenna function-

ality for several orders of magnitude of frequency coverage as well as

electronic tuning, the coupling of more than one transmitted and received

signal, and a diversity of beam shapes ranging from omnidirectional to

pencil beams.  Several technical challenges need to be overcome before

such antennas can be produced.  DARPA research needs to pursue the

following objectives, among others:
¥Achievement of useful antenna performance over a large frequencyrange;¥Development of low-cost techniques for implementing beam shap-
ing with affordable companion electronics that implement the phase shift-
ing and weighting (i.e., the electrical process of feeding antenna elements);
and¥Improvements in the cost-effectiveness of frequency-agile couplers
with built-in co-site filtering.
4.11  SMART WAVEFORMS
10.DARPA should conduct research to produce transmission tech-
niques that adapt to a wide range of operating conditions.
Commercial communications systems tend to operate under predict-
able, stable conditions.  Therefore, commercial waveforms
Ñcharacterized
by frequency band, bit rate, modulation method, and source coding and

channel coding techniquesÑare designed for operation over a limited rangeof conditions.   For example, high-tier systems are designed for one set of

conditions, whereas low-tier systems are designed for a different set of

operating conditions.  The operating environments and transmission con-

ditions encountered by military communications systems are more unpre-

dictable and subject to change.  Military systems would therefore benefit

from transmission technologies that adapt to changing conditions.
Recent research has produced theoretical results on the optimization
of bit rate, modulation method, source coding, and channel coding tech-

niques.  New DARPA research should be aimed at uniting the theory of

adaptive modulation and coding with the emerging technologies of ad-

vanced software radios (Section 4.9), which promise a practical means of

implementing adaptive schemes.  The results of the recommended model-

ing and simulation research (Section 4.5) would provide valuable tools for

performing this work.  In addition to meeting military needs for adaptable
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSsystems, this work could serve the long-term needs of the commercial sec-
tor by providing core technologies for integrated personal communications

systems that combine the advantages of several of today
Õs separate sys-
tems.One objective should be to develop modulation and coding strategies
that allow the demodulator to acquire the properties of interference in the

time domain, the frequency domain, or the constellation domain so that

the interference can be avoided or canceled.  These techniques would

concentrate energy in the regions of frequency, time, or code space that

provide the greatest link margin.  Another objective should be to produce

transmission techniques that establish a data rate consistent with interfer-

ence and fading conditions.  These techniques should allow for selection

of a data rate over two or more decades of bit rate.  They should also be

designed for rapid carrier synchronization time, rapid timing synchroni-

zation, and minimum training time for learning channel conditions.  The

choice of data rate should be consistent with adaptive source coding,

which gracefully degrades the perceived quality of the end-to-end appli-

cation as the channel quality declines.
In addition, for defense applications new waveforms are needed that
allow for very high spread-spectrum processing gain.  Typical spread-spec-

trum techniques require considerable computational power to be detected

by the desired receiver.  The high signal-processing gain required to jointly

discover frequency offset, baud boundary (or baud boundary offset), and

spreading code alignment at these high processing gains is inconsistent

with traditional portable radio design.  In addition, new spread-spectrum

waveforms are needed that allow for further reductions in the detectability

of transmissions, direction, and properties of the spread signal.
4.12  FILTER TECHNOLOGY
11.DARPA should conduct research to overcome the limitations of
current filter technology for use in military software radios and high-

density platforms.
Both software radios and high-density platforms require advanced fil-
ters.  Filters currently constitute 25 percent of the volume of a typical soft-

ware radio and are used in receive preselectors, power amplifier output

filters, local oscillators, and mixers.  To a great extent the radio receiver
Õssensitivity and dynamic range are determined by the selectivity and the

losses of the preselectors, and the radio
Õs co-site performance is determined
by the selectivity of output filters and the filters in the local oscillators and

upconverters.  Active and digital filters are not appropriate for these func-

tions because they introduce noise that degrades performance.  Handheld
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
165software radios would be improved by the miniaturization of filtering func-tions and improvements in frequency tuning range and selectivity.
There is also a need for filters that cover wide frequency ranges.  Com-mercial radio equipment spans either a small frequency band or a few

selectable bands.  Military radios that span wide frequency ranges (such

as 2 MHz to 2 GHz) require lumped filters built of inductors and capaci-

tors to handle the low end of the frequency range and transmission-line

techniques for filtering at the high end.  Research is required to identify

new circuit and materials technologies that allow for tunable, highly se-

lective filters that span this entire range, operate at higher power levels,

and take up less physical volume.  In addition, new processing techniques

are needed to enable the monolithic integration of highly selective filters

with semiconductor devices and to produce multisection filters in more

sophisticated shapes.
4.13  NOVEL COMPONENTS
12.DARPA should develop novel components to enhance the flex-
ibility of software radios.
Software radios have been significantly enabled by novel components,notably DSPs and FPGAs, which allow new waveforms to be added to

fielded systems through the installation of new software and hardware.

Additional novel components could further enhance the flexibility of soft-

ware radio architectures.  For example, components could be designed to

reduce the equipment size, weight, and power needed to accommodate

military designs that incorporate a wide range of potential future wave-

forms and large numbers of legacy waveforms.  Radio performance could

be improved through research into new DSP architectures that have adap-
tive resolution, clock speed, instruction sets, memory architectures, and

arithmetic functions designed to the specific signal processing of commu-

nications systems.
Similarly, novel FPGAs that either interconnect analog circuit ele-
ments or integrate analog and digital operation could be of great value.  A

chip containing analog circuit elements and FPGAs could be applied to

the analog front-end functions of many communications systems while

also providing a broad range of interfaces to other systems.  Research is

required to identify the semiconductor processes and circuit topologies

that provide sufficient isolation between the various analog functions,

interconnection with minimal loss, and circuits with sufficient versatility

to be configured for many applications.
Finally, the monolithic integration of nearly the entire software radio
function could provide experience in combining analog and digital signal
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSfunctions on a common substrate.  It is currently difficult to keep digital
noise from coupling into analog circuitry and degrading performance.  Re-

search on how to implement wide-dynamic-range analog circuitry mono-

lithically with digital circuitry would provide the basis for implementing

an entire software radio on a single component.  Such an effort needs to

encompass the monolithic implementation of high-performance filters that

are tunable over large frequency ranges.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY1671674Bibliography
Abramson, N.  1982.  ÒFundamentals of Packet Multiple Access for Satellite Networks,Ó
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
 10(2):309Ð316.
Abramson, N.  1985.  ÒDevelopment of the ALOHANET,Ó invited paper, 
IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory
 31(2):119Ð123.
Abramson, N., ed.  1993. 
 Multiple Access Communications:  Foundations for Emerging Tech-
nologies.
  IEEE Press, Piscataway, New Jersey.
Abramson, N.  1994.  ÒMultiple Access in Wireless Digital Networks,Ó 
IEEE Proceedings
82(9):1360Ð1370.Abramson, N., and E.R. Cacciamani, Jr.  1975.  ÒSatellites:  Not Just a Big Cable in the Sky,Ó
IEEE Spectrum
 12(9):36Ð40.
Abrishamkar, F., and Z. Siveski.  1996.  ÒPCS Global Mobile Satellites,Ó 
IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine
 34(9):132Ð136.
Acampora, A.  1996.  ÒWireless ATM: A Perspective on Issues and Prospects,Ó 
IEEE Personal
Communications Magazine
 3(4):8Ð17.
Acampora, A., and M. Naghshineh.  1994.  ÒControl and Quality of Service Provisioning
in High Speed Microcellular Networks,Ó IEEE Personal Communications Magazine1(2):36Ð43.Allard, K.  1996.
  Information Operations in Bosnia:  A Preliminary Assessment.  
Strategic Forum
91.  Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense University Press, Wash-
ington, D.C.
Anderlohr, G.  1969.  ÒWhat Production Breaks Cost,Ó 
Industrial Engineering
 1(9):34Ð36.
Asta, D.  1991. 
 Recent Dynamic Range Characterization of Analog-to-Digital Converters for
Spectral Analysis Applications.
  Project Report AST-14.  Lincoln Laboratory, Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology, Lexington, Massachusetts.
Ayonoglu, E., et al.  1995.  ÒAIRMAIL:  A Link Layer Protocol for Wireless Networks,Ó
ACM Wireless Networks
 1(1):47Ð60.
Baier, P.W., et al.  1996.  ÒTaking the Challenge of Multiple Access for Third Generation
Cellular Mobile Radio SystemsÑA European View,Ó
 IEEE Communications Magazine
34(2):82Ð89.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSBalakrishnan, H., et al.  1995.  
ÒReliable Transport and Handoff Protocols for Cellular Wire-
less Networks,
Ó ACM Wireless Networks Journal
 1(3):469
Ð482.
Balakrishnan, H., et al.  1996.  
ÒA Comparison of Mechanisms for Improving TCP Perfor-
mance over Wireless Links,
Ó pp. 256-269 in
 Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM Confer-
ence on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communica-
tions. 
 ACM Press, New York.
Berrou, C., et al.  1993.  
ÒNear Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding:
Turbo-Codes,
Ó Proceedings of the IEEE International Communication Conference
 44(10):
1261Ð1271.Biggins, J.  1996.  
The Two Headed Eagle. 
 St. Martin
Õs Press, New York.
Booz-Allen & Hamilton, Inc. 1995.  
Tactical Internet Systems Description for TFXXI
.  Report
for the U.S. Army Communications Electronics Command by Booz-Allen & Hamilton,

Shrewsbury, New Jersey.
Bradley, G.  1996.  
ÒMilitary Maneuvers:  Boeing Buying McD; Intel, Phillips Retreat,
ÓElectronics News 
42(2148): 1, 36, 38.
Bray, J.  1995.  
The Communications Miracle
.  Plenum Publishing, New York.
Cacciamani, E.R.  1970.  
ÒCommunications Satellites for the 1970
Õs,
Ó pp. 559
Ð572 in 
Proceed-
ings of the AIAA 3rd Communications Satellite Conference
, N. Feldman and C. Kelly, eds.
Paper No. 70-420.  Alpine Press Co., Los Angeles.
Cacciamani, E.R.  1971.  
ÒA Channel Unit for Digital Communications in the SPADE
System,
Ó paper presented at the IEEE International Conference on Communications,
Montreal, Canada, June 14
Ð16.
Cacciamani, E.R.  1973.  
ÒSynchronization and Coding in Data Communications Satellite
Networks,
Ó pp. 311
Ð327 in 
Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute on Com-
puter Communications Networks
, R.L. Grimsdale and F.F. Kuo, eds.  Noordhoff Interna-
tional Publishing, The Netherlands.
Caceras, R., and L. Iftode.  1995.  
ÒImproving the Performance of Reliable Transport Proto-
cols in Mobile Computing Environments,
Ó IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations
 13(5):850
Ð857.
Calhoun, G.  1988.  
Digital Cellular Radio
.  Artech House Publishers, Norwood, Massachu-
setts.Calhoun, G.  1992.  
Wireless Access and the Local Telephone Network
.  Artech House Publish-
ers, Norwood, Massachusetts.
Chuang, J.C.I.  1987.  
ÒThe Effects of Time Delay Spread on Portable Radio Communica-
tions Channels with Digital Modulation,
Ó IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions
 46(2):375
Ð380.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1994.  
Real-
izing the Information Future:  The Internet and Beyond
.  National Academy Press, Wash-
ington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1996.  
The
Unpredictable Certainty:  Information Infrastructure Through 2000
.  National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.
Couch, L.W.  1995.  
Modern Communication Systems:  Principles and Applications
.  Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Cox, D.C.  1995.  
ÒWireless Personal Communications: What Is It?
Ó IEEE Personal Communi-
cations Magazine
 2(2):20
Ð35.
Cox, D.C.  1996.  
ÒWireless Loops: What Are They?
Ó International Journal of Wireless Informa-
tion Networks 
3(3):125
Ð138.
Crawford, G.P., and T.G. Fiske.  1996.  
ÒReflective Color LCDs Based on H-PDLC and PSCT
Technologies,
Ó Proceedings of the Society for Information Display International Symposium:
Digest of Technical Papers
 27:99
Ð102.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY169Crochierre, R., et al.  1983. 
 Multirate Digital Signal Processing.
  Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey.
Cross-Industry Working Team.  1995. 
 Nomadicity in the NII.
  Corporation for National
Research Initiatives, Reston, Virginia.
Davids, N.  1996a.  
ÒPersonal Digital Assistants:  Part 1,
Ó IEEE Computer Magazine
 29(9):96
Ð100.Davids, N.  1996b.  
ÒPersonal Digital Assistants:  Part 2,
Ó IEEE Computer Magazine
 29(11):
100Ð104.Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.  1996.  Home page, http://www.ito.darpa.
mil/ResearchAreas/Information_Survivability.html.
Economist, The.
  1997.  
ÒFinancial Indicators:  Telecommunications,
Ó p. 119 in Vol. 342, No.
8007.Evans, T.F.  1997.  
ÓCellemetry-Telemetry via Cellular,
Ó pp. 1
Ð11 in 
Wireless Personal Com-
munications: Advances in Coverage and Capacity,
 J.H. Reed, T.S. Rappaport, and B.D.
Woerner, eds.  Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, Massachusetts.
Forman, G.H., and J. Zahorjan.  1994.  
ÒThe Challenges of Mobile Computing,
Ó IEEE Com-
puter Magazine
 27(4):38
Ð47.
Gallager, R.G.  1985.  
ÒA Perspective on Multiaccess Channels,
Ó IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Theory
 31(2):124
Ð142.
Garg, V.K., and J.E. Wilkes.  1996.  Wireless and Personal Communications Systems.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Gavish, B., and S. Sridhar.  1995a.  
ÒEconomic Aspects of Configuring Cellular Networks,
ÓWireless Networks
 1(1):115
Ð128.
Gavish B., and S. Sridhar.  1995b.  
ÒModels for Configuring Cellular Networks with Mobil-
ity,
Ó pp. 168
Ð178 in 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Telecommunication
Systems
.  ATSMA, Inc., Nashville, Tennessee.
Gerla, M., and J. Tsai.  1995.  
ÒMulticluster, Mobile, Multimedia Radio Network,
Ó ACM
Wireless Networks
 1(3):255
Ð266.
Gilhousen, K.S., et al.  1991.  
ÒOn the Capacity of a Cellular CDMA System,
Ó IEEE Transac-
tions on Vehicular Technology
 40(2):303
Ð312.
Goldsmith, A., and S.G. Chua.  In press.  
ÒVariable-Rate Variable-Power MQAM for Fading
Channels,
Ó to appear in 
IEEE Transactions on Communications
 2:815
Ð819.
Goldsmith, A.J.  1997.  
ÒCapacity of Downlink Fading Channels with Variable Rate and
Power,
Ó IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology
 46(3):569
Ð580.
Grant, M.  1996.  
ÒSignal Processing Hardware and Software,
Ó IEEE Signal Processing Maga-
zine
 13(1):86
Ð88.
Gundmundson, B., et al.  1992.  
ÒA Comparison of CDMA and TDMA Systems,
Ó pp. 732
Ð735 in
 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Record
.  Institute of Electrical and Electron-
ics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey.
Hafner, K., and M. Lyon.  1996.  
Where Wizards Stay Up Late:  The Origins of the Internet
.Simon and Schuster, New York.
Headrick, D.R.  1991.  The Invisible Weapon: Telecommunications and International Politics 1851Ð1945.
  Oxford University Press, New York.
Hill, C.H.  1997.  
ÒThe Spoils of War,
Ó The Wall Street Journal
, September 11, pp. r1, r4.
Holzman, G.J., and B. Pehrson.  1995.  
The Early History of Data Networks
.  IEEE Press, Los
Alamitos, California.
INSTAT/SIA Information Services.  1997.  
ÒSemiconductor End Use Forecast.
Ó  INSTAT/
SIA Information Services, Scottsdale, Arizona.
International Telecommunications Union Task Group 8/1.  1996.  Working documents from
the 10th meeting, Mainz, Germany, April 15
Ð26.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSJubin, J., and J.D. Tornow.  1987.  
ÒThe DARPA Packet Radio Network Protocols,
Ó Proceed-
ings of the IEEE
 75(1):21
Ð32.
Kahn, R.E., et al.  1978.  
ÒAdvances in Packet Radio Technology,
Ó Proceedings of the IEEE
,66(11):1468
Ð1496.
Katz, R.H.  1994.  
ÒAdaptation and Mobility in Wireless Information Systems,
Ó IEEE Per-
sonal Communications Magazine
 1(1):6
Ð17.
Katz, R.H., and E.A. Brewer.  1996.  
ÒA Case for Wireless Overlay Networks,
Ó paper pre-
sented at the 1996 SPIE Conference on Multimedia and Networking, MMCM 
Õ96, San
Jose, California, January 27
ÐFebruary 2.
Katzela, I., and M. Naghshineh.  1996.  
ÒChannel Assignment Schemes for Cellular Mobile
Telecommunication Systems:  A Comprehensive Survey,
Ó IEEE Personal Communica-
tions Magazine
 3(3):10
Ð31.
Kelly, K.  1994.  
Out of Control. 
 Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
Lauer, G.S.  1995.  
ÒPacket-Radio Networks,
Ó pp. 355
Ð358 in 
Routing in Communications
Networks
, M.E. Steenstrup, ed.  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Leiner, B.M., et al.  1996.  
ÒGoals and Challenges of the DARPA GloMo Program,
Ó IEEE
Personal Communications Magazine
 3(6):34
Ð43.
Leiner, B.M., et al.  1997.  
ÒIssues in Packet Radio Network Design,
Ó Proceedings of the IEEE
75(1):6Ð20.Lewis, T.  1993. 
 Empire of the Air:  The Men Who Made Radio
.  Harper Perennial, New York.
Lin, S., and D.J. Costello.  1983.  
Error Control Coding:  Fundamentals and Applications.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Masini, G.  1996. 
 Marconi
.  Marsilio Publishers, New York.
McCanne, S., and V. Jacobson.  1993.  
ÒThe BSD Packet Filter: A New Architecture for User-
Level Packet Capture,
Ó pp. 259
Ð269 in 
Proceedings of the 1993 Winter USENIX Technical
Conference
.  USENIX Associates, Berkeley, California.
Mooney, E.V.  1997.  
ÒMore Consolidation Yet to Come in Shrinking Paging Industry?
ÓRCR
, May 12.  Homepage, http://www.rcrnews.com.
Myles, A., et al.  1995.  
ÒA Mobile Host Protocol Supporting Route Optimization and Au-
thentication,
Ó IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
 13(5):839
Ð849.
Naval Studies Board, National Research Council. 1997.  
Technology for the United States Navy
and Marine Corps, 2000
Ð2035: Becoming a 21st-Century Force
, 9 Volumes, National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.
Nguyen, G.T., et al.  1996.  
ÒA Trace-Based Approach for Modeling Wireless Channel Be-
havior,
Ó paper presented at Winter Simulation Conference, Coronado, California, De-
cember 8
Ð11.
Norberg, A.L., and J.E. O
ÕNeill.  1992.  
A History of the Information Processing Techniques
Office of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
.  Charles Babbage Institute, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota.
Ogawa, K., et al.  1994.  
ÒToward the Personal Communication Era,
Ó International Journal of
Wireless Information Networks 
1(1):17
Ð27.
Padgett, J.E., et al.  1995.  
ÒOverview of Wireless Communications,
Ó IEEE Communications
Magazine
 33(1):28
Ð41.
Pahlavan, K.  1995.  
ÒWireless LANs,
Ó in Personal Communication Systems and Technologies,
 J.Gardiner and B. West, eds.  Artech House Publishers, Norwood, Massachusetts.
Pahlavan, K., and A. Levesque.  1994.  
ÒWireless Data Communication,
Ó invited paper
,IEEE Proceedings
 82(9):1398
Ð1430.
Pahlavan, K., and A. Levesque.  1995.  
Wireless Information Networks
.  John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Pahlavan, K., et al.  1993.  
ÒDecision Feedback Equalization of the Indoor Radio Channel,
ÓIEEE Transactions on Communication
s 41(1):164
Ð170.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY171Pahlavan, K., et al.  1995.  
ÒTrends in Local Wireless Networks,
Ó IEEE Communications
Magazine
 33(3):88
Ð95.
Pahlavan, K., et al.  1996a.  
ÒTransmission Techniques for Wireless LANs,
Ó IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications,
 special issue on wireless local communications 14(3):
477Ð491.Pahlavan, K., et al.  1996b.  
ÒTrends in Local Wireless Networks,
Ó invited paper, 
Proceedings
of the IEEE
 33(3):88
Ð95.
Peterson, L.L., and B.S. Davie.  1996.  
Computer Networks:  A Systems Approach
.  Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco.
Ramsdale, P.A.  1994.  
ÒPersonal Communications in UK
ÑImplementation of PCN Using
DCS-1800,
Ó International Journal of Wireless Information Networks 
1(1):29
Ð36.
Rappaport, T.S.  1989.  
ÒIndoor Radio Communications for Factories of the Future,
Ó IEEE
Communications Magazine
 27(5):15
Ð24.
Rappaport, T.S.  1996.  Wireless CommunicationsÑPrinciples and Practice.  Prentice-Hall,Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Rhode, L., and T.T.N. Bucher.  1988.  Communications Receivers:  Principles & Design.  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Russell, J.E.  1994.  
ÒUniversal Personal Communications: Emergence of a Paradigm Shift in
the Communications Industry,
Ó International Journal of Wireless Information Networks
3(3):149Ð164.Sari, H., et al.  1995.  
ÒTransmission Techniques for Digital Terrestial TV Broadcasting,
ÓIEEE Communications Magazine
 33(2):100
Ð109.
Sass, P. 1996.  
Survivable Adaptive Systems ATD Final Technical Report.
  U.S. Army
Communications Electronics Command, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.
Sass, P., and I. Eldridge.  1994.  
ÒArmy Demonstrates Wideband on the Move Communica-
tions for Digitized Battlefields,
Ó SIGNAL 48(7):54-55.
Sass, P., and L. Gorr.  1995.  
ÒCommunications for the Digitized Battlefield of the 21st
Century,
Ó IEEE Communications Magazine
 33(10):86-95.
Shannon, C.E.  1949.  
ÒCommunication in the Presence of Noise,
Ó Proceedings of the Institute
of Radio Engineers
 37:10
Ð21.
Shannon, C.E., and W. Weaver.  1949.  
A Mathematical Theory of Communication.
  University
of Illinois Press
, 
Urbana.
Sheng, S., et al.  1992.  
ÒA Portable Multimedia Terminal,
Ó IEEE Communications Magazine
30(12):64Ð75.Spencer, N.  1988.  
ÒComparison of State-of-the-Art Analog-to-Digital Converters,
Ó p. 75 in
Project Report AST-4
.  Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lex-
ington, Massachusetts.
Steer, D.G.  1994.  
ÒCoexistence and Access Etiquette in the United States Unlicensed PCS
Band,
Ó IEEE Personal Communications Magazine
 1(4):36
Ð43.
Tanenbaum, A.S.  1996.  Computer Networks, 
3rd Ed.  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey.Taylor, M.S., et al.  
Internetwork Mobility.
  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Turin, G.L.  1980.  
ÒIntroduction to Spread Spectrum Antimultipath Techniques and Their
Application to Urban Digital Radio,
Ó IEEE Proceedings
 68(3):328
Ð353.
Ungerboeck, G.  1982.  
ÒChannel Coding with Multilevel Phase Signals,
Ó IEEE Transactions
on Information
 Theory
 28(1):55
Ð67.
Van Tuyl, R.L.  1996.  
ÒUnlicensed Millimeter Wave Communications:  A New Opportunity
for MMIC Technology at 60 GHz,
Ó paper presented at IEEE GaAs IC Symposium, Palo
Alto, California, November 3
Ð6.
Viterbi, A.J.  1994.  
ÒA Vision of the Second Century of Wireless Communication,
Ó Interna-
tional Journal of Wireless Information Networks
 1(1):3
Ð6.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172THE EVOLUTION OF UNTETHERED COMMUNICATIONSWalrand, J., and P. Varaiya.  1996.  
High Performance Communications Networks. 
 Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, California.
Wepman, J.A., and J.R. Hoffman.  1996. 
 RF and IF Digitization in Radio Receivers:  Theory,
Concepts, and Examples.
  NTIA Report 96-328.  U.S. Department of Commerce, Wash-
ington, D.C.
Wickelgren, I.J.  1996.  
ÒLocal Area Networks Go Wireless,
Ó IEEE Spectrum
 33(9):34
Ð40.
Yacoub, M.D.  1993.  
Foundations of Mobile Radio Engineering.
  CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Ziemer, R.E., and W.H. Tranter.  1995.  
Principles of Communications Systems, Modulation and
Noise
.  John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Ziv, J., and A. Lempel.  1978.  
ÒCompression of Individual Sequences by Variable Rate
Source Coding,
Ó IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
 IT-24(5):530
Ð536.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1734APPENDIXESThe Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
175175ABiographies of Committee Members
DAVID J. GOODMAN
, 
chair
, is director of the Wireless Information
Network Laboratory at Rutgers University, where he is also a profes-
sor and former chairman in the Department of Electrical and Com-

puter Engineering.  Previously, he spent 20 years at AT&T Bell Labo-

ratories, where he was a department head in communications systems

research.  Dr. Goodman received a B.S. degree from Rensselaer Poly-

technic Institute, an M.S. degree from New York University, and a

Ph.D. from Imperial College, University of London, all in electrical

engineering.  He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics

Engineers and the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
NORMAN ABRAMSON 
is vice president and chief technology officer of
ALOHA Networks, Inc.  Previously, he was director of the ALOHA

System at the University of Hawaii and a professor of electrical engi-

neering at Hawaii and at Stanford University.  Dr. Abramson has

taught communication theory, computer networks, and satellite com-

munication courses at the University of California at Berkeley,

Harvard University, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology while

on visiting appointments.  He is a recipient of the Koji Kobayashi

Computers and Communications award given by the Institute of Elec-

trical and Electronics Engineers.  Dr. Abramson received an A.B. de-

gree from Harvard University and an M.A. degree from the Univer-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176APPENDIX A
sity of California at Los Angeles, both in physics, and a Ph.D. in elec-
trical engineering from Stanford University.
EUGENE CACCIAMANI
 is a senior vice president at Hughes Network
Systems, where he is responsible for business development, advanced

systems engineering, and government business.  Previously, he was

president and chief executive officer of MA/COMNET and held key

management positions at the American Satellite Company and the

Communications Satellite Corporation.  Dr. Cacciamani also worked

at RCA Data Systems Division and served in the U.S. Air Force.  He is

a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.  He

received a B.S. degree from Union College and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees

from the Catholic University of America, all in electrical engineering.
JOEL ENGEL
, recently retired as vice president-technology at Ameritech.
Previously, he was vice president for research and development at

MCI and vice president of engineering at Satellite Business Systems.

Dr. Engel also held several positions, including manager for corporate

planning studies, at AT&T and Bell Laboratories and at the Massachu-

setts Institute of Technology (MIT) Instrumentation Laboratory.  He is

a member of the National Academy of  Engineering and a fellow of the

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).  He is a recipi-

ent of the National Medal of Technology and the IEEE Alexander

Graham Bell Medal.  Dr. Engel received a B.S. degree from the City

College of New York, an M.S. degree from MIT, and a Ph.D. degree

from the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn.
MARK EPSTEIN
 is vice president, development, at QUALCOMM, Inc.
Prior to joining QUALCOMM, Dr. Epstein served as deputy for C
3I to
the assistant secretary of the U.S. Army (RDA), and, earlier, as a staff

assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense.  His previous posi-

tions include program director at the Computer Sciences Corporation

and assistant director, engineering, for Northrop Page Communica-

tions.  Dr. Epstein received B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Massachu-

setts Institute of Technology and a Ph.D. from Stanford University, all

in electrical engineering.  He serves as chairman of the Telecommuni-

cations Industry AssociationÕs International Standards Coordinating

Committee and as a member of two U.S. delegations to the Interna-

tional Telecommunications Union Radiocommunication Sector.
BRUCE FETTE
 is chief engineer at MotorolaÕs Government and Systems
Technology Group Communications Division.  He has been involved

in signal processing analysis for numerous systems, including the
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
177SpeakEASY multiband, multimode radio; wideband wireless network;Joint Special Forces Operations Radio System, Integrated Team Radio;

and numerous vocoders and systems in the STU-III family of secure

telephone systems.  Dr. Fette received a B.S. degree from the Univer-

sity of Cincinnati and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Arizona State Uni-

versity, all in electrical engineering.
DOUGLAS C. FIELDS
 is a vice president of United Parcel Service, where
he has been involved in developing wireless voice and data communi-

cations systems for the worldwide delivery vehicle fleet.  Previously,

he directed telecommunications planning for Corning Glass Works,

Levi Strauss & Company, and Key Services Corporation and was a

consultant to the Pacific Telephone Company.  Mr. Fields attended

Los Angeles City College and served in the U.S. Army Signal Corps.

He is a member of the International Telecommunications Users Group.BEZALEL GAVISH 
is a professor at the Owen Graduate School of Man-
agement at Vanderbilt University.  He previously held positions at the

Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, Naval

Postgraduate School, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, and Uni-
versity of Rochester.  In addition, he was a visiting researcher at Bell

Laboratories and IBM Corp. and a department head for the Israel

Defense Forces logistics branch.  Dr. Gavish received a B.Sc. degree in

industrial engineering and management science and M.Sc. and Ph.D.

degrees in operations research, all from Technion.
ANDREA GOLDSMITH
 is an assistant professor of electrical engineer-
ing at the California Institute of Technology.  She previously worked

at AT&T Bell Laboratories and MAXIM Technologies.  Dr. Goldsmith

is the recipient of a National Science Foundation career development

award and was an IBM fellow.  She is an editor of both 
IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications
 and 
IEEE Personal Communications Magazine.
Dr. Goldsmith received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the Univer-

sity of California at Berkeley, all in electrical engineering.
RANDY H. KATZ 
is a professor of computer science at the University of
California at Berkeley and a principal investigator in the Bay Area

Wireless Access Network project.  He has taught at UC Berkeley since

1983, with the exception of 1993 and 1994, when he was a program

manager and deputy director of the Computing Systems Technology

Office at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.  Dr. Katz

received a B.S. degree from Cornell University and M.S. and Ph.D.

degrees from UC Berkeley, all in computer science.  He is a fellow of
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178APPENDIX A
the Association for Computing Machinery and of the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers.
EDWIN A. KELLEY
 is division chief scientist and manager of the digital
transceiver product line for both commercial and military applications

at Hughes Communication Products, Hughes Aircraft Company.  Mr.

Kelley has been the program manager for the advanced secure digital

radio and the advanced communications engine project supported by

the Department of Defense.  Mr. Kelley received a B.S. degree in elec-

trical engineering and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering and com-

puter science, all from the University of California at Berkeley.
KAVEH PAHLAVAN
 is director of the Center for Wireless Information
Network Studies at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute, where he is

also a professor.  Previously, he was the director of advanced develop-

ment at Infinit, Inc., and taught at Northeastern University.  He is a

consultant to numerous companies on cellular networks, communica-

tions theory, and technical aspects of wireless networks.  Dr. Pahlavan

is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Com-

munication Society and the editor-in-chief of the 
International Journal
of Wireless Information Networks.
  He received an M.S. degree from the
University of Tehran and a Ph.D. degree from Worcester Polytechnic

Institute, both in electrical engineering.
CHARLES E. PERKINS 
is a senior staff engineer at Sun Microsystems.
Previously, he was a research staff member at the IBM T.J. Watson

Research Center.  He is the author or co-author of standards-track

documents in the srvloc (service location), dhc (dynamic host configu-

ration), and IPng (IP new generation) working groups of the Internet

Engineering Task Force.  He also serves on the Internet Architecture

Board and recently wrote a book on Mobile IP.  Mr. Perkins is an

associate editor of 
Mobile Communications and Computing Review
, the
official publication of ACM SIGMOBILE, and serves on the editorial

board of 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking
.  He received a B.A.
degree in mathematics and an M.E.E. degree from Rice University,

and an M.A. degree in mathematics from Columbia University.
THEODORE RAPPAPORT
 is professor and director of the Mobile and
Portable Radio Research Group in the Bradley Department of Electri-

cal Engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute.  Previously, he was a

postdoctoral research associate at the National Science Foundation

(NSF) Engineering Research Center for Intelligent Manufacturing Sys-

tems at Purdue University and an engineer at Harris Corp.  Dr.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
179Rappaport is a fellow of the Radio Club of America and a recipient of
the NSF presidential faculty fellow award and the Institute of Electri-

cal and Electronics Engineers Marconi Young Scientist Award.  He

received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Purdue University, all in

electrical engineering.
JESSE RUSSELL
, is chief wireless architect and managing director of the
AT&T Wireless Communications Center of Excellence.  His previous

positions at AT&T include chief technical officer in the Wireless Sys-

tems Business Unit, vice president of the Advanced Wireless Technol-

ogy Laboratory, director of the Cellular Transmission Laboratory and

Cellular Telecommunications Laboratory, and head of several depart-

ments.  Mr. Russell is a member of the National Academy of Engineer-

ing and a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.

He has received numerous awards, including U.S. Black Engineer of

the Year.  He received a B.S. degree from Tennessee State University

and an M.S. from Stanford University, both in electrical engineering.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180APPENDIX B180BBriefers to the Committee
JULY 29, 1996
Kevin Mills, Program Manager, Defense Advanced Research Projects
AgencyEugene Famolari, Associate Director, Army Communications-Electronics
Command (CECOM)
Paul Sass, Special Projects Office, CECOM
Jim Freebersyser, Army Research Office

John Graniero, Chief Scientist for C3, Air Force Rome Laboratory
OCTOBER 15, 1996
Rob Ruth, Program Manager, Defense Advanced Research Projects
AgencyMarlan Kvigne, Chief Engineer, Communications and Information Sys-
tems Department, NCCOSC (RDTE Division)
Joe Macker, Network Research Scientist, Center for High Assurance Com-
puter Systems, Naval Research Laboratory
David Wye, Technical Advisor, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau,
Federal Communications Commission
DECEMBER 10, 1996
Lou Dellaverson, Manager, Wireless ATM Laboratory, Motorola
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B181Nicolas Kauser, Chief Technology Officer, AT&T Wireless Services
William Osborn, Manager of Technology Development, Cellular Phone
Research and Development Center, Ericsson, Inc.
Joseph A. Tarallo, Director, Wireless Base Station and Radio Technology
Department, Lucent Technologies
D. Raychaudhuri, NEC America (via telephone)
At the December 1996 session, invited speakers from industry were
asked to address these questions, among others:
1.What technologies will the consumer wireless industry likely de-
velop over the next 5 to 15 years, regardless of whether the federal gov-

ernment provides basic R&D?
2.Are there any critical telecommunications technologies that must
be funded/developed by the U.S. government because commercial in-

dustry cannot justify the risk or exploratory expense?
3.What are the most critical technical and nontechnical issues facing
the wireless industry that threaten the competitiveness or growth of indi-

vidual companies on a global scale?
4.What is the potential for synergy between military needs and likely
commercial development? What technology gaps will the military need

to fill in order to use commercial products and services?
5.Which countries are leading in wireless communications, in terms
of deployment of technologies? What are examples of good policies that

help to foster good technological development in these countries? Who

will be the future leaders, and why?
6.How does industry benefit from wireless research done in aca-
demic institutions, universities, and research centers? What are some ex-

amples?
7.Given that the military may have to operate globally in developed
and underdeveloped regions, what could be viable wireless technologies

to support military mobile missions?
In addition to the guests invited to participate on the panel, there
were seven observers from the Federal Communications Commission:

David Wye, Ron Netro, Marty Liebman, Mike Marcus, Larry Petak, Steve

Sharkey, and Tom Stanley.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182APPENDIX C182CGlossaryACE
 (advanced communications engine) is a prototype multiband, multi-
mode software radio capable of emulating both military combat net
radios and commercial avionics radio systems.
ACN
 (airborne communications node) is an unmanned aerial vehicle de-
signed and equipped to provide hierarchical communications ser-

vices and crosslinking over a broad theater of operations.  See RAP

and UAV.
ACTS 
(Advanced Communications Technologies and Services program)
is the European CommissionÕs latest precompetitive research effort

focusing on advanced communications systems.
A/D converter
 is an analog-to-digital converter.
AJ 
(antijam) refers to techniques for reducing the effectiveness of attempts
to jam communications channels.  See Jamming.
AMPS 
(advanced mobile phone system) is the standard for the analog
cellular radio telephones now widely available throughout the United
States.ARQ
 (automatic repeat request) is a protocol used to retransmit data
packets received in error.
ASIC
 is an application-specific integrated circuit.
ATM 
(asynchronous transfer mode) enables voice, data, and video to be
handled with a uniform transmission protocol.  It breaks up the infor-

mation to be transmitted into short packets of data and intersperses

them using time division with data from other sources and delivered

over trunk networks.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C183ATM cell 
is an information packet containing 53 bytes of data traffic and
additional 
Òoverhead
Ó defining the virtual circuits and paths over
which the data are to be transmitted.
Bandwidth 
is the part of a frequency band occupied by a communica-
tions channel.  Sometimes the term is used to describe the number of
bits per second transmitted in a channel.
Bent pipe 
is a satellite communications system that transmits to an Earth
station essentially the same signal it receives from another Earth sta-

tion.BER
 (bit-error rate) is the probability that a bit is received in error.
Bit
 is a binary unit of information.
bps
 (bits per second) refers to the speed at which data is generated by a
source or transmitted over a communications channel.  Measurements

are often stated in units of 10
3 bits per second (kilobits or kbps) or 10
6bits per second (megabits or Mbps).
Byte
 is a unit of 8 bits.
C4I (command, control, communications, computing, intelligence) is a
military concept encompassing all the functions and capabilities

sought in an advanced communications system.
CDMA
 (code division multiple access) is a technique that allows many
users to share the same radio spectrum.  A sequence of pseudo-ran-

dom bits, known as a code, spreads the information signal over a

much larger range of frequencies than is occupied by the original

information signal.  See FDMA, TDMA, spread spectrum.
CDPD 
(cellular digital packet data) is a packet-switched network that
uses one or more channels in an analog cellular telephone system.
Cell 
refers to a geographic region within which cellular telephone sub-
scribers can communicate with a particular base station (site).  Cell

radius ranges from 0.5
Ð15 kilometers depending on the density of the
subscribers and the extent of topological obstructions.
CELP
 (code excited linear prediction) is a technique for encoding voice.
CMOS 
(complementary metal oxide semiconductor) is an inexpensive,
low-power integrated circuit technology.
CONDOR
 is a National Security Agency program designed to develop
and demonstrate secure voice and secure net broadcast services, us-

ing STU III-compatible units, over the commercial cellular infrastruc-

ture.COTS
 (commercial off-the-shelf) refers to readily available commercial
technologies and systems.
CSMA/CD
 (carrier-sense multiple access with collision detection) is a
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184APPENDIX Cprotocol that regulates the manner in which terminals gain access to a
shared communications channel.
DAMA
 (demand-assigned multiple access) is a technique that enables
many users to share the same radio spectrum.  A common signaling

channel is assigned to handle requests from transmitters for network

capacity.
dB
 is decibels, a unit for expressing the relative intensity of acoustic and
electromagnetic waves.
DBS
 (direct broadcast satellite) is a system in which GEO satellites broad-
cast a signal with sufficient power to enable direct reception in a

home, office, or vehicle with an inexpensive receiver.
DFE 
(decision feedback equalizer)is a nonlinear equalization technique
designed to reduce the effects of intersymbol interference.  See ISI.
Doppler effect
 is a change in the received signal frequency due to move-
ment of the transmitter or receiver.
DSP 
(digital signal processor/processing) is a specialized integrated cir-
cuit used to analyze or alter the characteristics of communications

signals.Erlang
 is a unit reflecting the traffic intensity on a communication link.  It
is equivalent to the fraction of time that the link is occupied.
ETSI
 is the European Telecommunications Standards Institute.
Fading
 refers to changes in the amplitude of received signals due to char-
acteristics of the transmission path and motion of the transmitter and

receiver.
FCC
 is the Federal Communications Commission.
FDMA 
(frequency division multiple access) is a technique that enables
many users to share the same radio spectrum.   Each user is allocated

a different frequency.  This is the approach used in AMPS cellular

radio.  See CDMA, TDMA.
FEC
 (forward error correction) codes give digital signals a highly special-
ized redundancy that enables a receiver to recognize and correct oc-

casional errors in the received signal.
FH
 (frequency hopping) is a technique for changing transmit frequency in
a way that makes it difficult for an adversary to jam communications.
FIR
 (finite impulse response) refers to a signal-processing operation per-
formed by a DSP.
FM
 (frequency modulation) is a modulation technique in which informa-
tion is conveyed in the high frequency of a carrier signal.
FPLMTS
 (future public land mobile telecommunication system) is the
original name for the International Telecommunications Union
Õs con-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C185cept for third-generation wireless telephone systems.  It is now called
IMT-2000.Frequency reuse
 refers to the use of the same signal spectrum at different
geographical locations.
GBS 
(global broadcast system) is an advanced military satellite commu-
nications system designed to have very high data rates (100 megabits

per second) and global coverage.
GEO 
(geosynchronous orbit) refers to an equatorial satellite orbit ap-
proximately 36,000 kilometers from the Earth in which the satellite

remains stationary over one position on the Earth
Õs surface.
GloMo
 (Global Mobile Information Systems) is a research and demon-
stration program dealing with mobile, wireless communications.  It is

funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
GSM 
(global system for mobile communications) is a combination
TDMA/FDMA cellular radio system that is the current digital stan-

dard in Europe.  It was originally known as group system mobile.
Have Quick
 is a military UHF radio designed to provide secure air-to-air
and air-to-ground communications with AJ capabilities.
HF
 (high frequency) is the frequency band at 3
Ð30 megahertz.
HIPERLAN
 is a high-performance radio local-area network designed to
operate at 20 megabits per second.
Hz
 (hertz) refers to a unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second.
Frequencies are often stated in units of 10
3 
hertz (kilohertz or kHz),
10
6  
hertz (megahertz or MHz), or 10
9 
hertz (gigahertz or GHz).
IC
 is an integrated circuit.

IEEE
 is the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
IMT-2000
 (International Mobile Telecommunications-2000) is the Inter-
national Telecommunications Union
Õs concept for third-generation
mobile wireless telephone systems.
Information warfare 
refers primarily to recent U.S. initiatives designed to
protect computer network infrastructures against intentional disrup-

tions.  The term encompasses many forms of disruption aimed at

communications networks (both wired and wireless) and the relevant

countermeasures.
INMARSAT 
(International Maritime Satellite) is an organization of 75
member countries that has launched several generations of satellite

communications systems for voice and low-rate data applications.
Intelsat is an international, government-chartered organization estab-lished in 1964 to coordinate worldwide satellite communications pro-
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186APPENDIX Cgrams.  A series of INTELSAT communications satellites has been
launched.
IS-95
 is the North American standard for second-generation CDMA digi-
tal wireless telephone systems.
IS-136 is the North American standard for second-generation TDMA digi-tal wireless telephone systems.
ISDN
 (integrated services digital network) is a set of international stan-
dards that specify the manner in which different types of information

(e.g., voice, data, video) can be transmitted in the same communica-

tions system.
ISI
 (intersymbol interference) occurs when multipath reflections corre-
sponding to a given bit transmission arrive at the receiver simulta-

neously with subsequent data bits.
ISM (industrial, scientific, and medical) refers to the unlicensed frequencybands available for use by any wireless device that conforms to rules

established by the FCC.
ITU
 is the International Telecommunications Union.
Jamming
 is a type of transmission designed to disrupt the radio commu-
nications of an adversary so as to interfere with military operations.
JCIT
 (Joint C4I Terminal) is a software-defined radio under development
by the Naval Research Laboratory that will implement combat net,
intelligence communications, and military datalinks on a single plat-

form.LAN
  is a local area network.
LEO
 (low Earth orbit) is a satellite communications system deployed in a
low orbit (500 to 2,000 kilometers from Earth).
LOS
 (line of sight) refers to a radio communications systems with an
unobstructed path between the transmitter and receiver.
LPC
 (linear predictive coding) is a coding technique based on a math-
ematical model of a voice signal.
LPD/I
 (low probability of detection and interception) refers to the capa-
bility to minimize an adversary
Õs awareness of transmitted radio en-
ergy, ability to measure any properties of a detected signal, or ability

to intercept the transmission.
MEO
 (medium Earth orbit) is a satellite orbit of intermediate height be-
tween LEO and GEO orbits.
Message store-forward
 is a system in which a message is uploaded to a
satellite and held there until the satellite is in a position to download

it to the destination.  It is an alternative to bent-pipe systems.
Millennium
 is a military research effort to design an ultra-wideband
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C187radio.  One objective is to demonstrate extremely high-speed A/D
converters for military and commercial applications.
MISSI
 (Multilevel Information Systems Security Initiative) is a National
Security Agency initiative designed to provide a framework for the

development of interoperable, complementary security products.
MMITS
 (Modular Multifunction Information Transfer System) is an in-
dustry forum focusing on technical standards and applications for

software-defined radios, networking radios, and multimode radios.
Mobile IP
 (mobile internetworking routing protocol) is designed to sup-
port mobile Internet users.
MSE 
(mobile subscriber equipment) is a military radio that resembles a
cellular telephone.
MSRT 
(mobile subscriber radio terminal) is a military radio.
Multipath propagation
 is a phenomenon in which copies of a transmitted
signal arrive at different times at a receiver.
NATO 
is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
NES
 (network encryption system) is an encryption system certified by the
National Security Agency that enables clusters of defense computer

networks to interconnect through the unclassified Internet.
OSI 
(Open Systems Interconnection) refers to a model that describes net-
works as a series of layers.
Packet
 is a collection of information symbols transmitted together on a
communications channel.
PACS 
(personal access communications system) is a U.S. standard for
second-generation digital wireless telephone systems serving sub-
scribers moving at pedestrian speeds.
PDA
 (personal digital assistant) is a portable, low-power computing de-
vice with a small display used for information storage.
Peer-to-peer
 is a network architecture in which transmissions flow be-
tween terminals without passing through a central hub.
Personal communications services are offered in frequency bands around1900 megahertz allocated for this purpose by the FCC.
PHS
 (personal handyphone system) is a Japanese standard for mobile
digital telephone services.
PSTN
 (public switched telephone network) is a collection of worldwide
wired telephone networks.
QoS 
(quality of service) refers to end-to-end performance guarantees of-
fered by a network.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188APPENDIX CRACE
 (Research for Advanced Communications in Europe) was a pro-
gram funded by the European Commission to perform precompetitiveresearch on advanced communications systems.  It was superseded

by the ACTS program.
Radio spectrum
 is a range of radio frequencies required to support one or
more communications channels.
RAM
 is random-access memory.

RAP
 (radio access point) is a wheeled or tracked vehicle that carries ex-
tensive communication systems, including an 
Òon the move
Ó antenna
system.  It provides a variety of cross-networking, repeater, and in-

formation services.
RF
 is radio frequency.

RMS
 (root mean square) is the standard deviation of a random variable.

RSVP
 (resource reservation protocol) supports the delivery of real-time
information over the Internet.
RTP (real-time protocol) is designed to support delay-intolerant datastreams, such as video, transmitted over the Internet.
S3
 (Scalable Self-Organizing Simulations) is a research program that uses
parallel computers to simulate communications networks.  The pro-

gram is sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects

Agency and the National Science Foundation.
SHF
 (superhigh frequency) is the frequency band at 3
Ð30 gigahertz used
for satellite, radar, and microwave communications.
SINCGARS 
(single-channel ground and airborne radio system) is a mili-
tary radio that hops transmission frequencies within the very-high-

frequency band, a capability that helps prevent jamming.
SNR 
(signal-to-noise ratio) is the ratio of signal power to noise power.
The higher the SNR, the clearer the transmission.
Software-defined radio 
is a radio implemented on DSPs with functions
defined by software, which can be downloaded as needed.  Such

radios can use many types of modulations.
SpeakEASY 
is a software-defined radio designed and demonstrated with
support from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

SpeakEASY can emulate some legacy military radio systems and op-

erate across a wide frequency range.
Spectral link efficiency
 is the data rate (in bits per second) per unit of
bandwidth of a communications channel.
Spread spectrum 
is a technique in which a signal is spread over a much
larger frequency range than the minimum required to deliver the

message.  It is often used by the military for antijam purposes.  It is

used by the commercial sector in CDMA mobile telephone systems

and wireless LANs.
The Evolution of Untethered CommunicationsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C189STU III
 (Secure Terminal Unit III) is a standardized voice and data tele-
phone capable of encryption up to top-secret level for defense and
civilian government purposes.  STU III operates over standard dial-

up telephone lines and has been extended to cellular applications.
Symbol
, as used in this report, refers to a series of encoded bits.
TDMA
 (time division multiple access) is a technique that allows many
users to share the same radio spectrum by transmitting information

in different time slots.  See CDMA, FDMA.
Throughput
, as used in this report, refers to the fraction of time during
which a communications channel can be used.
UAV 
(unmanned aerial vehicle) is an unmanned aircraft used to relay
radio signals between two points on the ground.
UHF
 (ultrahigh frequency) is the frequency band at 0.3
Ð3 gigahertz used
for UHF television and radar systems.
UMTS
 (universal mobile telephone system) is a pending European stan-
dard for mobile communications services, scheduled to be deployed

beginning in 2002.
USAT
 an ultrasmall-aperture terminal.
VHF
 is the frequency band at 30
Ð300 megahertz used for FM radio and
television.VSAT
 (very small aperture terminal) is a satellite communications sys-
tem in which Earth stations do not require large antennas.  The small

antenna size (typically less than 1 meter) allows for simplified instal-

lation and possibly portability.
WAN
 is a wide area network.
Winforum
 (Wireless Information Network Forum) was formed by sev-
eral companies in 1992 to obtain frequency bands and set protocol

standards for personal communications data services.
WLAN 
is a wireless local area network.
