DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/6269Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts ofInformation Technology228 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06032-5 | DOI 10.17226/6269Steering Committee on Research Opportunities Relating to Economic and SocialImpacts of Computing and Communications, National Research CouncilFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Fostering Research on theEconomic and Social Impactsof Information TechnologyREPORT OF A WORKSHOPSteering Committee on Research Opportunities Relating to Economic andSocial Impacts of Computing and CommunicationsComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.1998
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. ¥ Washington, DC 20418NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy ofSciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the
workshop steering committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences
and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by Grant No. SRS-95285584 between the National Academy of Sciencesand the National Science Foundation.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of theorganizations or agencies that provided support for this project.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 98-86542International Standard Book Number 0-309-06032-XAdditional copies of this report are available from:National Academy Press2101 Constitution Ave., NWBox 285
Washington, DC 20055800-624-6242202-334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
http://www.nap.eduCopyright 1998 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiSTEERING COMMITTEE ON RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIESRELATING TO ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL IMPACTS OFCOMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONSHAL VARIAN, University of California at Berkeley, ChairFRANCES ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JORGE SCHEMENT, Pennsylvania State University
SCOTT SHENKER, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
LEE SPROULL, Boston University
RICHARD SUTCH, University of California at BerkeleyStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorJANE BORTNICK GRIFFITH, Interim Director
PAUL SEMENZA, Program Officer (through July 1997)
JON EISENBERG, Program Officer
JULIE C. LEE, Administrative Assistant (through August 1997)
MICKELLE RODGERS, Project AssistantRITA GASKINS, Project AssistantFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivPREFACEivCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairFRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JAMES CHIDDIX, Time Warner Cable
JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara
A.G. FRASER, AT&T Corporation
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
JAMES GRAY, Microsoft Corporation
BARBARA J. GROSZ, Harvard University
PATRICK M. HANRAHAN, Stanford University
JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, Interval Research
BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN MAJOR, QUALCOMM, Inc.
DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley
DONALD NORMAN, Hewlett-Packard Company
RAYMOND OZZIE, Iris Associates, Inc.
DONALD SIMBORG, KnowMed Systems
LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel CorporationMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorJANE BORTNICK GRIFFITH, Interim Director (1998)
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer
JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Program Officer
ALAN S. INOUYE, Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Program Officer
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Associate
LISA L. SHUM, Project Assistant
MICKELLE RODGERS, Project Assistant
NICCI DOWD, Project Assistant
RITA GASKINS, Project AssistantFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEvCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES, MATHEMATICS,AND APPLICATIONSROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation, Co-chairW. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, Co-chairPETER M. BANKS, Environmental Research Institute of Michigan
WILLIAM BROWDER, Princeton University
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, University of Pennsylvania
RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University
JOHN E. ESTES, University of California at Santa Barbara
MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University
L. LOUIS HEGEDUS, Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University
CAROL M. JANTZEN, Westinghouse Savannah River Company
PAUL G. KAMINSKI, Technovation, Inc.
KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota
KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory
MARGARET G. KIVELSON, University of California at Los Angeles
DANIEL KLEPPNER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company
MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania
NICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory
CHANG-LIN TIEN, University of California at BerkeleyNORMAN METZGER, Executive DirectorFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viPREFACEThe National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in

1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-
ment on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the

National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of out-
standing engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of
its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility
for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also

sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages edu-
cation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr.

William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academyof Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.

Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy ofSciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology
with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal
government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-
viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the

Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviiviiPrefaceTo aid in identifying fruitful approaches to assessment of both the positiveand negative impacts of using information technologies, the National Science
Foundation asked the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB)
of the National Research Council (NRC) to gather perspectives on the problem
from experts in several relevant disciplinesÑin particular, economics, sociology,psychology, and anthropology, as well as computer science and engineering.  It

was thought that a sharing of ideas among individuals with pertinent experience
as well as openness to the benefits of interdisciplinary analysis might suggest
new ways of addressing what has proved so far to be a complex and difficult
undertakingÑassessing the diverse outcomes in a variety of contexts of the grow-ing use of computing and communications technology.  The results of this explo-

ration are intended to be useful to the National Science Foundation in its efforts to
assess the impacts of computing and communications technology, to provide ex-
amples of successful research and pose interesting questions to the research com-
munity, and to inform policy makers about the nature and utility of such research.The context for this project included recent legislation and administrationefforts (e.g., enactment of the Government Performance and Results Act, estab-
lishment of the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board) as well as ongo-
ing oversight activities aimed at assessing the outcomes and impacts of federal
programs, including research and development programs.  It also included the

National Science BoardÕs interest in expanding the body of science and technol-ogy indicators to include those relating to impacts on the economy and society of
information technologyÕs use.In addition, as a result of reductions in federal regulation or elimination offederal programs, a number of conventional federal sources of data have disap-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEpeared (e.g., data on telecommunications from the Federal Communications Com-mission, data on early Internet use from the National Science Foundation in con-
nection with its operation of the former NSFNET).  One result has been to focus

more attention on what can and cannot be measured and on how different disci-
plines can contribute to better public understanding of the linkages among re-
search and development, computing and communications science and technol-
ogy, and the larger economy and society.CSTB formed the multidisciplinary Steering Committee on Research Oppor-tunities Relating to Economic and Social Impacts of Computing and Communica-
tions, which met in February 1997 to organize a workshop held on June 30 and July
1, 1997 (Appendix A gives the agenda and lists participants).  The steering commit-

tee sought to identify topics amenable to research, especially interdisciplinary ef-
forts calling for collaboration involving computer scientists, economists, and oth-
ers.  The workshop featured discussion of specific kinds of impacts along with

examination of methodological issues, availability of valid data for research, and
approaches relevant to assessing the outcomes of information technologyÕs use.An objective of the workshop was to identify and stimulate thinking aboutpotential research topics, as well as to obtain perspectives on how to develop a
more systematic understanding of outcomes important to public policy making.
To this end, workshop participants considered possible gaps in knowledge, open
research questions, areas where quantitative and qualitative data as well as new
methodology are needed, and areas that appear to experts to be well covered.  The

workshop was also designed to illuminate how and where new research interest
could be stimulated in a range of disciplines.   In addition, the steering committee

explored how to promote and support such interdisciplinary research.To broaden the base of common understanding among the multidisciplinaryparticipants in the workshop, the steering committee requested position papers
from participants (Appendix B includes a selection of these papers) and also com-
missioned two background papers (presented in Appendix C).  These papers con-

tributed to discussions at the workshop and to the steering committeeÕs efforts tosynthesize workshop participantsÕ observations on key impact areas and associ-
ated analytical challenges.  In addition to meeting physically, the steering com-

mittee shared information by electronic mail and through a special World Wide
Web site, which it used to develop workshop and report materials.Given the broad nature of the task addressed by the workshop, and in keep-ing with the activityÕs limited budget and time frame, the steering committeeadopted the approach of selecting and developing for presentation in its report a
set of important and instructive examples compiled from the research topics, is-
sues, and research approaches discussed at the workshop, as well as in submitted
position papers.  The resulting workshop report thus presents examples of impor-

tant topics and fruitful approaches within several branches of social science rather

than attempting to be comprehensive in considering the full range of possible
topics.   In the report, the fields of anthropology, demography, education, and
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixpolitical science are underrepresented, and the text has little to say about libraryscience, bibliometrics, or information science.   Omission of a number of interest-

ing or significant topics reflects the exploratory nature of the project rather than a
value judgment on the part of the steering committee.  The topics of the creation

and growth of the computer industry itself, among the most obvious of the eco-
nomic and social impacts of computing and telecommunications, have been ex-
cluded here because they merit a report in their own right.The bibliography suggests further reading that provides broad coverage ofmany of the issues touched on in this workshop report.  Many of the references,

including a number of review articles, are themselves replete with pointers to
other work.  Where possible the report includes references to significant Web

sites addressing the impacts of computing and communications.The workshop steering committee is grateful to Eileen Collins, who originatedthe idea of an interdisciplinary exploration of the impacts of computing and com-
munications, and Les Gasser, both of the National Science Foundation (NSF), for
their support of the project and for ongoing guidance.  Their commitment to the

importance of interdisciplinary interaction was fundamental to the design of the
workshop.  Funding for the report came from both the NSF Division of Science

Resources Studies and the NSF Division of Information and Intelligent Systems.The workshop steering committee acknowledges the contributions of theworkshop participants, both through papers written as part of workshop activities
and during discussions at the workshop itself.  The steering committee also wishes

to thank the NRC staff for their assistance with the workshop and the preparation
of the final report, including Marjory Blumenthal, Paul Semenza, Jon Eisenberg,
Julie C. Lee, Mickelle Rodgers, and Rita Gaskins.  Finally, the steering commit-

tee is grateful to the reviewers for helping to sharpen and improve the report
through their comments.  Responsibility for the report remains with the workshop

steering committee.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the
National Research CouncilÕs (NRCÕs) Report Review Committee.  The purpose
of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will
assist the authors and the NRC in making the published report as sound as pos-
sible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.  The contents of the review

comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the
deliberative process.  We wish to thank the following individuals for their partici-

pation in the review of this report:Robert McC. Adams, University of California at San Diego,Michael Arbib, University of Southern California,
Anita Borg, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center,
Yale Braunstein, University of California at Berkeley,
John S. Chipman, University of Minnesota,
David Farber, University of Pennsylvania,
Irene Greif, Lotus Development Corporation,
Donna Hoffman, Vanderbilt University,
Heather Hudson, University of San Francisco,
James Morris, Carnegie Mellon University,
Milton Mueller, Rutgers University,
Jean-Michael Rendu, Newmont Mining Corporation,
Henry W. Riecken, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine (emeritus),Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Peter Temin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,Timothy Van Zandt, Princeton University, and
Terry Winograd, Stanford University.Although the individuals listed above provided many constructive comments andsuggestions, responsibility for the final content of this report rests solely with the
workshop steering committee and the NRC.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsxiiiEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION7
1.1Growth Trends, 9
1.1.1Computing Power, 9

1.1.2Demographics of Computer Ownership, 10

1.1.3Internet Use, 12

1.1.4Global Connectivity, 13
1.2Some Major Challenges, 14
1.2.1Productivity and Organizational Change, 14

1.2.2Information Technology and Wage Inequality, 16

1.2.3Design of Technology and Standards Setting, 16
1.3Role of Social Science, 18
2ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED
QUESTIONS21

2.1Households and Community, 21
2.1.1Computer Use in the Home, 22

2.1.2Differential Impacts of Technology, 24

2.1.3Community, 24

2.1.4Education, 26
2.2Social Infrastructure:  Universal Service, 29

2.3Business, Labor, and Organizational Processes, 32
2.3.1Location:  Internationalization and Telecommuting, 32

2.3.2Labor and Information Technology, 35
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivPREFACExivCONTENTS2.3.3Organizations and Processes, 39
2.3.4Social Science and the Workplace, 46
2.4Information Economy and Society, 48
2.4.1Protection of Intellectual Property, 48

2.4.2Free Speech and Content, 52

2.4.3Privacy, 53

2.4.4Information Use and Value, 56

2.4.5Pricing Models and Content, 60

2.4.6Pricing Information, 61

2.4.7Network Externalities, 65

2.4.8Auctions, 66

2.4.9Electronic Commerce, 67
2.5Illustrative Broad Topics for Ongoing Research, 72
3DATA
ÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE78
3.1Types and Uses of Data, 78
3.1.1Data from Experiments, 79

3.1.2Panel Data, 81

3.1.3Data from Time-Use Studies, 82

3.1.4Metadata, 83
3.2Availability of and Access to Data, 84
3.2.1Data Collected by the Private Sector, 85

3.2.2The Need for Firm-level Data, 86

3.2.3Data Collected by Government, 88
3.3New Types of Data, 89
3.3.1Documenting the Effects of Technology Deployment, 89

3.3.2Data on Social Interactions from the Internet, 92

3.3.3The Internet as a Window into How Commercial
Transactions Are Conducted, 933.4Time and Tools for Gathering and Interpreting Data, 93
3.4.1The Time Required to Do Good Social Science, 93

3.4.2Appropriate Subject Pools and Instrumentation, 95
3.5Approaches to Meeting Requirements for Data, 95
4OPTIONS FOR FOSTERING INTERDISCIPLINARY
RESEARCH AND IMPROVING ACCESS TO RESULTS101

4.1Encouraging Interdisciplinary Studies and Collaboration, 102

4.2Funding to Strengthen Interdisciplinary Research, 103

4.3Making the Results of Interdisciplinary Research
More Accessible, 105Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExvCONTENTSxvBIBLIOGRAPHY106
APPENDIXES
AWORKSHOP AGENDA AND PARTICIPANTS127
BPOSITION PAPERS SUBMITTED BY WORKSHOP
PARTICIPANTS131

Research on Information Technology ImpactsPaul Attewell (Graduate School and University Center,City University of New York), 133What If All Information Were Readily Available to All?Joseph Farrell (Department of Economics, University of California,
Berkeley), 138Critical Issues Relating to Impacts of Information Technology:  Areas for
Future Research and Discussion
Alexander J. Field (Santa Clara University)
, 139Computer-mediated CommunicationsClaude S. Fischer (Department of Sociology, University of
California, Berkeley), 142Impacts of Information Technology:  Behaviors and Metrics
Amy Friedlander (Corporation for National Research
Initiatives), 144Five Critical Issues Relating to Impacts of Information TechnologyMichael Froomkin (School of Law, University of Miami),
 147
Cultural Influences on the Process and Impacts of ComputerizationRob Kling (Center for Social Informatics, Indiana University), 
150Questions for ResearchJeffrey K. MacKie-Mason (Department of Economics,and School of Information, University of Michigan), 152Electronic InteractionsPaul Resnick (AT&T Laboratories), 156Social Impact of Information TechnologyFrank Stafford (University of Michigan), 
158The Uncalming Effects of Digital TechnologyMark Weiser (Xerox Palo Alto Research Center), 160Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CCOMMISSIONED PAPERS
Infrastructure:  The Utility of Past As Prologue?
Amy Friedlander (Corporation for National Research Initiatives,
Reston, Virginia), 165Computer And Communication Technologies:  Impacts on the
Organization of Enterprise and the Establishment and Maintenance
of Civil SocietyJohn Leslie King and Kenneth L. Kraemer
(University of California, Irvine), 188xviCONTENTSFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryThere has been a revolution in computing and communications in the pastfew decades, and all indications are that technological progress and use of infor-
mation technology will continue at a rapid pace.  These advances present many

significant opportunities but also pose major challenges.  Today, innovations in

information technology are having wide-ranging effects across numerous do-
mains of society, and policy makers, although currently lacking sufficient under-
standing and analysis of the consequences of their decisions, are acting on issues
involving economic productivity, intellectual property rights, privacy protection,
and affordability of and access to information, among other concerns.  Choices

made now will have long-lasting consequences, and attention must be paid not
only to their technological merit, but also to their social and economic impacts.1Despite the significance of these impacts for society, there has been rela-tively little investment in research to help understand, predict, and shape them.
Among the reasons for this underinvestment are the rapid emergence of these
phenomena and the difficulties in conducting the interdisciplinary work required
to understand them.  In the cross-cutting arena of the information economy,

research on how information technology affects organizations and economic pro-
ductivity can lead to better use of the technology for the benefit of society and
individuals alike.  Improved knowledge of how people interact with computing

and communications technology, the circumstances under which people will ben-
efit from it, and the differential impacts that such technology has on different
communities can be incorporated as well into decisions affecting technology
design and deployment.To explore possibilities for research on the impacts of information technol-ogy and ways to assess these impacts, the Steering Committee on ResearchFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYOpportunities Relating to Economic and Social Impacts of Computing and Com-munications held a 2-day workshop on June 30 and July 1, 1997, involving
participants with expertise in economics, social sciences, and computer science
and engineering.  Since this was an endeavor of limited budget and time frame,

centered on discussions and interactions among participants at a single workshop,
the workshop steering committee focused on identifying and developing ex-
amples of some significant research issues and concerns, rather than aiming to
cover the full range of relevant topics.  The content of this workshop report thus

reflects suggestions made and issues raised in workshop activities and in the
position papers submitted by workshop participants.Chapter 1 outlines some of the trends in the growth of computing and com-munications discussed at the workshop and highlights several policy areasÑ
including economic productivity, wage inequality, and technology designÑin
which interdisciplinary research involving both information technologists and
social scientists can contribute to a better understanding of the economic and
social impacts of information technology.  The value of the social science ap-

proach, which draws on systematically developed theories of human behavior in
combination with sound supporting data, is contrasted with the overreliance on
anecdotes, extrapolation, and sloganeering that often characterizes the writing of
pundits.Chapter 2 presents examples of cross-cutting research that has been con-ducted to understand information technologyÕs influence in personal, commu-
nity, and business activities and gives suggestions regarding important open re-
search questions.  Incorporating examples given at the workshop and in position

papers, it indicates some ways in which use of methodology from economics and
the social sciences might contribute to important advances, and it describes how
interdisciplinary research between social scientists and information technology
researchers might help to improve knowledge of outcomes affecting private life
and the household, the community, the social infrastructure, and business and the
workplace.  Chapter 2 concludes with a list of broad research topics offered by

the steering committee as examples of promising areas for ongoing research.Social science research depends on researchers having access to enoughreliable data to establish a basis for reaching valid conclusions.  Chapter 3 pro-

vides a brief overview of the types of data used by social scientists in their
investigations and describes some of the problems encountered in data collection,
management, and use.  According to some workshop participants, researchers

working at the intersection of information technology and socioeconomic issues
confront a number of challenges related to the availability of data.  Chapter 3

concludes with some suggested approaches to meeting these challenges.Based on discussions at the June 1997 workshop and on material in theposition papers submitted by its participants, the steering committee identified
several options for fostering interdisciplinary research and making the results ofFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3this research more accessible to the public and policy makers.  Chapter 4 presents
these options.The appendixes list the workshop agenda and participants and include aselection of the position papers submitted, as well as two additional background
papers commissioned for the workshop.EXAMPLES OF THE APPLICABILITY OFSOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCHPresented at the 1997 workshop and in participantsÕ position papers was an
array of examples showing applications of the results of social science research to
improve understanding of the economic and social impacts of information tech-
nology in different domains, including the following:¥Private life and the householdÑSocial experiments can be used to mea-sure the impact of computerization on household membersÕ behavior.
¥CommunityÑSociological studies can illustrate the differential impact oftechnology on user communities and members of organizations.¥Social infrastructureÑEconomic analysis and historical studies can beused to illustrate some of the policy trade-offs involved in universal service.2¥Business and laborÑSocial science methods can be used to examine decisions about organi-zational structure.ÑEconomic analysis of changes in labor markets can contribute to effec-tive economic policy.ÑHistorical studies of technological adoption of the electric motor arerelevant to current issues in computer technology.ÑSociological studies of technical support communities can contribute tobetter practices within those communities.
¥Information economy and societyÑHistorical analysis of intellectual property disputes can yield insightinto current problems in this area.ÑEconomic analysis of networks can lead to greater understanding ofmarket phenomena.ÑEconomic analysis of pricing can shed light on how online commercewill be conducted.ILLUSTRATIVE BROAD TOPICS FOR ONGOING RESEARCHWorkshop discussions and position papers yielded numerous suggestions forresearch topics.  The list below was compiled by the steering committee as an

illustrative set of promising areas for research.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY¥Interdisciplinary study of information indicatorsÑResearchers have rec-ognized and begun to analyze the increasing role that information plays in all
aspects of society. Interdisciplinary study could help to identify and define a set
of broadly accepted measures of access to, and the use and impact of, information
and information technology.  Composite information indicators such as an

interconnectivity index (characterizing the extent to which individuals, organiza-
tions, and businesses are linked to each other) and a marginalization index (char-
acterizing the extent to which the benefits of information and information tech-
nology are not available to certain segments of society) could be established.¥Impacts of information technology on labor market structureÑTo enableinformed decision making on critical policy issues such as how to respond to
increasing wage inequality (involving, for example, efforts to assess the potential
benefits of additional investment in training), it is important to understand to
what extent and how the use of computers might affect wage distribution.¥Productivity and its relationship to work practices and organizationalstructures for the use of information technologyÑGains in productivity come notonly when new technology is introduced but also when new ways are found to
use the technologies.  Compilation of work that has already been done in this area

is needed.  Continued research also could illuminate how better to quantify the

economic inputs and outputs associated with use of computers.¥Intellectual property issuesÑPolicy makers considering revisions to in-tellectual property law or international agreements, as well as firms evaluating
possible approaches to protecting intellectual property, would benefit from con-
tinued theoretical and empirical research.¥Social issues addressed at the protocol levelÑWidespread use of theInternet has ramifications in such far-reaching concerns as intellectual property
rights, privacy protection, and data filtering.  Exploring how these concerns

might be addressed at the protocol levelÑthrough policies, rules, and conven-tions for the exchange and use of informationÑcould prove to be a promisingapproach to addressing complex social issues arising from the use of new com-
puter and communications technology.APPROACHES TO MEETING REQUIREMENTS FOR DATAAs was noted in workshop discussions and some of the position paperssubmitted by participants, approaches such as the following could contribute to
meeting the requirements for data needed to study the economic and social im-
pacts of information technology:¥Making data related to the social and economic impacts of computing andcommunications available to the research community through a clearinghouse;¥Exploring ways for researchers to obtain access to private-sector data;¥Increasing data collection efforts by government;Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5¥Exploring the development of new multipurpose data sets by the researchcommunity;¥Establishing stronger ties with industry associations to facilitate collabo-rative research; and¥Exploring in workshop sessions uses of the Internet as a source of data onsocial interactions that take into account ethical and privacy issues associated
with data collection, archiving, and reporting.OPTIONS FOR FOSTERING INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH ANDIMPROVING ACCESS TO THE RESULTS OF RESEARCHBased on discussions at the June 1997 workshop and material in partici-pantsÕ position papers, the steering committee identified several options for fos-
tering interdisciplinary research and making the results of such research more
accessible to the public and policy makers.¥Encouraging interdisciplinary studies and collaboration between research-ers in information technology and researchers in the social sciences and econom-
ics through use of the following:ÑInterdisciplinary workshops to convene researchers with expertise in arange of fields to explore successful approaches to conducting research on
the impacts of information technology, as well as to foster increased collabo-
rative work;ÑInterdisciplinary curricula to help prepare students for collaborativework with researchers in other fields; andÑInterdisciplinary fellowships to stimulate intellectual cross-fertilizationand development of professional contacts.
¥Funding to strengthen interdisciplinary research through the use of thefollowing:ÑEvaluation of large technology system research proposals with atten-tion to their inclusion of interdisciplinary research on behavioral, social,
legal, and economic implications;ÑSynergistic use of major research programs that build or deploy proto-types of computing and communications systems, so as to improve under-
standing of impacts and to enhance outcomes; andÑCollaboration with private foundations and industry so as to leverageresources.
¥Making the results of interdisciplinary research more accessible throughthe use of mechanisms such as the following:ÑA World Wide Web page containing headlines and abstracts of policy-relevant social science research, pointers to the print and/or online published
results, and regularly updated reviews of literature summarizing the state ofFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYthe art in various fields as well as directories of specialists in particular areas;andÑSupplemental ways of disseminating the results of research, such as byproviding testimony at hearings held by policy makers or organizing special-
ized briefings for policy makers.NOTES1.Throughout this report, the term 
ÒimpactsÓ is used as a shorthand expression to indicate a
complex set of multicausal, multidimensional outcomes of the use of technology.  Technology
does not typically have a single impact, but rather a range of different outcomes depending on
the context or settings.  For more discussion, see Box 1.1 in Chapter 1 and Attewell
Õs andKlingÕs papers in Appendix B of this volume.2.Universal service is the practice of making telecommunications and information services
Ñsuch as basic telephone serviceÑavailable at an affordable price to all people within a speci-fied jurisdictional area.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION771IntroductionIt is becoming increasingly clear that the growth of computing and commu-nications technology is exceeding our understanding of its economic and social
impacts (Box 1.1).1  The processing power of microchips is doubling every 18
months.  From 1989 to 1995, Internet traffic doubled every 12 months, and it is

now doubling every 6 to 9 months.  When plots of trends over time require a

logarithmic scale on the vertical axis, something interesting must be going on!
Accompanying and supporting these dramatic increases in the power and use of
new information technologies has been the declining cost of communications as
a result of both technological improvements and increased competition in a sector
long dominated by monopoly (and in other countries often state-owned) enter-
prises.At the same time, there has been comparatively little investment in researchto help understand how information technology has affected and will affect our
society.  The United States, and indeed the world, are facing critical policy

issuesÑinvolving intellectual property rights, privacy, free speech, education,
and other crucial concernsÑarmed with very little understanding and analysis of
the consequences of possible choices.For several reasons, too little social science research has been done to date inthis area.  Certainly the phenomena associated with information technology have

developed rapidly in comparison with academic calendars and funding cycles.  In

addition, serious investigation of a number of complex technological, economic,
and social issues requires interdisciplinary work to which there are currently
many barriers.   It is rare, for example, to see economists and sociologists col-

laborating, much less sociologists and computer scientists.  One of the reasons is
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 1.1ÒImpactsÓ and Technological DeterminismOne of the most common findings in prior studies of information technologyÕs(ITÕs) impact has been that outcomes are far from uniform across all settings andcontexts.  In earlier years we looked for 
the impact of IT on, say, organizational
centralization, and scholars tended to hew to one end or the other of a bipolar
spectrum:  centralization versus decentralization, upskilling or deskilling, job de-
stroying versus job creating.  What scholars found, in almost every case, was thatthis was an unproductive way to conceptualize the issue.  One almost always

found evidence of both extremes of outcomes or impacts as well as many points inbetween (see Attewell and Rule, 1989).  We finally realized that we were asking
the wrong question.  We should have asked, In what contexts does outcome A

typically predominate, and in what contexts does outcome B tend to prevail, andwhen does one see A and B in equal measure?We found that a technology does not usually have an impact.  The context or
setting in which the same technology is used often produces strikingly differentÒimpacts.Ó This phenomenon has been discussed in terms of  
ÒWeb modelsÓ(Kling), or Òstructural contingency theoryÓ (Attewell) or Robey
Õs ÒPlus Ca ChangeÓmodel.  All imply that we fully appreciate the role of context in technology out-
comes and that we therefore expend sufficient research effort to measure the con-text, and to delineate its interactions with the technology.  If we fail to do this, we

return to the old Òblack boxÓ paradigm, that is, attempting to measure only the input
(say, a particular software program) and the outcome (say, kidsÕ test scores) with-out bothering with the context (the classroom, the kidsÕ family backgrounds) or the
causal mechanisms.Black box research on impacts often discovered ÒinconsistentÓ outcomes acrossstudies but proved unable to show why there was so much variation, because itneglected to measure the contextual variables that were moderating the effects ofthe input on the output.  For example, the old paradigm would phrase a research

question so as to ask whether or not home PCs would improve kidsÕ school perfor-
mance.  In contrast, research within the current contextual paradigm would ask un-
der what conditions having PCs at home affects studentsÕ school outcomes.  A piece
of my own work has indicated, for example, that having a home PC currently has aminimal effect on the school performance scores of poor and minority kids but isassociated with substantial positive effects on the school performance of kids with
high socioeconomic status (SES), when other factors are controlled for (Attewell andBattle, 1997).  Race and class/SES, in this example, prove to be very important
contextual features moderating the impact of home PCs on school performance.It is important to understand that because of the last three decades of researchand the importance of context as discussed above, many distinguished scholars oftechnology avoid the term Òtechnology impact.Ó  Using this term in framing the
question would be viewed by some of them as indicating an ignorance of the bodyof scholarship in technology studies.  For them, the term ÒimpactÓ connotes a kindof technological determinism that is very dated and widely discredited.  Personally,

I am not so averse to the term Òimpact,Ó but I do agree with their larger point about
avoiding models based on simple technological determinism.ÑPaul Attewell, ÒResearch on Information Technology ImpactsÓ(see Appendix B of this volume)Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9the investment of time and energy required by both technologists and socialscientists to understand enough of an unfamiliar discipline area to enable serious
progress in joint efforts.  Also, research funding agencies and programs are

generally not organized to exploit interdisciplinary opportunities.To aid in identifying fruitful approaches to assessment of both the positiveand negative impacts of using information technologies, the National Science
Foundation asked the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB)
of the National Research Council to gather perspectives on the problem from
experts in several relevant disciplines, such as economics, sociology, and psy-
chology, as well as computer science and engineering.  It was thought that a

gathering of a group with pertinent experience as well as openness to the benefits
of interdisciplinary analysis might suggest new ways of addressing what has
proved so far to be a complex and difficult undertakingÑassessing the diverseoutcomes in a variety of contexts of the growing use of computing and communi-
cations technology.  The results of this exploration are intended to be useful to the

National Science Foundation in its efforts to assess the impacts of computing and
communications technology, to provide examples of successful research and
pose interesting questions to the research community, and to inform policy mak-
ers about the nature and utility of such research.The Steering Committee on Research Opportunities Relating to Economicand Social Impacts of Computing and Communications organized a workshop to
explore opportunities for research on the impacts of information technology and
ways to assess these impacts.  Since this was an endeavor of limited budget and

time frame, and to be based in large part on input received at a single workshop,
the committee adopted the approach of identifying and developing some signifi-
cant examples and issues, rather than performing a more comprehensive study of
the full range of relevant topics.  The content of this report reflects areas of

interest and issues raised in the workshop and the position papers submitted by
workshop participants and subsequent work by the steering committee.This chapter illustrates the dramatic increases in computing power and thepenetration of new communications technology, and it highlights several key
areas where impacts of these trends are being felt.  It concludes by discussing the

role of social science in characterizing these impacts.1.1GROWTH TRENDS
1.1.1Computing Power
Computers have become so affordable and ubiquitous in part because of theremarkable improvements in semiconductors.  Since the 1960s, semiconductor

chip makers have increased the density of transistor circuits at a rate of about 10
percent a year.  Combined with numerous other technological advances, this

capability has led to a doubling of microprocessor power every 18 months (Fig-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYure 1.1), a trend known in the computer industry as ÒMooreÕs LawÓ after a 1964
prediction by Gordon Moore, a founder of Intel Corporation.  Improvements in

semiconductors and other components  account for the annual 20 to 30 percent

decline in the quality-adjusted price for computers (Berndt and Griliches, 1993;
Gordon, 1990), even as the costs of other industrial equipment have been increasing
steadily (Figure 1.2).  At the same time, businesses and consumers have chosen to

increase their spending on computers, suggesting that they find new uses of com-
puters worthwhile.  As a result, the real quantity of computer power deployed,

which reflects both increased spending and increased computer power per dollar
spent, has grown tremendously over the past several decades (Figure 1.3).1.1.2Demographics of Computer Ownership
A recent survey of more than 50,000 households found that more than 40million U.S. households now own PCs 2 (Computer Intelligence, 1997).  Owner-
P6P7Pentium80486803868028680488085808040048008808616M1G256M64M4M1M256K64K16K4K1K1001,00010,000100,0001,000,00010,000,000100,000,0001,000,000,00010,000,000,00019701975198019851990199520002005YearTransistors/DieMicroprocessorDRAMFIGURE 1.1Moore
Õs Law: The number of transistors per chip has grown exponentiallyfor several decades and is projected to continue to do so for some time to come.  SOURCE:
Brynjolfsson and Yang (1996), using data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysisand from Intel Corporation.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION11FIGURE 1.2Real computer prices.  The price of computers has declined relative to the
costs of other types of producersÕ durable equipment (PDE).  SOURCE:  Brynjolfsson
and Yang (1997), using data from the U.S. Department of Commerce.ship patterns correlate strongly with age and income.  About 20 percent of house-
holds with incomes between $10,000 and $20,000, but more than 60 percent of
households with incomes of $60,000 to $75,000, have computers.  Some of the

largest annual gains in computer ownership were found in middle-income groups.
For example, households in the $40,000 to $50,000 income group reached the 50
percent level, and there was a nearly 5 percent increase in penetration in the
$20,000 to $30,000 income group.  Almost 60 percent of households with chil-

dren own a computer today.An earlier RAND analysis by Anderson et al. (1995) examined computerownership data from the 1993 Current Population Survey conducted by the Bu-
reau of the Census.  They categorized computer ownership according to income,
education, race/ethnicity, age, sex, and location of residence.  This study found

that income and educational status were associated with significant differences inFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcomputer ownership.  For example, about 7 percent of the lowest-income quartile
of households had computers at home, whereas nearly 55 percent of the highest-
earning quartile had computers at home.3 In 1993, about 13 percent of individu-
als over the age of 15 who did not have a high school diploma had a home
computer, whereas 49 percent of college graduates had a home computer.1.1.3Internet Use
The most reliable figure on Internet use is the number of computer andnetwork domains connected directly to the Internet, all of which must have a
public Internet address.  According to conservative estimates from a recently

conducted Internet domain survey (Network Wizards, 1998), the number of
Internet host computers grew from 1.313 million in January 1993 to almost 30
million in January 1998.4FIGURE 1.3  Nominal and real computer investment.  SOURCE:  Brynjolfsson and Yang
(1997) using data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.01020304050607080195519601965197019751980198519901995YearBillion DollarsReal InvestmentNominal InvestmentFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION13The number of individuals who use the Internet is very difficult to measure,in part because the definition of users is somewhat fuzzy.  Users might be sub-

scribers to a consumer Internet service or other computer service that includes the
Internet as a component, or they might be potential users with access to the Internet
at their workplace.  Matrix Information and Directory Services (Quarterman, 1997)

estimated that as of January 1997 about 71 million people worldwide had access to
e-mail.  When access to information by file transfer protocol (FTP) or the World

Wide Web (WWW) was the criterion used, the figure was about 57 million people

worldwide.Project 20005 at Vanderbilt University has conducted several carefully de-
signed surveys of Internet and Web use.  One study (Hoffman et al., 1996)

examined Internet use by age, education, and sex using a telephone sample of
3,785 respondents.  It found significant differences in usage patterns across these

demographic groups.  For example, only 13.5 percent of those with a high school

diploma or less reported using the Web once or more per week, whereas nearly 56
percent of those with a college degree reported weekly use.  Hoffman and Novak
Õsmost recent estimates, based on Nielson Media ResearchÕs Spring 1997 InternetDemographic Study, showed that 45 million people in the United States 16 years
of age and older, or about 22 percent of the population, had accessed the Web at
least once (Hoffman et al., 1997a).Another study (CommerceNet/Nielsen Media Research, 1997), in which 9,000
people were interviewed, estimated that 58 million adults in the United States and

Canada used the Internet on a regular basis.  More than half of the respondents said

that they had been online within 24 hours of the interview.
Although e-mail appears to be the most widely used Internet service, theWorld Wide Web is one of the fastest growing services.  A Baruch College-

Harris Poll (1997) survey of 1,000 U.S. households conducted in the spring of
1997 indicated that the number of adult Web users had nearly doubledÑto 40million people, or 21 percent of adultsÑfrom the previous year.  About a quarter
of these were people in their forties.According to Matrix Information and Directory Services (Quarterman, 1997),about 36 million individuals worldwide have the technical capability to distribute
or publish information via FTP or WWW.  The Netcraft Web Server Survey

found 525,915 publicly accessible Web servers in an exhaustive search in No-
vember 1996; by December 1997 the number had risen to more than 1.6 million
(Netcraft, 1996, 1997).1.1.4Global Connectivity
According to a study by the International Data Corporation, the surge inInternet use is a global phenomenon (International Data Corporation, 1997a).
The study estimated a worldwide total of 91 million users as of November 1997,Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYwith 14 million users in the Asia/Pacific region, 20 million in Europe, and around1 million in both Africa and South America.1.2SOME MAJOR CHALLENGES
The studies cited above are, of course, based on particular samples andresearch methodologies; it is hard to appraise their accuracy without more de-
tailed investigation.  Moreover, among the variables that make measurement

difficult and contribute to inconsistent results are disparate definitions of ÒuseÓand Òaccess.Ó However, these studies clearly indicate that computer and Internet
growth is a significant, widespread, and global phenomenon.  Although use of

information technology is most prevalent among businesses and highly educated,
high-income, North American households, all demographic groups in the devel-
oped world show a pattern of significantly increasing  use.
A phenomenon this ubiquitous and growing this rapidly is clearly important.As the three examples below illustrate, social science research can help policy
makers and others to better understand and shape the interactions between tech-
nology and society.1.2.1Productivity and Organizational Change
In the long run productivity is the primary determinant of our standard ofliving and the economic resources available to address societal challenges and
problems.  Understanding whether and how computers affect economic produc-

tivity is a critical issue for policy makers as well as business leaders.  In 1987, the

economist Robert Solow quipped, ÒWe see the computer age everywhere exceptin the productivity statisticsÓ (Solow, 1987).  Solow
Õs comment reflects the factthat, despite the tremendous advances in computer power and affordability shown
in Figures 1.1 to 1.3, the aggregate statistics suggest that economic productivity
has grown more slowly since about 1973 than it did in the period from 1950 to
1973.There are many possible explanations for the apparent slowdown in produc-tivity despite the advances made possible by computerization.6 Analysis is com-plicated by the fact that many of the benefits of the computer age are not reflected
in the official statistics on output and productivity.  Managers typically cite

improved quality, variety, timeliness, and customer service as important reasons
for their investments in computers, yet these aspects of output go largely unmea-
sured.7  Furthermore, the growth of productivity in the service sector is difficult
if not impossible to measure.  Zvi Griliches, for example, has estimated that the

ÒunmeasurableÓ sectors of the economy grew from 53 percent of the total in 1948
to about 74 percent in 1994 (Griliches, 1994).  Ironically, there is apparently less

information in the information age about the value of output than there was in theFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION15industrial era.   New and better metrics clearly are needed to help in understand-
ing how productivity in the information age should be gauged and evaluated.8Another aspect of the productivity paradox may be unrealistically high ex-pectations about the potential of computers to affect output.  Investment in com-

puterization is still a relatively small share of the total economy, and so the
possible impact of computerization on the whole may be limited.  Based on the

quantity of computer power purchased each year, it is possible to  calculate the

expected contribution computers ÒshouldÓ be making to economic growth under
the assumption that capital investment in computers is earning a ÒnormalÓ rate of
return.  Various researchers have undertaken such an exercise, and the estimates

cluster around 0.3 to 4 percent of additional growth in the economy owing to
technological advances in computers each year.9  Perhaps, then, the measuredslowdown in productivity would have been even more pronounced had it not
been for the contributions made by computers.A constant stream of new discoveries and advances is required just to keepproductivity growth from falling to zero, and part of the promise of computers is
their ability to engender such new discoveries.  In earlier decades, growth in

productivity was the result of innovations such as electricity, automobiles, the
radio, jet engines, plastics, and even corrugated cardboard (Denison, 1985).  To-
day, new products and services, innovative business processes and organizational
forms, and even new industries can be traced to advances in information technol-
ogy.  Moreover, like earlier general-purpose technologies such as the steam en-

gine and electricity, computers have changed the nature of work in myriad minor
and major ways, thus magnifying their economic and social impact.David (1989, 1990) found that the electrification of factories had its greatesteffect after factories had been radically reorganized (see section 2.3.3 for more
details).  Similarly, case studies suggest that realizing the full benefit of computer

technologies also often requires a significant rethinking of how business works.
As a result, the ways in which computers are used may be more important than
the quantity of investment.  In one instance, a large medical products manufac-

turer found that effective use of computerization required changes in two dozen
work practices and policies, including those related to inventory, incentive sys-
tems, worker training, job responsibilities, and hiring criteria.  Initially, produc-

tivity fell because the new system did not work smoothly.  However, by focusing

on the interactions among the work practices, the company was able eventually to
reap substantial rewards from use of the technology (Brynjolfsson et al., 1997).Understanding exactly which work policies and practices need to be changedand which  changes are most important in various contexts
Ñfor example, whatfrequency and amount of training are required for workers to adapt to new tech-
nologiesÑare critical research issues.  Collection of further case studies can help,
but there is a particular need for analysis leading to broader insights that can be
generalized across numerous companies and situations.  Here again, lack of good
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYdata on how businesses are changing has hampered progress.  Section  2.3.3,
ÒOrganizations and Processes,Ó discusses these issues in more detail.
1.2.2Information Technology and Wage Inequality
For more than 20 years, the gap separating high-wage earners from low-wage earners has continued to increase in the United States.  For example, the

ratio of the wages earned by males at the 75th percentile of the distribution to
those at the 25th percentile has grown from 1.75 to 1 in the 1970s to 2.25 to 1 in
the early 1990s, and the wages of those at the more extreme percentiles have
moved farther from the median (Murphy and Welch, 1993).  By some measures,
the poorest members of society are worse off than they were a generation ago.
Most economists attribute much of the increase in inequality to an increase in the
demand for skilled labor and also link that shift in demand to technical change.
For example, Autor et al. (1997) showed that the increase in inequality was
largest in those industries that were the heaviest users of information technology.
However, it remains unclear how use of IT changes labor markets.  Thus, it is
difficult to predict whether the growth in wage inequality will continue and what
policy makers can do about it. Is the growth of inequality a temporary phenomenon that will correct itself?
Should society invest more heavily in education to dampen the negative effects of
technological change? What is the role of corporate reorganization in changing
the demand for different types of workers?  These are some of the important

questions that can be addressed only by further research on the economic and
social impacts of computing and communications.  Section 2.3.2, 
ÒLabor andInformation Technology,Ó discusses this subject in more detail.
1.2.3Design of Technology and Standards Setting
Social science has much to contribute to the design of appropriate technol-ogy.  Today the question facing many technologists is not, How do we do it? but,

What should we do?  As determinants of technology development, design issues
involving human-computer interfaces (see Box 1.2), pricing and ÒversioningÓ(the provision of different qualities or versions of a good that sell at different
prices), evaluation, and product life cycles have become more important than the
traditional engineering concerns.  Social scientists can help to design the ques-

tionnaires, marketing studies, pricing policies, and interfaces necessary to de-
velop successful information technology.Standards development is another aspect of technology design in whichsocial science can play a very useful role.  Technical standards are the basis for

interconnection and communication among information technology systems.
However, an important aspect of standards is that once adopted, they can be very
difficult to change because of their highly distributed nature and the consequentFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION17need for broad-range, costly alternations of user behavior and infrastructure.  For
example, technical standards developed and adopted now for electronic pay-
mentÑsuch as the proposed Secure Transactions (SET) standard for credit cardtransactions over the InternetÑmay be in use for some time, and careful thoughtshould be given to their implications.Thus far, information technology standards setting has been successful in nothindering the dramatic growth just described.   However, technical standards are
playing an increasing role in policy considerations, and some current issues re-BOX 1.2Human-Computer Interface DesignAs a result of technology advances, interface designers can now attempt tomake human-computer interfaces more personable by incorporating human-like
attributes such as speech or representations of human faces using pictures, simu-lations, or animation.  When technologists introduce human-like attributes into in-
terfaces, they change the userÕs experience from one of human-machine interac-tion to one that approximates some features of human social interaction.  Even
though such interfaces only partially represent human attributes and clearly arenot Òreal,Ó users still respond somewhat as though they were interacting with a
person rather than a machine.Social science research has explored how people react to more human-likeinterfaces.  For example, Clifford Nass and his colleagues demonstrated that when

people interacted with computers that had human-like attributes, they applied suchrules as ÒBe polite when delivering evaluationsÓ and 
ÒPraise of others is moreaccurate than praise of selfÓ when they assessed computer software (Nass et al.,
1994).Lee Sproull and her colleagues demonstrated that people made their own be-havior more social when they interacted with human-like interface agents.  For

example, people reported that they were more altruistic when they answered stan-dard personality-test questions asked by a talking face displayed on a screen thanwhen they answered the same questions displayed in a text window (Sproull et al.,
1996).In neither case did the researchers ask the conventional questions about easeof use: Was the audio easy to hear and understand? Were the visual images sharpand clear?  Were the instructions  easy to understand?  Instead the researchers
asked, Did users respond to these computer programs in ways reminiscent of
ways they would respond to a human being?Trying to introduce human attributes into interfaces is not necessarily the rightapproach.1  However, if technologists do attempt to make computer interfaces
more human-like, then social scientists can use theories of social interaction tohelp technologists understand and predict how people will react to these interfac-es, thus increasing the acceptance and utility of the computing technology.1A recent Computer Science and Telecommunications Board report (CSTB, 1997b) discusses promisingresearch in interface design.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYquire the development of standards that address social, legal, and policy con-cerns.  See sections 2.4.1, ÒProtection of Intellectual Property,Ó 2.4.3, ÒPrivacy,Óand 2.4.9, ÒElectronic Commerce,Ó for further discussion.
1.3ROLE OF SOCIAL SCIENCE
There is no shortage of pundits who will forecast the future of the informa-tion society.  Much of their writing is based on extrapolation or slogans, neither

of which is an effective guide to crafting public policy and designing technology.
One month everyone is talking about Òinformation ÔhavesÕ and 
Ôhave-notsÕÓ; thenext month it is Òagent-based commerce.Ó  Rarely do articles in the mass media
refer to social science research, such as studies of differential access to computers
or economic studies of a variety of mechanisms for automated trading, that would
be highly relevant to these issues.For the purposes of this report, the core social sciences are taken to beanthropology, economics, history,10 political science, sociology, and social psy-
chology.  Closely allied are the fields of demography, information science, law,

and organizational studiesÑareas that have a significant social science compo-nent and are also highly relevant to research on the impacts of information tech-
nology.  These disciplines use dramatically different methods.  Economics, for

example, is highly quantitative, whereas anthropology and history are typically
much more descriptive.An advantage offered by social science is that it can help technologists andpolicy makers to understand how people and social institutions behave in re-
sponse to current technology developments and what the effects of particular
changes might be.  Changes might be introduced at the microlevel, for example,

by technologists who make computer interfaces more personable, or at the
macrolevel, for example, by policy makers who put in place new intellectual
property protection frameworks.  At either end of and along the entire continuum,

social science data and theory can help decision makers make better-informed
decisions.The collection of reliable dataÑsuch as data on the penetration or use of aparticular technologyÑis an endeavor in which the methodology of social sci-ence can make an important contribution.  For example, as noted in section 1.1.3,

measurement of how many people use the Internet is complicated by the current
lack of widely accepted, precise definitions of Òuse.Ó  Defining terms appropri-
ately and precisely is basic to social science methodology, as are assessing the
reliability of survey data and increasing the reliability by using particular tech-
niques for sampling, increasing response rates, and assessing the impact of miss-
ing data.The technology-related work that has been done by social scientists is notwidely known either to policy makers or to technology designers in part because
it is published in academic journals, which are relatively inaccessible, and dis-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19seminated only to a relatively small audience. The World Wide Web may allowsuch studies to become more accessible.  However, the typical problem is not in

gaining access to scholarly journals and other such sources of pertinent studies,
but rather in knowing what to search for.  Also, scholarly work is often inacces-

sible to the lay reader.Much of the data on the computer and communications industry comes frommarket research firms whose data complements that generated by social scien-
tists.  Both types of data are necessary, and both are worthwhile.  One distinction

is that the commercial sources make money by selling their data; nobody makes
money directly from social science data.  But the primary distinction is that social

scientists do not simply count things.  When they count (to answer how much,

how many, how frequently), a theoretical context, involving systematic theories
of human behavior, motivates the counts.  Thus, for example, a sociologist inter-

ested in electronic group dynamics might ask about the relationship between
unpleasant events in the group and a decline in group membership.  She might

count the frequency of ÒflamesÓ (hostile messages) or 
ÒspamsÓ (electronic junk
mail) or flames about spams, or how much time people spend deleting flames and
spams from their mailboxes, as indicators of unpleasant events.  In assessing how

those numbers correlate with changes in the size of group membership, the goal is
not to count, but rather to understand how the frequency of one kind of behavior
affects the dynamics of a social institution.  Such understanding enables more

reliable forecasts and more trustworthy inferences about causal relationships.The value of social science research comes not from tracking the frequencyof use of the latest technologies but rather from helping to develop common
social and economic principles that can be applied to new circumstances.  Those
designing or relying on technology and those making policy decisions about the
use of technology without reference to systematic theories of human behavior or
economics will likely find themselves approaching each new issue in ignorance.
Given the rapid pace of technological change, this approach has both economic
and social costs.In summary, the ongoing computing and communications revolution re-quires serious social science investigation.  Such work would be valuable for both

social policy and technology design.  Many choices being made now will be

costly or difficult to modify in the future.  To help answer the challenges intro-

duced above, new areas of research, improved collection of data, and new col-
laborations are called for.  The chapters that follow examine these issues.
NOTES1.Throughout this report, the term 
ÒimpactsÓ is used as a shorthand expression to indicate  a
complex set of multicausal, multidimensional technology outcomes.  Technology does not

typically have a single impact, but rather a range of different outcomes depending on thecontext or settings.  For more discussion, see Box 1.1 as well as Attewell
Õs and KlingÕs papersin Appendix B of this volume.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY2.The Computer Technology Index survey used a sample designed to be representative of all
U.S. households and had a 66 percent response rate.3.Evidence is emerging that the advent of PCs priced below $1,000 is allowing lower-income
households to enter the market for personal computers (Hoffman and Novak, 1998).4.Network Wizards changed the method used to collect data starting with the January 1998
survey and cautioned that care is required in comparing figures derived by using the old and
new methods.  The extent of growth is unmistakable, however.  The last survey conducted with
the old method found nearly 20 million hosts in July 1997Ñwhich would correspond to roughly26 million hosts if the new survey method had been used.  See Network Wizards (1998) for a

discussion of this issue.5.Project 2000 publications are available online at <http://www2000.ogsm.vandervilt.edu/>.
6.To some, the slowdown in the growth of officially measured productivity seems at odds with
the many examples of how computerization has contributed to advances in the past two decades.Automatic teller machines enable banks to handle millions of transactions at all hours of the dayand in numerous locations, a capability made possible by computer networking.  Volumes of

transactions are handled that would be inconceivable without computers.  In addition, many
modern manufacturers operate with a fraction of the labor previously required while handling fargreater product variety.  Retailing, medicine, transportation and logistics, communications, and

virtually every other industry are in the midst of a computer-enabled transformation.7.Citing unmeasured improvements in these and other areas, the Boskin Commission recently
estimated that the consumer price index overestimates inflation by approximately 1 percent
(Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index, 1996).  This implies that growth inproductivity has been underestimated by a comparable amount.8.One tack that several researchers have recently taken is to rely on firm-level data instead of
national or industry-level data.  For instance, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1996, 1997) and Lichtenberg
(1995) have found that there is, in fact, a strong positive correlation between IT use and produc-tivity at the firm level.  See also CSTB (1994a).
9.See, for instance, Brynjolfsson (1996a,b), Oliner and Sichel (1994), Jorgenson and Stiroh
(1995), and Lau and Tokutsu (1992).10.Although history is not usually classified as a social science, historical analysis can play a
valuable role closely allied to that of the social sciences in helping to characterize the impactsof computing and communications.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS21212Illustrative Examples andUnanswered QuestionsThis chapter discusses a selection of social science studies that have pro-vided useful insights for understanding the impacts of computing and communi-
cations and shaping public policy. The aim is to give a flavor of the results
produced by earlier studies and to introduce some areas viewed as especially
promising for future research, including points raised and issues discussed at the
June 1997 workshop and in position papers submitted by the participants.  It is

not intended to be comprehensive; the points and issues discussed illustrate the
range and value of social science research and provide a basis for framing impor-
tant research questions.  The chapter concludes with an illustrative set of broad

topics for ongoing research drawn from the discussion presented below.Since the range of potential impacts associated with information technologyis vast, the examples and issues outlined below are organized according to the
domains in which they are extraordinarily important:  private life, including

households and community; social infrastructure; and business, including labor
and organizational process.  Cutting across all of these are issues integral to life in

an information economy and societyÑamong them protection of intellectual
property, pricing of information, and electronic commerce.  Another significant

impact of computing and communications is the changing boundaries between
these domainsÑbetween people and organizations, organizations and nations,
and the private and public sectors.2.1HOUSEHOLDS AND COMMUNITY
Americans are rushing to furnish their homes with a host of devices forsending, receiving, and processing huge quantities of information through di-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFIGURE 2.1Penetration of various household devices in the U.S. market over the 20th
century.  SOURCE: Data from Belinfante (1991), Electronic Industries Association (1984-

1990, 1992), Television Bureau of Advertising (1991), and U.S. Bureau of the Census(1986, 1990-1992).verse media across multitudes of channels.  Figure 2.1 shows trends in acquisi-
tion of devices such as personal computers compared with ownership of two
consumer staplesÑrefrigerators and automobiles.  If one could lift the roof fromthe characteristic U.S. home, one would see that it looks increasingly like a
multiplex theater.  What once took place in the town square, in the neighborhood

tavern, on market day, or in the library can now occur as easily in the study or in
the bedroom.  Computers and advanced communications are also playing in-

creasingly significant roles in community organizations and in education.2.1.1Computer Use in the Home
Computer use in the home is a relatively recent phenomenon, and one thathas changed considerably in the past two decades.  At first, a majority of use was

work-related.  Today computers are more accepted as a household technology,

with an increasing amount of software and other development targeted to the
home.  (For further discussion and a model for the interaction of the household

and technology, see Venkatesh, 1996.)Descriptive studies of computer use in the home are relatively rare andalmost always very Òthin,Ó that is, based on a small number of survey questions.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS23More intensive and extensive study of computer use in the home is required tounderstand what people use the computer for; how computer use substitutes for
other activities; and how it affects family dynamics, childrenÕs educationalperformance, adultsÕ employment activities, and so forth.  But even the best
descriptive studies inevitably confound household computer use and its effects
with effects stemming from household income and educational status.  House-

holds with greater resources are much more likely to have and use computers,
and they are likely to use them in different ways.  In this situation it is difficult

to understand how much of any described effect is due to the technology and
how much is due to ancillary resources the household brings to bear on such
challenges as understanding how to use software, troubleshoot technical prob-
lems, select software for children, and incorporate computers into family ac-
tivities.  A good way to untangle the effects of technology from the effects of

other household resources such as income and education is to conduct field
experiments in which households are given current technology and well-de-
signed training and support to compensate at least in part for limited income
and educational resources.The Homenet Project (Kraut et al., 1996; Kiesler et al., 1997), organized bysocial scientists at Carnegie Mellon University, is a field experiment document-
ing the use and effects of household computers in more than 100 households in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  Families were selected for demographic diversity, and

a matched sample of eligible but not-selected families was also tracked.  Each

selected family was given a computer, modem, extra telephone line, full Internet
accounts for each family member above age 8 who wanted one, software, train-
ing, online support, and access to an evening telephone help desk.  In exchange

for receiving technology and technical support, families agreed to participate in a
variety of data collection efforts, including surveys, home interviews, and auto-
mated logging of software use.Data collection and analysis are still under way, but the researchers havealready been able to document important findings:¥Even with hardware and software designed for ease of use, personal train-ing, and personal support, people found the technology hard to understand and
use.  Significantly, many of those who stopped (or never started) use blamed

themselves rather than the technology for their problems.  Generational effects

persist even when both older and younger generations have the same access to the
same technology.  People in the household under the age of 19 use the computer

more than people older than 19.¥Use of electronic mail is better than use of the Web as a predictor of latere-mail and Web use.¥Household income and educational levels are not valid as predictors ofInternet use when all the people compared have adequate technology and support.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY2.1.2Differential Impacts of Technology
It is rhetorically convenient to talk as though technology is used by everyonein the same way and affects everyone similarly, regardless of their life circum-
stances.  Thus, such generalizations as 
Òe-mail flattens organizational hierar-chiesÓ or 
Òpeople who spend time online reduce their face-to-face interactionÓ are
common.Historians of earlier technologies such as the telephone have noted thatpeople use the same technology differently and that it has different effects, de-
pending on a personÕs age, gender, income level, geographic location, and othercircumstances (see, e.g., Fischer, 1992; Mueller and Schement, 1996).Numerous researchers have reached the same conclusion about computers.Attewell and Battle (1997) showed that equivalent technological capability in
homes is associated with higher school test scores when family income is higher.
The Homenet study (Kraut et al., 1996; Kiesler et al., 1997; described above in
section 2.1.1) demonstrates that the same technology in the home is used differ-
ently by males and females, and also by teenagers and adults.  A RAND study of

retirees (Bikson et al., 1991) showed that the same technology is used differently
by recent retirees and same-age counterparts who have continued to work.  Sec-

tion 2.3.4 gives examples of the differential impact of e-mail use in scientific
communities.An important related question is understanding why some people who madeuse of the Internet at some time then stopped using it.  Demographic studies of the

populations of network users and nonusers are required.  The developing popula-

tion of people who experimented with Internet use but did not become long-term
users deserves analysis.  One study of this topic, using Nielson data from more

than 14,000 households, discovered that Internet Òdrop-outsÓ were less likely
than those who continue using the Internet to have developed social relationships
and roles online (Chung, 1998).Research on differential impacts holds a very important message to those,such as policy makers and others, wishing to understand the interactions between
technology and society as a single, uniform impact:  they will forever be disap-

pointed or deluded.  It is vital to recognize that the 
ÒsameÓ technology has
different effects in different social and organizational circumstances.  Indeed, one

of the most important contributions that social science research can make is in
exploring how social and organizational conditionsÑsuch as income, age, sex, orwork statusÑaffect and are affected by how technology is used.2.1.3Community
The Internet offers a new locus for communication and participation.  Ac-
cording to a Business Week/Harris poll released April 28, 1997, of the 89 percentof those surveyed who used e-mail, nearly one-third considered themselves partFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS25of an online community.  Forty-two percent of those involved in an online commu-
nity said that it was related to their profession, 35 percent said that their community
was a social group, and 18 percent said that it revolved around a hobby.The shift away from traditional notions of public space may threaten olderforms of community.  Polls show, for example, that more New Jerseyans know

the names of the mayors of New York and Philadelphia than know the names of
the mayors in their own towns.  Although regions vary, this decline in localism

seems to be a characteristic of the U.S. political landscape. Large media networks
collect audiences by concentrating on stories that appeal to large blocks of view-
ers and readers.  Thus suburban and rural citizens are quite likely to recognize the

name of a city official for whom they cannot in fact vote.  Individuals who

commute to distant workplaces and whose personal networks are spread geo-
graphically are further disconnected.  The possibility that localism may become

increasingly irrelevant to increasing numbers of Americans signals social and
political change of a profound nature.  For as long as community has remained

intact, for example, libraries and churches and schools have functioned to bring
people together, to educate newcomers, and to reinforce the virtues of citizen-
ship.Today the number of potential secondary anonymous relationships has in-creased vastly as individuals seek to accomplish tasks by relying on mediated
information received from strangers.  Home-centered, individualistic, informa-

tion-heavy approaches to carrying out their personal and professional lives offer
people opportunities to bypass both the traditional community and the public
sphere.Hard evidence on the issue of localism and engagement with the communityis very mixed.  For example, Americans today change homes and communities at

about half the rate that they did in the mid-19th century, and even less than they
did in the 1950s.  It is possible to argue that people are less involved on a daily

basis with their neighborsÑand more with people elsewhereÑthan they were acentury ago, but the degree of that change is as yet unestimated.  Such change

may also be a result of other phenomena in the early 20th centuryÑrural to urbanmigration, the streetcar in cities, and the automobile in rural areasÑrather thannew communications.In a sense, the questions first raised by the University of Chicago school ofsociology (e.g., Park, 1916, 1955) in the early part of this century persist in their
relevance:  How does community form out of the ferment of diverse cultural

experiences?  How does democracy emerge from the diverse cultural experiences

of immigrants?  At the end of the 20th century such questions are still being

asked; but whereas the Chicago school focused on the role of the newspaper as an
agent for assimilation and teaching democracy, the question today is under what
conditions new information technology and media will bring Americans together
or pull them apart.  Box 2.1 illustrates some interesting areas meriting further

exploration.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 2.1Community in the Information AgeInterface between the household and the community.  How does the transfor-mation of household functions enabled by information technologies alter an indi-vidualÕs expectations of community?Political values.  Does identification with networked communities affect Ameri-cansÕ construction of democratic participation, responsibilities, and obligations?
Will Americans devalue political values associated with geographic community asthey integrate into networked communities?Virtual communities.  Are they communities? In what ways do people enact therights and responsibilities of citizenship in virtual communities?Networked communities and the elderly.  To what extent does participation innetworked communities enrich the lives of the elderly and/or contribute to alien-ation from geographic communities?Families.  Does Internet use by families contribute to the establishment and main-tenance of family networks? How fragile are these networks?Friendship.  Does making friends in cyberspace enrich or fragment emotionallife?  Does dependence on cyber friends result in lower motivation to develop

friendships with those close by?Computer networks as social networks.  How social are computer networks?What needs do they meet or fail to meet?2.1.4Education
Increased use of computing technologies in K-12 education is giving rise toimportant new areas for social science research.  The Internet has penetrated

rapidly and extensively into U.S. public schools.  A U.S. Department of Educa-

tion survey found that as of fall 1996, 65 percent of schools had access to the
Internet; penetration had increased by 15 percentage points in each of the prior 2
years (Heaviside et al., 1997).  The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA)

estimated that in 1995, U.S. schools had 5.8 million computers for use in instruc-
tionÑabout one for every nine students (Office of Technology Assessment,1995).However, the presence of computers for instruction does not necessarilytranslate into student use of computers for instruction.  The OTA reported that

despite the presence of close to 6 million computers for instruction in the nationÕsschools (in 1995; presumably there are more now) students spent only about 2Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS27hours a week using them.  Like factories at the introduction of the electric dy-
namo or business at the introduction of computing technology, schools and teach-
ers may not yet have learned how to modify work practices and organizational
structures to take advantage of computing and communications technology.
Schools have in general not found it easy to use technologies effectively for
improving teaching and learning.1 Nevertheless it is important for policy makers,
educators, and parents to understand what could be accomplished with comput-
ing technology in schools under optimal conditions.Although a variety of proposals have been advanced to increase the avail-ability of computers and Internet connectivity, and substantial investment made
in purchasing technology, relatively little attention has been paid to how they will
be used once they are in place.  Because of the decentralized nature of U.S.

education, it is difficult to understand for the nation as a whole the breadth and
depth of change in educational practice and outcomes associated with the increas-
ing presence of computing and communications technology in schools and class-
rooms.  While many state departments of education and local districts are imple-
menting new programs with a technology component, efforts to design and
employ measures of effectiveness that would allow policy makers and parents to
compare across projects are generally lacking.A recent report of the PresidentÕs Committee of Advisors on Science andTechnology, Panel on Educational Technology, stresses the importance of ex-
perimental research in exploring what educational approaches are most effective
(PCAST, 1997; see Box 2.2).  The report notes that research on educational

technology has received minimal funding relative to total national spending on
K-12 education, and it urges increased investment.  One of the major research

categories proposed is the need for rigorous empirical study of which approaches
to using information technology in schools are most effective.The starting point for empirical study is descriptive inventories of projectswith comparable measures of effectiveness, which would provide an exception-
ally useful knowledge base.  Such a study can take advantage of natural variation

across states and school districts and would not require active intervention.2This mapping of the range of endeavors under way would lay the foundationfor the second phase, a more intensive study of how best to use computers in
education.  It would be worth considering how to organize, fund, and research a

small number of schools as demonstration sites where work practices and organi-
zational structures are radically redesigned to improve teaching and learning
through technology.  To achieve a fair demonstration, schools would have to be

paired with a second set of schools matched according to student and staff demo-
graphics and capabilities.  The second set would receive economic resources

comparable to those of the first set that they could deploy in a range of other
ways.  Although natural variation among schools would be sufficient for the

descriptive phase, this active intervention is required for the second phase in
order to derive useful conclusions in the short run.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThe politics and economics of designing and running such demonstrationstudies would be enormously complex and contentious.  Yet, currently, school

districts and teachers are making decisions about how to allocate resources of
both money and time for technology-related efforts, without the benefit of good
information about the potential consequences of their decisions.  A series of

discussions is called for that would involve both the public sector and the private
sectorÑand would include educators, parents, technologists, and researchersÑinexploring the feasibility and usefulness of such demonstration projects.A significant opportunity to study the use of information technology in thepublic schools is presented by the Schools and Libraries Universal Service Fund,
which was established as part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996.  With

funding of up to $2.25 billion per year, the program will provide discounts on
telecommunications services, Internet access, and networking, with the largest
discounts going to rural and inner-city communities.  By enabling a large number

of schools to acquire new technology, this program in effect creates a large-scale
ÒlaboratoryÓ where the sorts of research described above could be conducted.
BOX 2.2Research Recommendations of the PresidentÕs Committee ofAdvisors on Science and Technology,Panel on Educational Technology1.  Basic research in various learning-related disciplines (including cognitive
and developmental psychology,  neuroscience, artificial intelligence, and the inter-
disciplinary field of cognitive science) and fundamental work on various education-ally relevant technologies (encompassing in particular various subdisciplines of
the field of computer science).2.Early-stage research aimed at developing innovative approaches to the ap-
plication of technology in education which are unlikely to originate from within the
private sector, but which could result in the development of new forms of educa-tional software, content, and technology-enabled pedagogy, not only in scienceand mathematics (which have thus far received the most attention), but in the
language arts, social studies, creative arts, and other content areas.3.  Rigorous, well-controlled, peer-reviewed, large-scale (and at least for some
studies, long-term), broadly applicable empirical studies designed to determine not
whether computers can be effectively used within the school, but rather whichapproaches to the use of technology are in fact most effective and cost-effective inpractice.SOURCE:  Reprinted from PCAST (1997), p. 53.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS292.2SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE:  UNIVERSAL SERVICE
Formulating public policy on aspects of social infrastructure such as univer-sal access to telephony and other communications services requires decision
making about how large amounts of money are allocated and how broad seg-
ments of society are served.  Although the debate about such questions may often

take on a political cast, both empirical research and the application of social
science theory offer much to help guide public policy making and the investment
of public resources.Since the value of a networkÑsuch as the public telephone network or theInternetÑdepends on the total number of people connected to it (a phenomenonknown as Ònetwork externalitiesÓ), it is often argued that access to networksshould be universally provided.  Universal service has long been part of U.S.

telecommunications policy, and there are those who argue that universal service
is an appropriate public policy goal for Internet access (see, for example, Ander-
son et al., 1995).3Whether or not one agrees that universal service for networks is an appropri-ate objective of public policy, it is worth pointing out that the historical evidence
suggests that there would be widespread popular support for applying universal
service policies to new networks made possible by advances in technology.  His-

torically, in several instances, the political demand for universal service has
repeatedly induced Congress to ensure universal service at uniform rates.For example, a postal service available to all was established by the Consti-tution. Initially (in 1792), postal rates for a first-class letter depended on the
distance it was to be carried:  6 cents for fewer than 30 miles, 8 cents for 31 to 60

miles, and so on through nine rate classes to the highest rate of 25 cents for more
than 450 miles.  In 1845 the rate structure was collapsed to only two categories,

5 cents for not more than 300 miles, and 10 cents for more than 300 miles.  In

1863 a uniform rate (3 cents) regardless of distance and free intracity delivery
were established (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975).  Rural free delivery began in

1896.  Subsidized Parcel Post became effective in 1913, effectively connecting

rural residents to the advantages of city department stores through mail-order
houses like Sears-Roebuck and Montgomery Ward. A premium for airmail deliv-
ery was dropped in 1978.For services provided by private businesses, government regulation was of-ten used to ensure universal service and nondiscriminatory rate structures.  Rail-

road rates were regulated by the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) begin-
ning in 1887.  Interstate telephone rates were regulated by the ICC and later the

Federal Communications Commission beginning in 1919.  Intrastate telephone

calls were made subject to state regulatory authority.  Telephone companies were

required to charge a uniform fee for service connection.  Cable television rates

and access have also been regulated.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYGovernment ownership, government subsidies and loans, and direct govern-ment programs have been used to ensure universal network services.  Land grants

and other government assistance brought railroads to every city in the country.
The Rural Electrification Administration was established in 1935 to extend elec-
trical service to areas where high construction costs and low population density
had made private service unprofitable.  The federal highway program and later

the federal Interstate Highway System connected every congressional district to
the national transportation network.Education can also be thought of as a good with substantial network exter-nalities.  In the United States, elementary education has been provided univer-

sally (and compulsorily after the 1880s), and secondary education has been pro-
vided universally since the mid-1940s.  College education has been subsidized by

the state and federal governments since the Land Grant Universities were estab-
lished shortly after the Civil War.  Increasing fractions of the population have

benefited from government-subsidized higher education.  Special programs have

been introduced to assist the children from low- and middle-income families to
pay the cost of college.Two points about these government efforts to foster or mandate universalityfor network goods need to be stressed.  First, all of these congressional and state

efforts were designed to accomplish (as much as possible) universal geographic
connectivity.  Thus letters with 32-cent stamps are delivered to remote sites in the

Alaskan north, in mountainous wilderness, and on small, but inhabited, islands.
Even Hawaii has an interstate highway!  Rural residents received telephone and

electrical service just as their city cousins did.  Second, the principle of universal-

ity was to extend to people in all income classes, rich and poor alike.  This has

often gone beyond establishing uniform rates for service to the creation of subsi-
dized ÒlifelineÓ rates for basic service at prices presumably available to even the
poorest families.The political logic behind these moves is threefold.  First, they have been
defended as required by the principle of democracy.  Individuals cannot effec-

tively participate in the democratic process if they do not have equal and unre-
stricted access to the main methods of communication and transportation.  Thus

as increasing fractions of the population become connected to a network, those
left unconnected become an increasing burden on the democratic principle, and
the cost of subsidizing their inclusion becomes smaller and smaller.  Sooner or

later the political calculus tips the balance toward a policy of guaranteeing uni-
versal service.  The second principle that has been applied is the desirability of

equal opportunity.  As economic development proceeded, both high-income oc-

cupations and low-cost access to the most diverse array of consumer goods being
produced became concentrated in the urban areas.  Federal action was seen to be
required to keep rural Americans abreast of these advances.  Farmers, too, it was
argued, should share in the opportunities and wealth created by the new technolo-
gies.  The third argument used to defend special programs for the poor was the
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS31argument that connection to a network was essential or at least very helpful forself-advancement.  Basic education is necessary to become employable.  More

education is probably better.  Basic telephone and electrical service is probably

necessary to hold a good job and to seek out better opportunities.  The political

fear is that unless government redistributive actions are taken to include the poor
in the network, their lack of connectivity will doom them and their children to
permanent poverty.Although it is certainly true that widespread availability may increase thevalue of a network, it is not necessarily the case that such access will occur only
with government provision or subsidies.  After all, many goods with network

externalities are provided by the private sector, including our fax machines, video
player/cassette market, and so on.  Indeed, only a couple of years after the Ander-

son et al. (1995) report, for-profit firms such as Hotmail4 began offering free e-
mail, supported by advertising.Basic telephone service has long been regarded as a social good that requireda deliberate policy effort to achieve universal access.  However, a close reading

of history suggests another possible conclusion.  According to Mueller (1997),

penetration of basic telephone service could easily be comparable to todayÕsrates, even if there had been no policies of subsidized access.  Various comments

to the FCC in its recent docket on universal service reform indicated that the
current structure of pricing in telephony is costing the United States billions of
dollars, with very little impact on penetration rates for basic telephone service.
These deadweight losses arise because the prices of services such as long-dis-
tance calling, for which demand is sensitive to price, are set well above cost, and
the prices of price-insensitive services, such as basic service, are often below
cost, in direct violation of the economic principles of efficient pricing to cover
joint and common costs (ÒRamsey pricingÓ; see Kahn, 1970).Advocates of universal service for the Internet or telephony typically maketheir case on grounds of geography or of income.  One can well see why inter-

ested parties might argue for geographic subsidization:  economic theory sug-

gests that most of the benefits of providing services to isolated areas will be
captured by those who own land in those areas.  Land with electricity, telephone,

and road service is certainly more valuable than land with none of these features,
and it is, of course, appealing to those who own the land to have someone else pay
for such improvements.Geographical concerns also flow from the interest in social and economicdevelopment in rural areas.  This was a past concern in the United States for

telephony, and it remains an issue for expansion of new broadband services to
rural areas.   Rural access to even basic telephony remains a major issue in many

developing countries.  Whether cross-subsidies are the appropriate means to fund

the expansion of rural telecommunications services is an area of ongoing public
policy debate.With respect to income arguments for universal service subsidies, it is alsoFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYimportant to understand clearly that cost may not be the only reason that the poor donot have access to goods such as telephone service.  Mueller and Schement (1996)
found that a higher fraction of households below the poverty line in Camden, New
Jersey, had cable TV service than had telephones.  The most important reason for

people choosing not to have telephones was that their friends and relatives would
make long-distance calls and leave them liable for paying the bill.  According to

this study, the monthly charge for basic access was not a significant factor in their

choice of whether or not to purchase telephone service.Public policy debate surrounding the 1996 Telecommunications Act raisesnew and unresolved research questions.  For example:  Is special funding for

schools and libraries necessary, and if so what is the most efficient means for
providing it?  Should 
Òcarrier-of-last-resortÓ obligations be allocated via auctions
(see section 2.4.8, ÒAuctionsÓ)?   Some studies that might shed light on this last
question include international comparative studies of the effects of various policy
approaches and the impact of subsidies in these policy regimes on consumer
behavior.2.3BUSINESS, LABOR, AND ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
2.3.1Location:  Internationalization and Telecommuting
One important way in which information technology is affecting work is byreducing the importance of distance.5  In many industries, the geographic distri-
bution of work is changing significantly.  For instance, some Silicon Valley firms

have found that they can overcome the tight local market for software engineers
by sending projects to India or other nations where the wages are much lower.
Furthermore, such arrangements can take advantage of the time differences so
that critical projects can be worked on nearly around the clock.  As the day ends

in San Jose it is just beginning in Bangalore, India, and so the teams can hand off
their work electronically to colleagues thousands of miles away (Economist,1996).  Firms can outsource their manufacturing to other nations and rely on

telecommunications to keep marketing, R&D, and distribution teams in close
contact with the manufacturing groups.  Thus the technology can enable a finer

division of labor among countries, which in turn affects the relative demand for
various skills in each nation.Although there are a number of case studies examining this phenomenon,quantitative evidence is desirable.  For example, how many programmers are

there in India who are actually working for Silicon Valley firms?  And to what

extent is this phenomenon of redistribution of employment linked specifically to
information technology as opposed to other factors?While the international redistribution of work is clearly significant, an equallyimportant, if less obvious, effect of the technology is in enabling a redistribution
of work within countries such as the United States.   This shift began with the
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS33advent of inexpensive telephony, nationwide toll-free telephone numbers, and theability to network dispersed call centers to corporate databases (CSTB, 1994a).
For instance, technology has also enabled many financial services firms to move
jobs out of lower Manhattan.  Some of the data entry work is being shifted to New

Jersey while large call centers are being set up in North Dakota and other
midwestern states.  Other industries are similarly affected.  A majority of the

large national hotel chains have set up their reservations centers in Omaha, Ne-
braska, leveraging large computer databases and cheap long-distance telephone
service.Even as it becomes easier to transmit data across both state and internationalborders, tracking or regulating these activities remains very difficult.  A given

collection of bits being sent from the United States to India may encode a childÕsdrawing being sent to a proud grandmother or the latest version of a million-
dollar software program.  Furthermore, as discussed above, the technology en-

ables various types of work and employment to be decoupled from one another.
The net result is that the firms have greater freedom to locate their economic
activities, creating greater competition among regions in infrastructure, labor,
capital, and other resource markets.  Most interestingly, it also opens the door for

more Òregulatory arbitrageÓ:  firms can increasingly choose which tax authority
and other regulations apply.  The emergence of a significant Web-based off-shore

gambling industry is only one example of this phenomenon.That the importance of distance will be reduced by computers and communi-cations technology also has implications for the residence patterns of Americans
and the demand for transportation services.  Telecommuting is being touted in

California as a way to ease traffic congestion (Smart Valley, 1994; see also
CSTB, 1994c).  Telecommuting may significantly reduce the need for workers to

locate their residence within automobile or public transit range of their employer
Õsworkplace.As creative workers of all types and service workers ranging from telephonereceptionists and data entry operators to management consultants, accountants,
and lawyers find that they can realistically do most of their work at home rather
than in a centralized workplace, the demand for homes in climatically and physi-
cally attractive regions could increase dramatically.  Box 2.3 discusses possible

consequences of such a shift.The ability to do most of oneÕs work at home will reduce but not eliminatethe need for face-to-face meetings with fellow employees and customers.  Tele-

commuters are likely to need to travel more for business meetings than are
similarly employed office workers.  Typically these trips will be long distance.

This is not just because the favored residential locations of telecommuters are
likely to be remote, but also because the enterprise employing the telecommuter
is likely to be less centralized than under the current system.  The demand for

business travel and accommodations should increase.  The location of these

periodic business meetings will increasingly be urban areas such as Boston, NewFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYYork, Washington, New Orleans, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco, andSeattle and quite possibly resort business centers.  Those urban centers should

thrive, while smaller or less attractive cities will share the fate of the older
suburbs and struggle with declining populations, jobs, and property values.Telecommuting will enable not only shifts of hundreds or thousands of miles,but also shifts of only a few miles within cities.  Information technology could

also create employment opportunities for people in the inner city who may lack
adequate means of transportation to the outlying areas where new jobs are being
created.There is a need for interdisciplinary research to further examine the impactsof widespread telecommuting (see Box 2.4).  The political, social, and economic
consequences seem likely to be quite significant, and the potential for a sudden
rise in telecommuting within the next few years seems high.  Insights might well
BOX 2.3Telecommuting Scenario: Employment Shifts to Rural AreasOne can anticipate a shift of population away from the metropolitan areas tobucolic agricultural settings (rural Vermont, the California wine country, fishing vil-lages), to resort areas (Aspen, Monterey, Sedona), and to the sunbelt and beach-
front.  Just as the automobile, superhighways, and trucking helped shift population
out of the central city to the suburbs in the 1950s, the computer, the informationsuperhighway, and modems will help shift population from the suburbs to more
remote areas.The consequences of a shift in employment from the suburbs to more remoteareas would be profound.  Property values would rise in the favored destinations

and fall in the suburbs.  Individuals and groups interested in preserving the rural, or
historical, or charming aspects of life and the environment in the newly attractiveareas could face new pressures.  Since most of those able to relocate with the

advent of realistic telecommuting would be among the better educated and higherpaid, the demand for high-income and high-status services in these areas shouldsoar.  Gourmet restaurants, clothing boutiques, high-income grocery stores, office

supply depots, topflight medical services, and venues for artistic and cultural eventsshould thrive.  But so, too, would there be an expansion of services of all types.
These new magnet areas would need more gas stations, gardeners, churches,
housekeepers, construction workers, and postal employees.  This would create new
and expanding job opportunities for the local population, but more significantly thetelecommuters would bring with them many others from the cities and suburbs who
would not be telecommuting.  This economic boom for rural and resort communities
would be mirrored by a decline in property values and population in the least attrac-tive areas of the central cities and suburbs.  The exodus and the resulting decline in
the tax base would reduce local government revenues, perhaps leading to a declinein governmental services, and would exacerbate the economic differences between
the mobile segment of the population and those who remain in the older suburbs.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS35be gained by a renewed study of the causes and consequences of urbanization andsuburbanization in our past.It is clear that widespread use of telecommuting, even in its nascent stages,will have a major impact on how organizations function.  The evolution of orga-
nizational forms in response to increased use of networking needs detailed study.
For example, how is work being done at a distance monitored and evaluated?
One implication is that work tasks could be designed in such a way that there is an
identifiable output that the home worker or the telecommuter is delivering.2.3.2Labor and Information Technology
Labor Market and Information TechnologyThe popular press is filled with anecdotal evidence about the negative effectsof information technology on employment.  However, relatively few attempts

have been made to address these issues scientifically.Wolff (1996) conducted a careful analysis of the effect of computerizationon the composition of the labor force during the period from 1950 to 1990 using
U.S. census data.6 The first step in his analysis was to classify the census data into
BOX 2.4Telecommuting Scenario: Increased Employment FlexibilityBy reducing the fixed cost of employment, widespread telecommuting shouldmake it easier for individuals to work on flexible schedules, to work part time, toshare a job (perhaps with their spouse), or to hold two or more jobs simultaneous-
ly.  Since changing employers would not necessarily require changing one
Õs placeof residence, telecommuting should increase job mobility and speed career ad-vancement.  Some think that this increased flexibility will reduce job stress and

increase job satisfaction.  That would be a welcome outcome in itself, and since
job stress is a major factor governing health there may be additional benefits in theform of reduced health costs and mortality rates.  These impacts also seem ripe for

research by social scientists, particularly demographers, and medical researchers.If the increased flexibility of work schedules is great enough, there may besome profound effects on retirement and saving behavior has well.  With a re-

duced and less stressful work load, the elderly may wish to continue working wellpast the conventional retirement age.  If so, they may choose to save less during
their peak earning years because their need for asset income in late life would be
reduced.  Those who enter telecommuting early enough to purchase or build res-
idences in remote areas before property values rise in those areas will experiencesubstantial capital gains on their home and for this reason also might feel less
need to save from current income.  The implications of such developments for
company pension systems and the social security system need study.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY267 occupations and 64 industries, which were then further refined into thecategories Òknowledge workers,Ó Òdata workers,Ó and 
Ògoods and service work-ers.Ó ÒInformation workersÓ refers to the sum of knowledge and data workers.
Wolff (1996) found that from 1950 to 1990, employment of knowledgeworkers grew at 3.1 percent a year, while that of data and service workers grew at
2.6 percent a year.  Employment of goods producers increased at a rate of only

0.3 percent per year.  Overall, in 1950, 37 percent of the employed labor force

was information workers; by 1990, 55 percent of the labor force was information
workers.What accounts for this dramatic change in labor market structure? Wolff(1996) showed that the total growth in employment could be decomposed into
three effects:  a Òsubstitution effectÓ that describes the extent to which industrieshave substituted information labor for other types, a Òproductivity effectÓ that
accounts for changes in productivity growth among different industries, and an
Òoutput effectÓ that accounts for the change in the composition of final output.
7Wolff (1996) found that the substitution effect accounted for about half of thegrowth of the share of knowledge workers in employment.  Almost none was due to

output effects.  In other words, most of the increase in knowledge workers was due

to the fact that employers substituted knowledge workers for other kinds of labor,
coupled with the fact that industries that used knowledge workers intensively (e.g.,
service industries) had lower rates of growth in labor productivity than did goods-
producing industries.  Analysis of this sort is very important in understanding labor

force changes and can be a significant input into policy analysis.Wage Inequality and Information TechnologyOne of the most striking changes in the economic landscape of the UnitedStates over the past 20 to 30 years has been a dramatic increase in inequality of
earnings.  A growing number of researchers suspect that technological change in

general, and computerization in particular, may be part of the explanation.Although there was relatively little change in the dispersion of wages in the1950s and 1960s, starting in the 1970s wage inequality increased rapidly.  Per-

capita income and family income show similar patterns.  Interestingly, the changes

in inequality are evident across virtually every income subgroup:  the wages for

those at the 95th percentile increased relative to those at the 90th percentile,
which in turn outpaced those at the 85th percentile and so on down to the poorest
people in the country (see Figure 2.2).Although the rise in inequality has been well documented in the academicliterature (see Levy and Murnane, 1992, and Gottschalk, 1997, for reviews), there
is not yet a consensus as to its causes.  However, much of the increase in inequal-

ity seems to be related to a growing premium for skilled workers throughout the
economy.  For instance, the premium paid to college-educated workers and those

with more experience has grown significantly.  Since skilled workers were al-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS37ready at the top of the wage distribution, any increase in their relative wages willtend to increase overall inequality.  Furthermore, because the supply of college-

educated workers has grown over the past several decades, the fact that their
relative wages have increased indicates that the demand for such workers has
grown even faster.The increased demand for these workers cannot easily be explained bychanges in the composition of industry output or other observable factors.  ÒTech-nical change,Ó typically a residual in wage equations, has been left as the best
explanation.  More direct evidence that technical change is behind the growth in

inequality was provided by Berman et al. (1994). They found that the rate of
investment in computers was positively correlated with higher demand for skilled
workers relative to less skilled workers.  This finding clearly runs counter to the

claim that computers ÒdeskillÓ work, as some have claimed.  Although this is
clearly the case in certain applications, the findings of Berman et al. suggest that
it is not true on average.FIGURE 2.2Wage inequality in the United States, 1973 to 1994.  SOURCE:  Adapted
from Gottschalk (1997), p. 27.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThe mechanism by which computers increase the relative demand for skilledwork is still not well understood.  There are at least five distinct possibilities:
81.Computers may be disproportionately automating routine, rote jobs, thus
reducing the demand for low-skill workers, but not much affecting high-skill
workers.  Indeed, Mark (1987) found that industries with significant changes in

technology typically experienced significant reductions in the number of basic
production workers but not in the number of more skilled workers.2.Computers may complement highly skilled work, making it more valu-
able.  For instance, after controlling for observable characteristics, Kreuger (1993)

found that workers using a computer were paid, on average, 20 percent higher
wages.3.The direction of causality could instead go in the opposite direction, with
high-paid workers getting computers first, as a signal to their colleagues of their
skills.  Feldman and March (1981) put forth such a thesis years ago.
4.Computers may facilitate a winner-take-all effect by reducing communi-
cations and search costs.  As a consequence, the 
ÒbestÓ experts in each field can
compete over broader geographic regions, displacing the local expert and captur-
ing higher earnings in the process.  This explanation seems most applicable to the

few ÒsuperstarsÓ at the top of the earnings profile.
5.Computers may enable broader reorganization of work, which may change
the relative demand for various skills.  For instance, decentralization of decision

making, use of lateral communications, and greater outsourcing of activities may
reduce the need for people who can follow instructions carefully and increase the
need for people who can solve problems independently.Existing measures of income inequality do not consider the nonmarket goodsand services that people consume.  However, a significant share of an individual
Õswell-being may be derived from factors that are not counted in traditional in-
come.  For instance, if employees find that work done with computers is more (or

less) enjoyable than it was before the work was computerized, then this percep-
tion may exacerbate (or mitigate) the increase in inequality.  Unfortunately, there

is relatively little data on the extent to which people value nonmarket services
and virtually none on how computerization might affect such services.Effects of Information Technology on Labor and Skill DemandThe evidence on information technology and wage inequality suggests thatcomputers may be partly responsible for the relative increase in the demand for
skilled, educated workers.  However, thus far, the measures of 
ÒskillÓ and 
Òedu-cationÓ are fairly coarse.  Further research is needed to enhance understanding of
what skills information technology complements (Levy and Murnane, 1997).
Traditional skills, such as math and reading skills, appear to be important, butFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS39other skills, such as the ability to work well with others, may also be significantfactors.If computers increase the demand for educated workers, then a nationalpolicy of increasing investment in education, especially at the bottom of the
educational scale, will help with two national goals that historically have been in
opposition:  increasing economic output and decreasing inequality.  Simply spend-

ing more on education or requiring students to spend more time in school may
help with these problems, but a major research gap exists in understanding how to
make education more efficient.  Relatively little is known about what types of

courses and what methods of instruction are most effective in providing the
education and skills sought by the marketplace.  One does not have to believe that

economics is the only driver of educational choice by policy makers and students
to believe that it is one important consideration.  (See also the discussion of the

role of information technology in education in section 2.1.4.)2.3.3Organizations and Processes
Measuring ProductivityAs noted in Chapter 1, while the rapid pace of technological change incomputing and communications has been astounding, it has been hard (at least
until very recently) to find evidence for improvements in productivity as a result
of these dazzling technological innovations.9  A fundamental problem is that
many of the variables typically measured are becoming less relevant in the emerg-
ing information economy.  For instance, Walter Wriston, the former chief execu-

tive officer of Citibank, has quipped, ÒWhen I was a kid in the bank, the keyeconomic indicator we looked at was freight-car loadings.  Who the hell cares

about them now?Ó (Stewart, 1997).
In todayÕs economy, technology, knowledge, skills, and organizational com-petencies are often more important resources than land, labor, and traditional
capital.  Economic output is becoming increasingly 
ÒunmeasurableÓ as gross
domestic product shifts from mining, manufacturing, and agriculture to services
(Griliches, 1994).  Even in manufacturing, intangible components of value, such
as product variety, customization, timeliness, and quality have become more
important.  Similarly, intangible assets, ranging from software, copyrights, and

patents to worker skills, customer relationships, and organizational knowledge,
are increasingly recognized as important inputs.Direct measurement of these intangible assets remains elusive, but one indi-cator is the substantial increase in the ratio of the financial valuation of firms
(stock market equity and value of outstanding debt) to the book value of these
firms (plant, property and equipment, cash, inventories, and other measured as-
sets) over the past decade.  Apparently, investors in the financial markets believe

that an increasingly small fraction of firmsÕ true assets are accounted for by
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYtraditional metrics.  Interestingly, a recent study (Brynjolfsson and Yang, 1997)
found that changes in the value of firmsÕ computer assets correlated strongly with
changes in the implied extent of intangible assets.However, there is no reason that the ÒunmeasurableÓ outputs and inputs must
remain so.  As the benefits to businesses of intangibles such as those mentioned

above have grown, and as the costs of overhead have come to dominate direct
labor and materials costs, researchers such as Robert Kaplan have helped trans-
form managerial accounting to better reflect these realities (Kaplan, 1989).  A

similar rethinking of our national economic accounts is in order.The issue of unmeasured improvements in qualityÑof particular importancein evaluating the output of servicesÑhas also received considerable attentionfrom economists.  Section 1.1.1 describes how improvements in computing tech-

nology have reduced the real cost of computing.  Recently, economists have

begun making the same sorts of adjustments in other cases, such as for pharma-
ceuticals (Berndt et al., 1996), as well as for various particular types of medical
care such as heart procedures.  When patient survival rates and quality of life are

considered, they typically find that ÒrealÓ medical prices have actually been
falling, or at least not rising as rapidly as previously thought, and that ÒrealÓoutput and productivity have been growing impressively (Cutler and McClellan,
1996; Cutler et al., 1996).   Similar work could be done for information technol-

ogyÑa task made easier now that advances in IT enable better tracking of qualityimprovements.Finally, even as information technologies are helping to make organizationsmore economically efficient than ever before, many people are questioning whether
other important goals and values are being overlooked.  For instance, social frag-

mentation, increased inequality, environmental degradation, and greater emotional
stress are sometimes associated with advances in technology.  A single-minded

focus on economic efficiency, narrowly defined, may come at the expense of other
goals valued by society.  Indeed, technologies need not serve only as generators of
wealth.  They also can serve other societal functions such as increased equity.
Further compounding the question, technology is giving us new options byrelaxing many long-standing constraints.  Thus, there is a strong need today for

clear thinking about what goals organizations can and should serve.  Perhaps a

portion of research funding should be reserved for work that contemplates not
only how technology can make our lives better, but also what society means by
Òbetter.ÓHistorical Perspective:  The Computer and the Electric Dynamo
Although the various scientific and engineering disciplines excel at produc-ing technological developments, understanding how or whether these develop-
ments lead to greater productivity is quite a different matter.  Replacing old

information technology with new while retaining the same work practices andFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS41organizational structure may have little impact on productivity.  The true measure
of the technologyÕs worth can be evaluated only when work practices and organi-zational structures are revamped to best take advantage of the flexibility and
power of todayÕs computing and communications technologies.The subtle process of extracting productivity gains out of technological ad-vancements has been the subject of much scrutiny by social scientists.  One

particularly relevant and illuminating study is by David (1990).  This historical

analysis discusses the electric dynamo and its role in an earlier Òproductivityparadox.Ó At the turn of the century, electrification was seen, much as computers
are today, as a transformational technological advance whose impact would soon
be widely felt.  However, factory electrification did not have much impact on

productivity growth in manufacturing before the 1920s.The proximate source of the delay in the exploitation of the productivity im-provements potential incipient in the dynamo revolution was, in large part, the
slow pace of factory electrification.  The latter, in turn, was attributable to the
unprofitability of replacing still serviceable manufacturing plants embodyingproduction technologies adapted to the old regime of mechanical power derived
from water and steam. (David, 1990)The first phase of electrification (from the mid-1890s to 1920) mainly uti-lized the group drive system of power transmission, with one motor powering
many pieces of equipment.  This way of shifting to electric motors entailed

minimal changes to the basic factory design, and essentially replaced the old
mechanical power system with an electric one.  However, in the 1920s, the ÒunitdriveÓ approach, with individual motors powering each piece of equipment, was
widely adopted.  The benefits of this approach were not limited to the immediate

savings associated with greater energy efficiency.  In fact, the greatest benefits

derived from the ability to build lighter, more modular, single-story factories
using this new technology.  Learning how best to utilize this flexibility was not

immediate:Although all this was clear enough in principle, the relevant point is that itsimplementation on a wide scale required working out the details in the contextof many kinds of new industrial facilities, in many different locales, thereby
building up a cadre of experienced factory architects and electrical engineersfamiliar with the new approach to manufacturing.  (David, 1990)
The analog of this story for the computer has yet to be written.  While there
are encouraging reports (see CSTB, 1994a; Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 1996, 1997)
that perhaps the productivity paradox is no more, there yet remains substantial
work to be done in understanding what work practices and organizational struc-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYtures are optimal in this new computer age.  How will the modern counterpart to
DavidÕs Òcadre of factory architectsÓ be developed?  That is the challenge facingthe social scientists studying the new industrial frontier.Information Technology and Organizational StructureBoth firms and markets can be thought of as sophisticated institutions forprocessing information about desires, costs, capabilities, and constraints (Gal-
braith, 1977; Hayek, 1945; Radner, 1992; Sah and Stiglitz, 1986).  Thus, given

the fact that the cost of computer processing of information has declined by
several thousandfold over the past three decades, it would be surprising if these
institutions did not change.  Several researchers have developed models that

predict how changing information processing and communication costs are likelyBOX 2.5The Concept of ÒOrganizationÓPerhaps the most important potential impact of computers and communica-tions on organizations is a shift in the very concept of ÒorganizationÓ as an economic
and social entity.  Once considered to be semipermanent and routinized by defini-

tion, ideal organizations increasingly have come to be seen as flexible, change-oriented, and able to shift their boundaries, alliances, and partnerships rapidly tomeet changing conditions.  Computers and communication technologies increasing-

ly permit anytime, anywhere communication, synchronous and asynchronous col-laboration, and tight linkages in operational processes within and between organiza-tions (e.g., manufacturers and their suppliers and distributors, and manufacturers
and the direct buying public).  The concept of the 
ÒadhocracyÓÑa fluid organizationin which members come and go as interests changeÑhas emerged as competitionfor the concept of bureaucracy.  After many decades of increasing vertical integra-

tion of production and growth as a totem of success, many organizations have di-vested themselves of every function that was not a core competence, and that couldpossibly be ÒoutsourcedÓ or bought on the market.  Small really did become beauti-
ful, at least in principle.  Young entrepreneurs who started little companies in theirgarages built novel ideas into huge companies and fortunes, capturing the imagi-nation of the world.  And the mighty such as AT&T, IBM, and GM appeared shaken

as the world they had built started to collapse around them.Yet, as recent history has shown, organizations such as AT&T, IBM, and GMhave by no means been pushed aside by the changes of the information age.
They have adopted and adapted the technologies and harnessed them in waysthat have allowed radical downsizing of work forces while retaining and in somecases enhancing top management control over firmsÕ performance and profitabili-
ty.  And the start-up companies created in garages have found it necessary to
adopt time-honored aspects of organizational hierarchy in order to function effec-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS43tively.  This lesson from recent history reveals an important but frequently over-
looked aspect of the information revolution:  that its revolutionary character is be-
ing channeled through pathways established by powerful social and institutional
forces that are not necessarily swept aside by the effects of technology, no matterhow powerful those effects are.Much of the rhetoric about profound change in organizations has been specu-lative and undisciplined, based more on idealized views of what organizationsought to be rather than on the practical realities that shape organizational form andfunction.  One can construct scenarios of organizational demassing and decentral-

ization, but one also can just as easily construct sound arguments that computerand communication technologies give new life to the traditional bureaucracy.Functions normally carried out by middle managersÑinformation gathering, deci-sion making within directives, communications with lower-level staff, and monitor-ing and upward-reporting of activities carried on belowÑcan be replaced to someextent with technology.  The resulting 
ÒflatteningÓ of the organization through the
elimination of middle managers has been said to bring greater ÒempowermentÓ of
remaining employees.  But technological change can just as easily allow signifi-
cant increases in organizational centralization, tighter monitoring of employee ac-
tivity, more effective enforcement of compliance with the desires of top manage-ment, and the redesign of tasks in ways that make it difficult for employees to actoutside of prescribed patterns.There are reasons to be confident about profound changes under way in thecharacter and concept of organizations as a result of new computer and communi-cations technologies.  At the same time, it is important not to let ideological enthu-

siasm substitute for careful reasoning and empirical research.ÑJohn Leslie King and Kenneth L. Kraemer, ÒComputer and CommunicationTechnologies: Impacts on the Organization of Enterprises and theEstablishment of Civil SocietyÓ (see Appendix C of this volume)
to affect firms and markets (e.g., Malone, 1987; Brynjolfsson, 1996a; Bakos,1997).Not only are markets and firms changing, but new structures, some neverbefore feasible or even imagined, may also emerge.  Research is needed to extend

existing theories about organizations and to learn from the organizational changes
and experiments that are already happening (see Box 2.5).  Results of such

research would provide a sound basis for corporate Òre-engineeringÓ efforts that
seek to make better use of information technology.Recent research on the effects of information systems has highlighted theimportance of complementarities.  Theory (Milgrom and Roberts, 1980), case

studies (Brynjolfsson et al., 1997; Orlikowski, 1992), and econometric/statistical
analyses (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 1997) indicate that the effects of information
technology depend significantly on other organizational factors such as organiza-
tional form, communications practices, and the education and training of theFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYwork force.  Therefore, research on the organizational impacts of IT should
consider these complementary factors whenever possible.  Understanding the

nature of the complementarities is critical to being able to make predictions about
the social and economic impacts of IT.  For instance, if IT is complementary to an

organizational structure for which teams and decentralized decision making by
workers are important, then as IT becomes cheaper, one would expect that there
would be increasing demand for people who work well in teams and who have
the skills and education needed to make them effective decision makers.One of the difficulties researchers face is that the data on the organization ofwork are fragmented and disorganized.  There is a clear need for a compilation of

what data already exist in this area.  A project that sought to catalog, or better yet,

assemble and make available, the key data sets on this topic could reduce dupli-
cation of efforts, speed research, and help settle debates that stem from misunder-
standings about the basic evidence.Time series data, even short time series, would be especially valuable inclarifying the role of technology in some of the organizational changes that are
observed.  For instance, better time-budget studies could help address the ongo-

ing debate as to whether the average worker is spending more hours or fewer
hours at work.  Data gathered from employers indicate that the work week has

shrunk, but employees report that they are working more hours.  The discrepancy

may be owing to employees working more at home or working for multiple
employers, or it may have some other cause.Another possible source of data is exit interviews, during which workerscould be asked how technology has changed the nature of the work they do.
Firms and social scientists could collaborate on survey design and data collec-
tion; results would benefit the participating companies as well as the broader
research community.Process HandbookIn recent years, a number of striking examples have emerged of how infor-mation technology can be combined with the redesign of organizational pro-
cesses or the invention of new processes to transform the way organizations
work.  Although initially uncommon and perceived as radical, ideas such as just-

in-time inventory control and concurrent engineering10 have become accepted as
Òbest practiceÓ (Carter and Baker, 1991).  How can the new organizational possi-
bilities enabled by the continuing, dramatic improvements in information tech-
nology be developed, understood, and exploited?  Given time, managers and

employees of companies will certainly develop new ways of working that take
advantage of these new opportunities.  For more rapid progress on these prob-

lems, however, it is useful to develop a more systematic foundation for under-
standing organizational processes. In order to understand successful organiza-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS45tional practices, one must be able to recognize and represent organizational prac-tices that are observed, and imagine alternative ones.While data sets exist on individuals, firms, industries, and nations, there is asubstantial gap in the availability of data at the level of business processes.
Business processes are a distinct unit of observation from firms or individuals.
Not only does an individual firm involve numerous business processes, but many
business processes also cut across the firmÕs boundaries.  The creation of a
database with information on business processes that included numerous ex-
amples of how different groups and companies perform similar functions could
enable new research directions.  The database should provide a taxonomy for

categorizing business processes, and ideally should be designed in a way that
multiple researchers could access, add to, and comment on the data.In fact, a prototype for such a databaseÑa process handbookÑhas beencreated by Thomas Malone and colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology.  The handbook is intended to help people imagine new organizations and

organizational practices, redesign existing organizations, share ideas and ÒbestpracticesÓ about organizational processes, and generate or select software to
support or analyze these processes.One key feature of this representation technique is that it not only breaksdown activities into process subparts (ÒsubactivitiesÓ) but also adds the conceptof specializationÑdifferentiating a process into various specific ways of doingthe  process (
ÒspecializationsÓ).  For example, specializations of the process
labeled Òsell somethingÓ include 
Òsell by retail storeÓ and 
Òsell by mail order.ÓThe techniqueÕs second key feature is that it characterizes dependencies betweenprocesses and ways of managing these dependencies, also known as Òcoordina-tionÓ  mechanisms (e.g., Malone and Crowston, 1994).  A dependency exists, for
example, when an item produced by one process must be made available to
another at the right time.  Two alternative coordination approaches to handling

this dependency would be to produce the good to order or produce the item to be
held in inventory until it is required.The work provides an approach to analyzing processes at various levels ofabstraction, thus capturing both the details of specific processes as well as the
Òdeep structureÓ of their similarities.  A primary advantage of the approach is that
it allows people to explicitly represent the similarities (and differences) among
related processes and to find or generate sensible alternatives for how a given
process could be performed.Results from this project suggest that such databases are both technicallyfeasible and managerially useful (Malone et al., 1997).  The process handbook

project has developed a series of software tools for storing and manipulating
processes, which have been used to represent more than 2,000 activities of both
generic processes and specializations of these processes from specific organi-
zations.Because empirical research in this area is often constrained by lack of dataFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYon organizational processes used by firms, the further development of data setslike the process handbook could engender significant new research on the im-
pacts of information technology that would not otherwise be possible.2.3.4Social Science and the Workplace
Differential Impacts Within the Workplaceand Professional CommunitiesSection 2.1.2 discusses the differential impacts of information technology inthe home.  Not surprisingly, the same phenomenon of differential impacts owing

to the use of  information technology is also found in the workplace.
Scientists are one set of information technology users for whom the differen-tial impacts in a professional setting have been studied.  In structured interviews

with 67 scientists in 1991 and 1992, Walsh and Bayma (1997) showed that
scientists in four scientific fieldsÑmathematics, experimental biology, chemis-try, and particle physicsÑused computer networks quite differently.  They iden-
tified four attributes of scientific disciplines that predicted lesser or greater use:
(1) size of disciplineÑsmaller disciplines used computer networks more thanlarger ones; (2) market penetrationÑdisciplines in which property rights andfinancial rewards to research findings were more closely linked used computer
networks more; (3) locus of informationÑdisciplines in which most researchfindings are produced at the laboratory bench used computer networks less; and
(4) technical limitationsÑdisciplines that rely on photographs and drawings usedcomputer networks less.11Even within a single scientific field, e-mail can differentially benefit scientistswho otherwise could be at an information disadvantage.  For example, according

to one study, physical oceanographers who work at inland universities or laborato-

ries derived more benefit from each additional e-mail message sent or received than
did oceanographers who worked at coastal universities or laboratories (Hesse et al.,
1993), when standard measures of scientific productivity were considered such as
number of journal articles published.Differential impacts have been observed for shift workers as well.  Shift
workers in a municipal government derived more benefit from each additional
message sent (although not received) than did day workers, as gauged by stan-
dard measures of organizational commitment and well-being  (Huff et al., 1989).Because e-mail omits direct information about social statusÑsuch as age,physical appearance, and genderÑthat inevitably accompanies face-to-face com-munication, it can differentially benefit people who otherwise could be socially
marginalized.  Younger oceanographers derived more benefit from each addi-

tional e-mail message than did older, more established ones (Hesse et al., 1993).
Physically disabled members of a multiyear program of computer communica-
tion derived more benefit than did nondisabled members (Earls, 1990).  Members
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS47of a retirement-planning task force who were themselves recent retirees derivedmore benefit from use of e-mail than did their still-employed counterparts (Bikson
et al., 1991).12Romm and Pliskin (1997) have examined the use of e-mail in the workplace.They suggest that several characteristics of e-mailÑspeed of delivery, ease ofsending to a large number of addressees, ease of adding commentary to messages
and forwarding them on, and ease of control over which versions of messages are
sent to which recipientsÑmake it a powerful political tool.  Used deliberately in
this way as a tool for Òvirtual politicking,Ó e-mail can increase the power of
employees relative to that of management.  The adoption of information technol-

ogy to improve the performance of organizations will also have significant, dif-
ferentially distributed impacts on the individuals within those organizations.Technical Support CommunitiesSocial science methodology associated with the study of communities hasproven useful in improving business performance.  In the mid-1980s, anthropolo-

gist Julian Orr conducted extensive field work among Xerox Corporation service
repair technicians (Orr, 1990).  One of his findings was that technicians never

relied exclusively, or sometimes even at all, on the company-provided service
manuals when troubleshooting machine problems.  Often the manuals were out

of date or did not address local, idiosyncratic problems.  Rather than using manu-

als, or in addition to using them, they relied on war stories passed from technician
to technician in an oral storytelling culture.  Orr pointed out the value of these

stories to corporate management, noting that they represented an important intel-
lectual resource that the company should capitalize on.Partly inspired by OrrÕs work, a team of Xerox developers spent a long timeobserving and talking with service technicians, learning what would be useful to
them from their point of view.  Based on their fieldwork they built a system to

leverage techniciansÕ local knowledge through a community-validated 
ÒtipsÓ da-
tabase.  A 
ÒtipÓ is a problem-cause-solution case that is voluntarily written and
submitted by anyone in the field service organization and validated by technical
specialists.  When the tip is released to the field, it carries in it the name of both

the submitting technician and the validator.  In one field trial of the tips system

with 1,300 field support people, Xerox found that about 15 percent of the em-
ployees submitted tips and that the tips database was accessed more than 1,000
times a day (Bell et al., 1997).The technology per se in this system is not at the forefront of computerscience.  Both developers and managers attribute the success of this system in

part to the effort to take seriously social science ideas about community.  They

learned that local knowledge conveyed in the community vernacular by commu-
nity members is useful to technicians troubleshooting unfamiliar problems.  And
so the system was designed to support vernacular content.  They learned that
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcommunity knowledge could spread much more rapidly than standard corporatepublication or validation cycles.  And so the system was designed to include

many human validators in order to ensure very short validation cycles.  Initially,

developers and managers worried that they might have to provide economic
incentives for technicians to contribute tips.  But they learned that technicians

value the social validation that comes from other community members who ap-
preciate their tips.  And so the system was designed to ensure that people contrib-

uting tips could be maximally visible to others in their community.  In the first

deployment of the tips system, the corporation collected data suggesting that use
of the tips database was responsible for a significant improvement in this groupÕsservice performance.  The corporation has subsequently begun deploying vari-

ants of this system in many of its service organizations.2.4INFORMATION ECONOMY AND SOCIETY
Advances in information technology raise a number of research issues in-volving the economic, social, and cultural aspects of how society accesses, uses,
and values information.  For example, the ability to store and distribute more

information more rapidly is leading to concerns about information overload and
raising new questions about how information is evaluated by users.  Increasingly,

information is exceeding the bounds inherent in the written and printed word.
New types of media and new technologies for accessing information pose chal-
lenges to educators, creators and distributors of information, and policy makers,
among others.2.4.1Protection of Intellectual Property
Increasing representation of a wide variety of content (e.g., text, images,video, audio) in digital form has resulted in markedly easier and cheaper duplica-
tion and distribution of informationÑwith mixed effects on the provision ofcontent.  On the one hand, content can be distributed at a dramatically lower unit

cost.  On the other hand, distribution of content outside of channels that respect

intellectual property rights can reduce the incentives of creators and distributors
to produce and make content available in the first place.  Information technology

has raised a host of questions about intellectual property protection, and quite a
number of solutions have been proposed.  Making appropriate choices requires

attention to a range of considerations and perspectives and can be informed by
economic and historical analysis.Economic Analysis of Intellectual Property RightsThe classic economic study of the trade-off between innovation and intellec-tual property protection is that of Nordhaus (1969), who examined the optimalFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS49length of a patent.  Longer-lived patents give producers more incentive to inno-
vate but also lead to longer periods of monopolization.  Using a simulation

model, Nordhaus studied the benefit-cost trade-off between these two effects and
concluded that a patent life of around 20 years was a reasonable middle ground.
Subsequently, economists have examined other dimensions of patent policy, such
as the scope of patents, the standard for novelty, and so on.Whereas patent rights apply to inventions, copyright applies to artistic orliterary expression (be it in print, audio, or visual form) and is the dominant form
of intellectual property protection for electronic content.  Numerous studies have

looked at the economic impact of patents, but far fewer such studies have been
done on copyright, even though there is currently much legal and policy activity
in this area.  In part this discrepancy reflects differences in data availability:

patent data is available electronically in a centralized database, whereas copy-
right is granted automatically and does not require the copyright holder to register
formally in all instances.13Even relatively simple cost-benefit examination of some of the issues wouldcontribute to a better understanding of the effects and implications of particular
approaches raised in policy debates about intellectual property rightsÑfor ex-ample, a new form of copyright protection for data in databases that  the Europe-

ans are asking the United States to consider.Economic considerations are also important in evaluating methods for en-forcing requirements attached to the use of copyrighted materials, including tech-
nological approaches.  One specific approach is the use of secure hardware that

enforces specific terms and conditions  (Stefik, 1995).  However, both theoretical

examination (Shy, 1998) and practical experience with devices that provide pro-
tection against unauthorized copying suggest that this strategy is problematic in a
highly competitive environment.  If copy protection imposes inconvenience on

users, then new products that do not incorporate copy protection can successfully
compete against those that do.  This occurred with spreadsheets during the mid-

1980s when a rash of new entrants caused Lotus to remove its key-disk copy
protection scheme.  Knowing how intellectual property protection strategies and

market structure interrelate is clearly important for understanding how secure
hardware might work in protecting intellectual property rights.Among the variety of alternatives for protecting intellectual property arefixed licensing rates, media taxes, and statistical sampling.  The costs and ben-

efits of these approaches clearly depend on the costs of monitoring use, but little
theoretical or empirical work has been done that examines this issue in detail.Historical Perspectives on CopyrightThe challenge of setting appropriate intellectual property policy is not new.Indeed the history of copyrightÕs use is filled with examples that are relevant totodayÕs concerns.  Now, as in the past, there are those who question whether
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcopyright is appropriate at all in the information age.  Some would argue that
Òinformation wants to be free.Ó  But what would be the consequences of all
information being free?  Hesse (1991) examined experiences following the elimi-

nation of copyright in post-revolutionary France.The French monarchy used copyright as a tool for censorship.  Just as in
England, the French kings granted monopoly rights to publishers in exchange for
the right to censor publications.  One of the first acts of the French revolutionaries

was to eliminate copyright in 1789.  The revolutionaries thought that all people

would then be free to publish whatever they wanted without government censors
looking over their shoulder.The consequences were disastrous:  literature, especially serious literature,
disappeared.  The only material published was newspapers, pornography, scandal

sheets, and seditious tracts.  These were printed on cheap paper suitable to be read

only once and then thrown away.  In 1789 more than 100 French novels were

published; in 1794 only 16 were published.  The elimination of French culture

was enough to frighten even the revolutionaries, and the government quickly
reinstituted copyright and initiated a program to subsidize the production of
cultural works.But within a few years budget cuts forced the elimination of the subsidies.The French government had set the term of copyright to run for 10 years after the
authorÕs death.  But given the short life span typical of the period, this term
generally allowed for only a single edition to be published.  Publishers therefore

gravitated toward works in the public domain, according to a then-contemporary
observer:Modern publishing consists of all the books that are reprinted endlessly, whichare no oneÕs property, and which anyone can make use of . . . [The publishers] allprint the same works . . . and end up remaindering them.  But the public does not

even profit from the low prices because the editions are abridged, inaccurate, andpoorly produced, which harms the art and the honor of French publishing in theeyes of Europe.  (Pierre-Cesar Briand, 1810, as quoted in Hesse, 1991)
The treatment of copyright immediately after the French Revolution showsthat the absence of copyright protection can be disastrous.  But there are also

cases in which information providers have been too conservative in the manage-
ment of their intellectual property.Rise of the Novel.  The first modern libraries for middle-class readers were
created in the late 1700s, soon after the invention of the English novel.  English

bookstores could not keep up with the demand for novels and romances, and so
they started renting them out.  These circulating libraries, as they were called,

were denounced by the literate classes as Òslop shops of literature.Ó They were
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS51also unpopular with publishers and booksellers, but for a different reason.  As an
observer put it at the time:. . . when circulating libraries were first opened, the booksellers were muchalarmed; and their rapid increase added to their fears, and led them to think that
the sale of books would be much diminished by such libraries.  (Knight, 1854)
However, in the long run there is no doubt that the sale of books was notdiminished by the circulating libraries, but rather was much enhanced.  Before the
advent of the circulating libraries there was no low-cost, entertaining literatureÑand so the common folk had little reason to learn to read.  In 1800 there were only

80,000 readers in England.  By 1854, that number had increased more than 60-fold

to 5 million readers (Knight, 1854).  The publishers who served the new mass

market for books thrived, while those who sold only to the elite disappeared.14As the market for books grew, people started to buy rather than rent.  As
Knight reported:. . . thousand of books are purchased each year by such as have first borrowedthem at those libraries, and after reading, approving of them, have becomepurchasers.  (Knight, 1854)
The presence of the circulating libraries did kill the old publishing modelÑbut at the same time it enabled the creation of the new model of mass-market
books.  The publishers and booksellers who recognized this causality prospered;

those that continued to push for the old model went out of business.The for-profit, circulating libraries continued to survive in England well intothe 1950s.  What ended them was not a lack of demand for reading material, but

rather the paperback bookÑan even cheaper way of providing literature to themasses.Rise of the Video.  The pattern seen in the rise of the novel occurred also in themarket for prerecorded videos in the 1980s.  Initially the video machine was no

threat to the film industry because it was so expensive.  In the early 1980s video

machines cost more than $1,000, and video tapes sold for around $100.  Videos

were a medium only for the richÑjust as books were in 1800.The video rental stores changed all that.  Like the circulating libraries 200
years earlier, they brought a new form of entertainment to the masses.  The rental

market broke out of the low-level equilibrium.  If an ordinary family could 
rentthe video machine and rent the cartridge, the industry could get enough cash flow
to invest in new production technologies.  By the mid-1980s the average middle-

class family could afford a video machine, and video rental stores were thriving.Hollywood did not like the video rental business.  Studios tried to get around
the first-sale doctrine with various leasing arrangements, but these schemes wereFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYnot acceptable to the video store owners.  But despite HollywoodÕs objections tovideo rentals, they ended being very profitable for the movie studios.  The avail-
ability of inexpensive videos meant that people watched many more movies.  By

the 1990s, video machines were selling for less than $200 and 85 percent of U.S.
families owned one.Eventually the Hollywood producers realized that people would actually buya video if the price was right.  Since 1990, the video 
rental market has been flat,
and all the action is in the sales market.  In the last 15 years, video purchase prices

have dropped more than 90 percentÑand Hollywood is making money like neverbefore.Far from killing Hollywood, video was HollywoodÕs savior.  Just as in the
case of circulating libraries, video rental created a huge new market for both
renting and buying the product.  The companies that recognized the implications
of the new technology succeeded beyond their wildest dreams, and those that did
not have vanished.152.4.2Free Speech and Content
Many contentious issues surround free speech and regulation of content onthe Internet, and there continue to be calls for mechanisms to control objection-
able content.   Since the Communications Decency Act was struck down by the

Supreme Court in 1997, many groups have become interested in developing other
ways of rating or labeling content.  Emotions run high on both sides of this issue,

but attention to several empirical questions would be of use in finding a sensible
solution.First, very little objective information is publicly available on the kinds of
content accessible on the Web, even though content-monitoring software compa-

nies such as Surfwatch and CyberPatrol16 are in a position to have such data.  Little
is known about how much access children have to ÒobjectionableÓ sites.  Cer-
tainly some surveys are in order.Second, definitions of ÒunacceptableÓ content are subjective.  Dealing with
indecent material involves understanding not only the views on such topics but
also their evolution over time.  What are institutional and individual attitudes

toward filtering?  What do parents, schools, libraries, and other institutions want?

In the case of the InternetÑwhere content flows globallyÑit is important tounderstand how different localities define objectionable content.There are larger political issues involved as well.  The same technology thatallows for content filtering with respect to decency can be used to filter political
speech.  In some countries (e.g., Germany), hate speech and Nazi symbols are

outlawed.  Approaches designed to limit indecent content could be used to restrict

access to political material as well.  How effective would such approaches be?

How desirable would they be?Since censorship of indecent material does not appear to be an option in theFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS53United States, a well-known policy response is labeling.  The idea is that consum-
ers will be better informed in their decisions to avoid (or seek out) objectionable
content.  An interesting question is what constitutes the 
ÒbestÓ form of such labels
from the viewpoint of cognition and use.  The considerable debate about the type

of labels used for the V-chip, for example, encompasses whether they should be
based on age or type of content, whether they should be one dimensional or
multidimensional, whether they should employ three levels of rating or seven,
and so on.  The debate has been conducted with little in the way of scientific

investigation of alternatives to inform the participants.One interesting proposal is the Platform for Internet Content Selection (PICS;Resnick and Miller, 1996).  PICS is a set of protocols that defines the communi-

cation of Òratings.Ó The protocol set is very broadly designed so that any site can
declare itself a ÒraterÓ and provide ratings to the public.
17  PICS provides an open
standard that may be very helpful in dealing with the issue of content in a flexible
way, but there are many questions about how this technology might be used.For one thing, some incumbents in the industry already have proprietarylabeling schemes.  What are their incentives to move to the PICS standard? The

literature on economic considerations in standards setting (see Besen and Farrell,
1994, for a survey) would be useful in stimulating careful thinking about this
issue.What is the cost recovery model for labeling services?  Is there any reason to
believe that competitive forces will yield an appropriate social outcome, or are the
opportunities for Òfree ridingÓ (enjoying the benefits without incurring the costs) so
strong that a market for labeling cannot be sustainable?  How frequently is material

added to or updated on the Internet, so that reexamination is appropriate?2.4.3Privacy
The rapid increase in computing and communications power has raised con-siderable concern about privacy (Box 2.6 discusses one aspect).  Privacy issues

arise in the public and private sector as well as in the conduct of social science
itself.An initial set of questions concerns public attitudes toward privacy.  Classicstudies of this subject include Baker and Westin (1972) and Westin and Louis
Harris & Associates (1981).  A recent survey of Web users included several

questions measuring the view of survey respondents on such issues as the need
for new laws to protect privacy on the Internet and the rights of content providers
to resell information about users (Kehoe et al., 1997).   Kang et al. (1995), which

provided an overview of issues relating to the Internet, also called for better
data.18  A more recent study looked specifically at the privacy concerns and
experiences of computer users (Louis Harris & Associates and Alan F. Westin,
1997).19  This survey found that while many people are concerned about the
confidentiality and security of personal information online, there are very fewFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYreports of actual breaches of confidentiality.  Whereas only 5 percent of Internet
users said that they had been a victim of what they regarded as an invasion of
their privacy, 54 percent of Internet users reported that they were concerned that
information about which sites they visited would be linked to their e-mail address
and disclosed without their consent or knowledge.  The report also found lower

trust in online institutions and communication:  computer users had less confi-

dence in online businesses than in other institutions and were more concernedBOX 2.6The Argus State: Technological Advances andIndividual PrivacyDecreases in the cost of video, audio, and other sensor technology, as well ascheaper data storage and information processing, make it likely that it will become
practicable for both governments and private data-mining enterprises to collectenormously detailed dossiers on all citizens.  This prospect raises a host of issues
requiring research and debate.  Among them:
¥Who currently collects what data about individuals?  How is it used?  How is
it shared?  What are the trends?
¥What are the existing default rules in different jurisdictions relating to thecollection of information?  Does the nature of default rules meaningfully alter out-
comes?  Do prohibitions on data collection (e.g., data protection laws) affect out-

comes?  To what extent are existing rules vulnerable to foreign 
Òdata havensÓ and
other regulatory arbitrage?  To what extent do/will consumers choose alternativesto the default rules when such an option is available?¥What are the possible political, social, and economic consequences of ex-tensive individual profiling?  Is extensive profiling likely?  Is the absence of a great
deal of the privacy now taken for granted compatible with freedom?  What differ-

ence does it make if the profiling is undertaken by (or available to) democraticgovernments?  Non-democratic governments?  Private industry?  What would theeconomic and social consequences be of making profiling data available to some?
To all? At a cost? At no cost?  Would it be socially valuable to prohibit the creation
of individualized dossiers?  In an era of distributed databases, would it be techni-
cally practical to enforce such a prohibition?¥To what extent do different types of electronic cash and electronic com-merce enable or disable profiling?  To what extent do concerns about the control of

electronic money laundering imply the power to restrict free speech or anonymouscommerce?  To what extent does the protection of free speech and a private social
and economic space require the protection of anonymous speech and/or anony-
mous commerce?  What are the current national policies regarding anonymous
speech and commerce?  In a networked world, what are the external and extrater-
ritorial effects of one nationÕs policies regarding anonymous speech and com-merce?ÑMichael Froomkin, ÒFive Critical Issues Relating to Impacts ofInformation TechnologyÓ  (see Appendix B of this volume)
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS55about the confidentiality of e-mail than that of other common means of commu-nication.   However, with increasing familiarity comes greater trust:  those who

used e-mail regularly were less than 50 percent as likely to be concerned about
the confidentiality of this form of communication.Absent better understanding of the nature and extent of public concern, thepublic debate appears to rest on assertions by vocal advocates.   More data and

analysis would support more effective debate and decision making.The ease of dissemination afforded by new technologies such as the Internetis raising privacy issues related to the release of government-collected informa-
tion about individuals.  As an illustration of the delicate nature of privacy policy,

consider the issue of tax assessments.  In most local communities, these are

publicly available in City Hall.  The public purpose served is that individuals can

compare their own assessment to the assessment of similar properties and file a
protest if they believe that their property has been unfairly valued.  Victoria,

British Columbia, put its tax-assessment rolls on the Internet in order to make it
easier for residents to access this information.  However, many residents thought

that the assessed value of their property was now too accessible.  Ultimately,

Victoria had to close down the Web site, under pressure from British ColumbiaÕsInformation Commissioner, who believed that the site violated Canadian privacy
laws (Colebourn, 1996).In a related example, a computer consultant in Oregon paid the state $222 forthe complete motor vehicles database, which he then posted to a Web site.  The

database allows anyone with knowledge of a particular Oregon license plate num-
ber to look up the vehicle ownerÕs name, address, birth date, driverÕs license num-ber, and vehicle title information (McCall, 1996).20  Also, state and local govern-
ments are themselves finding that their data can be a source of revenue, through the
sale either of customized search services or entire databases (Chandrasekaran,
1998).  Already, regulations and legislation that address concerns about personal

dossiers are emerging at both state and federal levels for the specific case of
medical records.  A recent CSTB report (CSTB, 1997a) examines trends and

issues relating to the protection of medical information.ÒInformed consentÓ in surveys and experiments is a dimension of privacy
that strikes close to home for social scientists.  Quite strong safeguards are in

place for social science work involving human subjects, but in some ways it is
difficult to apply some of these practices to the Internet.  For example, the fact

that data is being collected can easily be concealed from subjects.  One source of

useful data comes from retrospective examination of existing records such as
server logs or ÒUsenetÓ postings where a social science experiment was not the
original intent of the data collection.  Just as in the case of private data, cross-

tabulation of innocuous data sets can identify seemingly anonymous subjects.
Certainly, social scientists must develop a code of practices, ethics, and perhaps
regulations that will help deal with these issues.Another dimension of privacy is Òannoyance.Ó A recent report on junk e-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYmail by World Research, Inc. (1997) announced that half of the more than 1,000respondents in a voluntary online survey said that they ÒhateÓ junk mail, and
another quarter said that they found it Òbothersome.Ó  Three-quarters of the
respondents felt it should be regulated.  The interesting question is what form of

regulation (if any) would be appropriate.  A number of congressional bills have

been introduced to address this issue, such as S.771, which proposed requiring
that advertisements be self-labeled.  It would be interesting to investigate how

effective such solutions have been in controlling physical junk mail, magazine
ads, Òinfomercials,Ó and so on.
There have been suggestions that industry self-regulation could be an effec-tive tool for protecting privacy.  A National Telecommunications and Informa-

tion Administration report  contains a number of papers exploring the prospects

for and limitations of self-regulation (NTIA, 1997).  One approach, offered by

Laudon (1996), proposes a market for personal information in which individuals
would have the right to sell or prevent the sale of information about themselves.
Varian (1996a) has examined some economic aspects of such a market, but much
work remains to be done.Cryptography is a technological approach to protecting privacy.  Cryptogra-phy policy is being widely debated; see CSTB (1996b) for a thorough study.  The

online Information Economy Page on Security, Privacy, and Encryption21 is also
a valuable resource.  However, there are comparatively few studies of the impli-

cations of cryptography policy.  One area where social science can contribute is

in characterizing the role of encryption in the commission and detection of crime.
For example, it has been claimed that use of cryptography presents a serious
barrier to criminal investigations.  Yet a study by Denning and Baugh (1997)

found that use of encryption was not currently obstructing a large number of
investigations.  However, it also found that the use of encryption by criminal

elements was growing rapidly and could become a problem in the future, suggest-
ing the need for further study.2.4.4Information Use and Value
Information OverloadIt is popular wisdom that people today suffer information overload.  If true,
overload has implications for those studying such issues as the value of informa-
tion.  Characterizing and quantifying overload also can shape the design of new

information technology tools.  Several questions need answering to determine the

truth of this assertion.  In what particular sense are people dealing with more

information than in the past? Is digital information more complex, harder to
apprehend, less compressible? Are there new social or psychological phenomena
emerging?Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS57One issue is whether in fact more information is being produced.  A line of
studies going back through Pool (1984) and Machlup (1982) looked at production
of information, but there seems to be a shortage of current data on measures of
production, particularly in the electronic environment.  It would be useful to

update the Pool and Machlup studies.Second, people may be spending more of their time absorbing information.There is certainly a need for detailed studies of how people spend time with
regard to various information sources, and in particular what they are doing with
these sources.  Are they using them as a basis for decision making or are they

collecting largely irrelevant information just because it is available and they think
they should know about it?Use of the Internet is a prime example of where research into time use is valu-able.  A 1997 Price Waterhouse Consumer Technology Survey (Price Waterhouse,

1997) polled 1,010 American consumers via telephone and found that 43 percent of
the time spent accessing the Internet from home was used for obtaining information,and 34 percent was used to send or receive e-mail.  This categorization is a start,
but clearly it is important to know what kind of information people are accessing
on the Internet and how it is being used.  Time-use diaries (see section 3.1.3) are
another important source of information.There is also the issue of how individual differences, expertise, and intentmay determine how much information is selected and extracted.  These questions

need to be examined in comparative studies of changing uses of information and
effects on productivity within specific contexts and domains.  For example, com-

parative studies to determine the effects of the availability of electronic preprints
in particular scientific disciplines as well as other information-sharing and dis-
semination practices of various disciplines could yield useful insights.Further elucidation of questions concerning information overload can comefrom microlevel studies of technology, information viewing practices, and infor-
mation-seeking behavior.  Collecting better information on the use of library

materials in the electronic environment could represent an important opportunity.
However, it is worth noting that most online systems are not instrumented to
allow such data collection, except for a few locally developed systems like the
University of California library information system, UC MELVYL.22 The paper
by Amy Friedlander, ÒImpacts of Information Technology:  Behaviors and
Metrics,Ó in Appendix B describes additional approaches to the question of li-
brary information use.Current use is not the only measure of value in a library context.  There is
also value associated with future, potential use such as having access to archival
material and preserving the scholarly record.  The paper in Appendix B by

Alexander Field, ÒCritical Issues Relating to Impacts of Information Technolo-gies,Ó raises questions about what is needed to ensure retrievability of material in
archives in the information age.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBranding, Credibility, and AuthorityBranding23 and authority
Ñthe credibility associated with the name of a pub-lisher or authorÑare interrelated in critical ways with the information overloadquestion and with user strategies to manage it.  Authority is also critical in social

and societal uses of information.  Little is understood about where authority

comes from and how it operates in the information context.  How do people

assign credibility, and how is this changing, in an increasingly information-rich
and competitive environment? What kinds of credibility systems could be in-
vented or developed?  How does branding work in the digital environment, and

how do brand identities transfer from other media?   How does the credibility

established by peer review conducted prior to publication in scientific journals
translate to the digital environment where researchers can reach a wide audience
without publishing in traditional journals? In a highly competitive environment, the costs for information production
and distribution are sometimes driven to the lowest possible level.  To understand

how authority works in this situation requires comparative data on the quality and
cost of information.  Also, research is needed to develop a theory of production

and publishing strategies in the new Web environment that includes both ÒpushÓand ÒpullÓ technologies,
24 micropayments, advertising support, and other alterna-
tives.  Together, these constitute a much richer set of options than that provided

by current media.  It is also important to understand interactions affecting how

people search for information.  For example, a CommerceNet/Nielson survey in the

spring of 1997 found that 71 percent of frequent users found Web sites through
search engines, 9.8 percent used friends and relatives, 8.5 percent used newspapers
and magazines, and 8.4 percent used links from other sites (CommerceNet/Nielsen

Media Research, 1997).On the question of authority, a candidate for case study is legal information,which formerly was a monopolistic market but now is fragmenting as new play-
ers become involved.  A baseline needs to be established, followed by studies of

how authority changes with fragmentation into competitive marketplace (see
Berring, 1995, which describes authority in legal information).  How does the

market structure affect the creation of authority?  Is it better to have a single,

authoritative source (and pay monopoly prices) or to have competing authorities
and face problems of choice and accuracy?  The paper by Michael Froomkin in

Appendix B discusses some additional questions about the economics of trust.Medicine and finance offer two opportunities to study credibility and how itis established.  In both cases, changes in technology and government policy have

made a great deal of data available to the public (via MEDLINE25 and EDGAR
26).At the same time many nontraditional sources of information can be found via the
Web and other mediaÑsome very good and some very much outside the main-stream, if not downright fraudulent.  How are people using these information

sources, and how do they assign credibility to them?  A recent study of credibility
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS59in Usenet groups for the support of people with medical or psychological ail-ments or disorders found that members relied on predictable strategies to estab-
lish the legitimacy of their questions and the authority of their replies.  Members
(or interlopers) who did not use these strategies were either ignored or censured
by the group (Galegher et al., 1998).How does technology change relationships with professionals, for example,physician-patient relationships?  What are the costs of errors in judging credibil-
ity?  One study of the effects of an e-mail 
ÒlistserveÓ support group found that
members who reported the greatest benefits were those who were also using
professional medical services (Cummings et al., 1998).On the Internet there is a growing range of sources of information whosecredibility varies.  How does this variability change social behavior?  Does it

contribute to social fragmentation?  Does this variability when combined with the

global nature of the Internet reinforce fringe beliefs that would not be self-
sustaining in an environment determined by geography?  Are there indicators of

the current level of common knowledge or experience (beyond viewing of net-
work television) that can be tracked to gain insight into these changes? How will
people recognize and manage bias in information, such as that which may be
present in advertiser-sponsored content?The Information GapThe typical formulation of the gap separating information 
ÒhavesÓ and 
Òhave-notsÓ27 is highly biased toward a definition of literacy as the ability to read and
write written text, and even somewhat biased toward scholarly communication.
Vast amounts of audio and video information are becoming available, searchable,
and retrievable.  Currently the enabling technologies for these activities are ex-

pensive and are not available as consumer products.  However, at some point the

infrastructure necessary to support the transmission of digital multimedia infor-
mation, such as broadband networks to the home, will be available.It is important to characterize more general forms of literacy and relate theseto the educational process.  How is the definition of literacy changing?  How is

the value of different forms of literacy (e.g., the ability to facilitate a discussion,
or create slides for a presentation) shifting?  Television has been a pervasive

medium of communication for several decades.  What new questions do novel,

more interactive media present that television did not?  It is probably necessary to

go beyond using such terms as ÒliteracyÓ or 
ÒnumeracyÓ to indicate a wider set of
skills, and instead characterize the skills specifically.What part can the educational system and universities play in serving theinformation poor?  How should this change models of distance learning and

distance education?  It would be useful to establish a baseline on current distance

education practices and effectiveness by careful studies of the National Techno-
logical University in the United States, the Open University in the United King-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYdom, and other similar organizations.  Can distance learning be used to narrow
the gap between the information ÒhavesÓ and 
Òhave nots,Ó or will it only widen
it?  What would be some of the characteristics of a system of distance education

targeted toward the information poor?How are differences in wealth related to possession of needed skills or accessto information?  Should the focus be on increasing skills or on reducing the need
for skills by providing more accessible technologies and content?  For example,

what happens if and when people move away from text-dominated computing
and communication?  It is important to understand and establish the validity of

interrelationships among access to information, the characteristics of the technol-
ogy used to access the information, and economic opportunities.2.4.5Pricing Models and Content
Different approaches to paying for information often involve different incen-tives for what types of information are created and sold.  For instance, Spence and

Owen (1977) showed that when television was paid for by advertising as opposed
to pay-per-view fees, there was an incentive to develop more programs that
would appeal to a wide audience, rather than programs that were intensely valued
by a small group of people.   The reason was that advertising rates are based on

the size of the audience and not on how much enjoyment each viewer gets from
a show.  In contrast, a highly focused show that appeals to a narrow audience

might be able to recover its costs more easily in a pay-per-view system because it
could charge a higher price per viewer.  Quite diverse content distributed by cable

television, such as the History Channel, the Cooking Channel, and the like, is
supported by finely tuned advertising.   This line of reasoning helps to explain

why broadcast television, which until recently depended almost exclusively on
advertising revenues, is often perceived to appeal to the least common denomina-
tor.  Similar trade-offs are likely to apply in other product markets such as the

market for content on the Internet.  For example, if online content is supported

primarily by advertising, one might expect that it will devolve to the lowest
common denominator.  Compared with broadcast television, the Web offers much

greater opportunity for niche markets, analogous to specialized cable channels,
and perhaps niche advertising.  A model to describe the quality and diversity of

possible content when cost-recovery is generated by such niche advertising would
be quite interesting.Furthermore, even when goods are supported by direct consumer payments,different incentives arise depending on whether the payments are for individual
goods and services or for bundles of goods and services.  Information goods that
are profitable as part of a bundle may be unprofitable when sold separately, and
vice versa.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS612.4.6Pricing Information
The emergence of the Internet as a way to distribute digital information suchas software, news stories, stock quotes, music, photographs, video clips, and
research reports has created new opportunities for the pricing of information
goods.  Providers of digital information goods are unsure about how to price them

and are struggling with a variety of revenue models (CSTB, 1996c).  Because

perfect copies of these goods can be created and distributed at virtually no cost,
some of the old rules, such as Òprice should equal marginal cost,Ó do not apply, as
noted by Varian (1995a,b).The Internet has also created new opportunities for repackaging contentthrough bundling, site licensing, subscriptions, rentals, differential pricing, and
per-use fees.  All of these schemes can be thought of as either aggregating or

disaggregating information goods along some dimension.  For instance, aggrega-

tion can occur across products, as when software programs are bundled for sale in
a software ÒsuiteÓ or when access to the full contents of an online service is
provided for a fixed fee.  Aggregation can also occur across consumers, as when
a site license is provided to multiple users for a fixed fee, or over time, as when
subscriptions are made available.Many observers have predicted that software and other types of content willbe increasingly disaggregated and metered, as on-demand software ÒappletsÓ or
as individual news stories and stock quotes.  For instance, Robert Metcalfe has

written: ÒWhen the Internet finally gets micromoney systems, weÕll rent tiny bitsof software for seconds at a time.  Imagine renting a French spelling checker for

one document onceÓ (Metcalfe, 1997).  The main rationale for this prediction is
that the current advantage obtained from bundling many goods to save on trans-
action and distribution costs will no longer apply, given that both of these types
of costs are often much lower on the Internet.However, recent theoretical work suggests that in some cases aggregationcan also be a surprisingly effective pricing strategy (Bakos and Brynjolfsson,
1997a,b).  Not only can it increase the seller
Õs profits from a set of digital infor-mation goods, but it may also benefit the consumer as well.  As a result, instead

of subdividing goods into smaller pieces to be rented separately to individuals, it
is sometimes more efficient to bundle many digital goods together.  The reason is

that by enabling a form of price discriminationÑthe charging of different pricesto different consumers based on their valuation of the quantities they consumeÑaggregation can make it easier for the seller to extract value from a given set of
goods (Box 2.7).  For the case of bundling, this type of aggregation has been

studied in a number of articles in the economics literature (e.g., McAfee et al.,
1989; Schmalensee, 1984).  The analysis shows that the benefits of aggregation

depend critically on the low marginal cost of reproducing digital information and
the nature of the correlation in valuations for the goods: aggregation is lessFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 2.7Economics of Bundling: Graphical IntuitionThe impact of aggregation on the profitability of selling information goods canbe illustrated by graphically analyzing the effect of bundling on the demand forinformation goods. Consumers will choose either 0 or 1 unit of an information
good, such as a music video or a journal article, depending on how their valuationof the good compares to its price.  A possible aggregate demand curve for such agood is depicted in Figure 2.3.Perfect price discriminationÑcharging different prices to different consumers,based on their valuations of a goodÑwill maximize the sellerÕs profits and willeliminate the deadweight loss shown in Figure 2.3 (Varian, 1995a).  If the seller

cannot price discriminate, however, the only single price that will eliminate theinefficiency from the deadweight loss will be a price equal to the marginal cost,which is close to zero.  Such a low price will not generate sufficient revenues to

cover the fixed cost of production and is unlikely to be the profit-maximizing price.Aggregation can sometimes overcome this dilemma.  Consider again a journal
article and a music video, and suppose that each is valued by consumers at be-
tween $0 and $1, generating linear aggregate demand curves like the one in shownFigure 2.3.  Suppose further that a consumer
Õs valuation of one good does notcorrelate with his or her valuation of the other, and that access to one good does
not make the other more or less attractive.What happens if the seller aggregates the two goods and sells them as a bun-dle?  Some consumers
Ñthose who valued both goods at $1Ñwould be willing topay $2 for the bundle; othersÑthose who valued both goods at almost $0Ñwouldnot be willing to pay even a penny.  The total area under the demand curve for the
bundle of the two information goods, and hence the total potential surplus, is ex-actly equal to the sum of the areas under the separate demand curves.  However,
most interestingly, bundling changes the shape of the demand curve, making it
flatter (more elastic) in the neighborhood of $1 and steeper (less elastic) neareither extreme, as shown in Figure 2.4.  As more goods are added, this effect
becomes more pronounced.  For example, Figure 2.5 shows the demand curve for

a bundle of 20 information goods, each of which has an independent, linear de-mand ranging from $0 to $1.A profit-maximizing firm selling a bundle of 20 goods will set the price slightlybelow the bundleÕs mean value of $10, and almost all consumers will find it worth-while to purchase the bundle.  In contrast, only half the consumers would have
purchased the goods if they had been sold individually at the profit-maximizing
price of 50 cents each, and so selling the goods as a bundle leads to a smallerdeadweight loss and greater economic efficiency.  Furthermore, the seller will earn
higher profits by selling a single bundle of 20 goods than by selling each of the 20
goods separately.  Thus, the shape of the bundle
Õs demand curve is far morefavorable both for the seller and for overall economic efficiency.Why does the shape of the demand curve change as goods are added to abundle?  The law of large numbers implies that the average valuation for a bundle
of goods with valuations drawn from the same distribution will be increasingly con-centrated near the mean valuation as more goods are added to the bundle.  For

example, some people subscribe to America Online for the news, some for stockquotes, and some for horoscopes.  It is unlikely that a single person places a veryhigh value on every single good offered; instead most consumers will assign highFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS63values to some goods and low values to other goods, leading to moderate valuesoverall.  However, if some consumers tend to have systematically higher valua-
tions for all types of goods, then the moderating effect of bundling will be muted
and, in some cases, unbundling will be preferred.  In general, a strategy of mixed
bundling, which involves offering both the complete bundle and various subbun-dles, can be shown to be the dominant strategy.Similar effects result in other types of aggregation, such as aggregation acrossconsumers, as in the case of selling a single site license for use by multiple con-sumers.  The law of large numbers, which underlies these aggregation effects, is

remarkably general.  For instance, it holds for almost any initial distribution with a
finite varianceÑnot just the linear demand assumed for the examples above.  Fur-
thermore, the law does not require that the valuations be independent of each other
or even that the valuations be drawn from the same distribution.However, theoretical analysis shows that when marginal costs are high, thendisaggregation may be more profitable than aggregation.  Because the marginal

costs of reproducing goods are so much lower on the Internet than they are in mostother contexts, bundling may become much more attractive as Internet commercegrows.  The policy implications of such changes, including their potential effects on

competition and innovation, remain issues for future research.FIGURE 2.3Deadweight loss from sales of a zero-marginal-cost information good.
Assume that after the first unit, marginal production costs, denoted by c, are close to zero.At price p, the number of units purchased will be q, resulting in profits of (p-c)q.  Howev-
er, as long as p > 
c, some consumers who value the good at more than its production costsc will not be willing to pay the going price 
p.  As a result, these consumers do not get
access to the good, creating a deadweight loss for society, denoted by the shaded region.pcqQuantityPriceMarginal CostDeadweight Loss (DWL)ConsumerÕs  Surplus (CS)DemandFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFIGURE 2.4Demand curve for bundle of two information goods with independent
uniform demand.FIGURE 2.5  Demand curve for a bundle of 20 information goods with independently
distributed uniform valuations.51015200.00.250.5
0.751Quantity (for bundle)Price21.51.00.50.00.250.50.751
Quantity (for bundle)PriceFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS65attractive when marginal costs are high or when valuations are highly correlated(Bakos and Brynjolfsson, 1997a,b).Thus, strategies involving bundling, site licensing, and subscriptions caneach be understood as responses to the radical decline in costs for the reproduc-
tion of information made possible by digitization and distribution through the
Internet.  Increased use of micropayments can be seen as a consequence of

radically lower transaction and distribution costs.  Information goods that had

previously been aggregated to save on transaction or distribution costs may be
disaggregated as predicted by Metcalfe (1997), but new aggregations of goods
may emerge to exploit the potential for price discrimination.Experimentation with various approaches continues, and it is premature toconclude that one approach such as microcharging is best, or to try to predict
even in what circumstances it may be preferred.  Collection of data, analysis, and

further theoretical work would all be helpful.2.4.7Network Externalities
Economists say that a network externality exists when one consumer
Õs de-mand for a product or service depends on how many other consumers purchase
that service.  For example, consider a consumer
Õs demand for a fax machine.People want fax machines so that they can communicate with each other.  If no

one you communicate with has a fax machine, it certainly is not worthwhile for
you to buy one.  Modems have a similar property:  a modem is useful only if there

is another modem somewhere that you can communicate with.Network externalities are ubiquitous in computing and communications.  The
demand for e-mail depends on how many other users there are; the demand for a
Web browser depends on how many servers there are; and even the demand for a
word processing package will depend on how many other users of that package
there are.28Network externalities were first modeled by Rohlfs (1974) in an attempt tounderstand why AT&TÕs Picture Phone was not successful.  However, there is
little interest in failures, and RohlfsÕs article did not attract wide notice untilalmost 10 years after it appeared.  Today much more is known about this phe-

nomenon.  Nicholas Economides has studied network economics extensively and

maintains a Web site that contains a bibliography of his and other work on this
topic.29  Also see Katz and Shapiro (1994) for a nice overview of network exter-nalities and their implications.In each of the examples above (fax, e-mail, Web, word processing), the usegrew slowly at first and then suddenly surged ahead.  Figure 2.6 shows the price

and number of fax machines shipped over a period of 12 years.This qualitative behavior can be reproduced by some very simple economicmodels whose essential feature is multiple equilibria.  If everyone expects a

product to be a failure, then no one will buy it and the product will fail.  But if
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYeveryone expects a product to succeed, many people will want to buy it and theproduct will succeed.  Which of these outcomes occurs depends on whether the

number of early adopters exceeds a particular critical mass that is a function of
the parameters of the model.   In a stochastic model, the probability that this will
happen depends on the magnitude of the random fluctuations in the number of
adopters.Because of the phenomenon of critical mass, it is very important to try tostimulate growth early in the life cycle of a product.  Today it is quite common to

see producers offering very cheap access to a piece of software or a communica-
tions service in order to create a new market where none existed before.  A

critical question is how big the market has to be before it can take off on its own.
Theory can provide little guidance here; the appropriate strategy depends on the
nature of the good and the costs and benefits that users face in adopting it.2.4.8Auctions
Auctions, one of the oldest market institutions,30 have played an important
role in the development of wireless communications.  The modern study of

auctions by economists dates back to Vickrey (1961), whose work, which was
later awarded a Nobel prize, was little read until the early 1970s, when the U.S.
Department of the Interior auctioned off the right to drill for oil in offshore tracts.
Following the auction, several economists became interested in the optimal strat-
egies associated with such auctions and examined ways that auctions might be
designed to achieve some given end (e.g., profit maximization, or efficient allo-
cation of resources).In recent years Congress has authorized the Federal Communications Com-mission (FCC) to allocate the radio spectrum via auctionÑa policy recommendedby economists Leo Herzl and Ronald Coase over the period from 1957 to 1959FIGURE 2.6Average price of fax machines sold (left) and number of units shipped
(right).   SOURCE: Adapted from Economides and Himmelberg (1995).
Average Pricefor fax machines sold05001000
15002000
250019761980198419881992yeardollarsFax machines shipped050010001500
2000
250019761980198419881992yearthousandsFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS67(Coase, 1959).  These auctions are generally regarded as having being quite
successful.31  See McMillan (1994) for a readable introduction to how the FCC
auctions were conducted.The economic analysis starts by considering two sorts of auctions:  common-
value auctions and private-value auctions.  In a common-value auction, such as

the auctioning of offshore oil drilling rights, the item that is being bid for is worth
some particular amount, but the bidders may have different opinions about how
much that amount is.  In a private-value auction, the item in question is worth

different amounts to different people.  Most auctions of ordinary consumer goods

such as works of art and antiques are of the private-value type.  For more on the

theory and practice of auctions, see the survey by Milgrom (1989) and the refer-
ences cited therein.  See also the discussion in Box 2.8.
2.4.9Electronic Commerce
Electronic commerce is different from physical commerce because technol-ogy changes the modes of communication, ultimately affecting the flow of infor-
mation.  The reduced cost of communicating, transmitting, and processing infor-
mation is at the core of these differences. The marginal cost of disseminating
information electronically to new or existing customers is lower than with more
conventional methods, since the cost of an additional Web query or e-mail mes-
sage is close to zero.  Similarly, customers can use the Internet to search across

competing sellersÑwhich can be done directly by visiting various sellersÕ Web
sites and inquiring about prices, products, and availability.  Increasingly, searches

can also be facilitated by using Òintelligent agentsÓ or intermediaries that can
gather and aggregate the necessary information on behalf of the customer.  As a

result, geographic and informational barriers that dampen competition among
sellers may become increasingly irrelevant.Bakos (1997) has analyzed the implications of reduced search costs forcompetition, efficiency, and the division of surplus between buyers and sellers.
His model indicates that when electronic marketplaces reduce the costs to the
consumer of searching for the lowest price, there will be (1) an improvement in
overall economic efficiency and (2) a shift in bargaining power from sellers to
buyers.  As a result buyers will be strictly better off, but the effect on sellers is

ambiguous.  A change from very high to moderate search costs will tend to make

sellers better off, as new markets emerge.   For instance, a market for specialty car

parts might be unsustainable without a technology like the Internet to lower the
transaction costs involved in finding buyers and sellers.  The creation of such a

market provides new opportunities for sellers.  However, Bakos
Õs model indi-cates that if search costs continue to fall, sellers may be made worse off since
buyers can more easily find the seller that offers the lowest price.  Since all sellers

charging more than this lowest price will lose business, competition will tend to
drive down prices until they reach the marginal cost of the product, leaving noFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 2.8Simple Insights Learned About AuctionsCommon-value AuctionsA sensible strategy in a common-value auction, it would seem, would be to estimatethe value of the item in question, add on a profit margin, and then bid that amount.  How-

ever, if everyone uses such a procedure, it follows that the winner will tend to be the bidderwith the highest estimateÑwhich then is likely to be an overestimate of the true value.Hence the ÒwinnerÓ will usually end up overbidding, a phenomenon known as the 
winnerÕscurse.Avoiding the winnerÕs curse involves bidding down from oneÕs estimated value, withthe reduction depending on the number of other bidders.  If one
Õs estimate is higher thanthe estimates of 2 other bidders it may be reasonably close to the true value; but if it topsthe estimates of 100 other bidders, it is almost certainly an overbid!Economists have developed a number of statistical and game theoretical models ofbidding behavior in such markets that have been applied successfully in practical contextssuch as auctions of parts of the radio spectrum.
Private-value AuctionsThe most common form of private-value auction is the English auction, in which bids
are successively raised until only one bidder is left who then claims the item at the last
price bid.  In this kind of auction, the person who is 
willing to bid the highest gets the item,
but the price paid will generally be slightly above the bid of the second-highest bidder.Sealed-bid AuctionsIn a sealed bid auction, each consumer submits a bid sealed in an envelope.  The bids
are opened and the item is awarded to the highest bidder at the price he bid.  The optimal

strategy in the sealed-bid auction is to try to guess the amount the other consumers will
bid, and then enter a bid slightly above the highest of these, assuming that the item isattractive to the bidder at that price.  Thus bidders will not, in general, want to reveal theirtrue valuation for the item being auctioned off.  Furthermore, the outcome of the sealed bid

auction will depend on each bidderÕs beliefs about the othersÕ valuations.  Even if these
beliefs are correct on average, there will be cases in which the bidders guess incorrectlyand the item is not awarded to the person who values it most.Vickrey AuctionsA variation on the sealed-bid auctionÑknown as the ÒVickrey auction,Ó after the econ-
omist who first analyzed its propertiesÑeliminates the need for strategic play.  The Vick-
rey auction simply awards the item to the highest bidder, but at the second highest pricethat was bid.  It turns out that in such an auction, there is no need to play strategically
Ñtheoptimal bid is simply the true value to the bidder.1It is also worth observing that the revenue raised by the Vickrey auction will be essen-tially the same as that raised by the ordinary English auction, since in each case the
person who assigned the highest value gets the item but only has to pay the secondhighest price.  (In the English auction, the person 
willing to bid the highest gets the item,
but he or she has to pay only the price bid by the person with the second highest value,
plus the minimal bid increment.)1The essence of the argument can be seen in a two-bidder example. Let v1 be the true value of bidder 1, andlet b1and b2 be the bids of the two bidders. Then the expected payoff to consumer 1 is
Prog b1 > 
b2v1  b2.If v1 > 
b2 then bidder 1 would like the probability to be equal to 1
Ñwhich he can assure by reporting b1  v1.If v1 < 
b2, bidder 1 would like the probability to be zeroÑwhich he can ensure by reporting b1 = 
v1. Either way,it is optimal for bidder 1 to report the true value.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS69surplus for the sellers (Bakos, 1997).  The dynamics of 
Òfriction-freeÓ capitalism
are not attractive to sellers of commodity products who had previously depended
on geography or customer ignorance to insulate them from the low-cost seller in
the market.  As geography becomes less important, new sources of product dif-

ferentiation, such as customized features or service or innovation will become
more important, at least for those sellers who do not have the advantage of the
lowest cost of production.Is this kind of dynamic already emerging in Internet commerce?  Although
there is much speculation about the effect that the Internet will have on prices,
thus far there has been virtually no systematic evidence obtained or analysis
done.  However, one exploratory study by Bailey and Brynjolfsson (1997) did not

find much evidence that prices on the Internet were any lower or less dispersed
than prices for the same goods sold via traditional retail channels.  Their analysis

was based on data from 52 Internet and conventional retailers for 337 distinct
titles of books, music compact disks, and software.  Bailey and Brynjolfsson

provided several possible explanations for their unexpected findings, including
the possibility that search on the Internet during the sample period was not as
easy as is sometimes assumed, that the demographics of the typical Internet user
encouraged a higher price equilibrium, that many of the Internet retailers were
still experimenting with pricing strategies, and that Internet retailers were differ-
entiating their products (e.g., by offering options for delivery or providing cus-
tomized recommendations), which added value.   Because of the rapid pace of

change in Internet commerce, it is not clear whether their findings will apply to
current and future periods.  However, they have suggested the need for close

examination of the common assumption that the Internet will be simply a  Òfric-tion-freeÓ version of the traditional retail channels.
Despite the uncertainties about electronic commerce and relatively few at-tempts to look at the broad picture,  there is a great deal of private-sector interest.

Electronic commerce is also receiving increasing attention from policy makers.
The Clinton AdministrationÕs Framework for Global Electronic Commerce
(1997; available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/New/Commerce/
index.html>) highlights both the economic potential of electronic commerce
via the Internet as well as the need for government to avoid undue regulatoryrestrictions and to not subject Internet transactions to additional taxation.Right now society is in a period of intense speculation and experimentation.Experimentation involves a risk owing to path-dependenceÑtechnological choicesmade in the past may constrain what technological options will be compatible in the
future.   Standards developed now for electronic payment may remain in use well

into the future, and careful thought should be given to their implications.  For

example, some of the architectural design of the Visa-MasterCard ÒSecure Elec-tronic Transactions (SET)Ó technical standard was necessitated by the need to
conform with current cryptographic export control policies.  Yet these policies are

today very much in flux and may be entirely different in a few years.  Migrating the

SET standard so that it is consistent with these new policies could be very costly, if

not impossible.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYEven if cryptography policy changes, society may be locked into designchoices already made.  Thus it is critically important that any such standards be

examined by those with expertise in technology, economics, business, and lawÑno one discipline suffices to provide the necessary expertise.One important insight about electronic commerce that follows from a legaland economic analysis has to do with assignment of liability, that is, with who
ends up bearing the costs of unexpected outcomes.  If the goal is to minimize

overall transaction costs, liability should be assigned most heavily to those who
are best placed to reduce the costs of transactions.Consider, for example, the rule in the United States that the consumer isliable for only the first $50 in losses from fraudulent credit card use.  This

assignment of liability has led to the development of highly sophisticated statisti-
cal profiling of consumer purchases that allows companies to detect fraudulent
activity, thereby reducing the total costs of transactions.  If the liability had

instead rested entirely with consumers, one might have expected to see them
being more careful in protecting their credit cards, but there would have been
little reason for banks to invest in risk management technology.  Another ex-

ample is the difference between U.S. and U.K. assignment of liability for auto-
matic teller machine (ATM) fraud.  In the United States the burden of proof lies

with the bank; in the United Kingdom it lies with the customer.  This has led U.S.

banks to invest in video cameras at ATM machines, whereas U.K. banks typically
have not made such investments.The issue of liability is critical for electronic commerce.  A survey released
in March 1997 by CommerceNet/Nielson Media Research (1997) found Òa lackof trust in the security of electronic payments as the leading inhibitor preventing
people from actually purchasing goods and services online.Ó  This is remarkable
considering the fact that the standard $50 limit still applies to online credit pur-
chases.  One might conjecture that credit card companies are not interested in a

marketing effort to educate the public on this issue until they understand their
own potential liabilities for fraud and misuse.  There is also a need to understand

the psychological and social dimensions of Òtrust,Ó since trust is a critical compo-
nent of any sort of commercial transaction.The information economy calls for new economic institutions such asÒcertificate authoritiesÓ that certify the connection between legal identities
and possession of cryptographic keysÑa public-key infrastructure.  Large
certificate issuers include Versign, which has close ties to the credit card
issuer Visa, and GTE, which has close ties to MasterCard.  The economics of

this industry are uncertain and clearly depend critically on the issue of liabil-
ity assignment.Another factor that is potentially delaying the growth of electronic com-merce is intellectual property protection.  Some of the broader issues are dealt

with in section 2.4.1, ÒProtection of Intellectual Property,Ó but some of the spe-
cifically commerce-oriented issues are mentioned here.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS71The first such issue is the role of copy protection, which is a technical meansfor making it more difficult to create additional functional copies of software in a
competitive environment.  Copy-protected mass-market software was effectively

competed away during the mid-1980s.  Any copy protection that inconveniences
users is difficult to maintain in a highly competitive market.  See Shy (1998) for

an economic analysis.More generally, numerous copy protection schemes have been proposed tohelp safeguard intellectual property, suggesting that there will almost certainly be
a standards battle for supremacy in this market.  Besen and Farrell (1994) have

provided a survey of economic analysis with regard to conflicts about standards
that sets forth the current state of the art in this area.  More work in this area

would be valuable.Electronic commerce also raises significant antitrust issues.  There are large
economies of scale in distributionÑa single general-purpose online bookstore orCD store can serve a very large market.  There are also potential demand-side

economies of scale in payment mechanisms and software, which leads to a win-
ner-take-all market structure with a single firm (or small set of firms) dominating
the market.There have been a number of interesting studies of market structure in thiscontext (see, e.g., Katz and Shapiro, 1994, for a survey); however, much more
work is needed.  The role of antitrust policy in an industry with strong network

externalities and standardization issues is especially important to understand.  A

dominant firm brings the benefits of standardization, but presumably also im-
poses inefficiencies due to its monopoly position.  The social trade-off between

these benefits and costs is critically important and is the subject of much current
debate.  Some dispassionate analysis would be highly welcome.
There has been much speculation about the macroeconomic effects of elec-tronic commerce, such as the loss of economic sovereignty.  Most economic

analysis has focused on moving from multiple currencies to a single currency (as
in the European Union context), but the emergence of currencies issued by pri-
vate companies and barter arrangements is a distinct possibility.  Economic mon-

etary history would likely shed some light on how an economy functions in the
presence of multiple private currencies, since that circumstance was common up
until the turn of the last century.There is also the question of who will appropriate the benefits of electroniccommerce.  Varian (1996a) has argued that price discrimination will become a

widely used approach to selling information.  (One form of price discrimination

is enabled by bundling, discussed in section 2.4.6, ÒPricing Information.Ó) Hecites earlier studies that suggest that the welfare effects of price discrimination
will be benign from the viewpoint of overall welfare, but price discrimination
may certainly affect the division of economic gains between consumers and
firms.  These earlier studies typically assumed a monopolistic market structure,

which may or may not be appropriate for electronic commerce.  Thus extending
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYthese models to more competitive market structures would enhance understand-ing of the likely impact of electronic commerce on consumers.2.5ILLUSTRATIVE BROAD TOPICS FOR ONGOING RESEARCH
Workshop discussions and position papers yielded numerous suggestions forresearch topics, a number of which are discussed above.  From these topics
Ñspanning a wide range of interdisciplinary subjects from economic productivity
to communities in the information ageÑthe workshop steering committee se-lected an illustrative set of promising areas for research, listed below.¥Interdisciplinary study of information indicators. The idea of develop-
ing a method for quantifying certain aspects of society in the United States is as old
as the Constitution.  Over the last two decades, researchers have recognized and

begun to analyze the increasing role that information plays in all aspects of society.
These efforts have proved most fruitful when measuring the contribution of infor-
mation to the economy,32 the size of the information work force,33 and the level ofpenetration of the information infrastructure.34  In most of these analyses, the
conclusions drawn have been consistent with the view that society is in the process
of a fundamental change through the rapid development and implementation of
information technologies and the products and services associated with them.Some of these studies raise the indirect question of the value of attempting touse a set of indicators to represent the information activities of society, such as
public discourse and democratic processes, to improve understanding.  This ap-

proach was first pioneered by Borko and Menou (1983).  In essence, looking at

society from an information perspective leads us to perceive society as composed
of information structures and communication behaviors.  In other words, those

activities that lead to the construction of environments for producing, receiving,
distributing, and processing information reflect the creation of information struc-
tures, while those activities that involve transmission of information reflect com-
munication behaviors.  Box 2.9 lists some notional indicators.
The dramatic information-centric changes that have occurred across all soci-eties in recent decades suggest that the social forces enabled by the development
of information structures and the prevalence of communication behaviors be
measured.  More fully developed, a set of quantitative information indicators

offers opportunities for comparatively measuring community information assets,
public participation, interconnectedness, social capital, information poverty, and
universal service.It would be useful for the nation to invest in an interdisciplinary study ofinformation indicators.  The perspectives of many disciplines come to bear on the

question of measuring impact.  An exploration of how different disciplines do or
do not reach consensus about how to measure impacts, and the extent to which
consensus is desirable, is called for.  From such an exchange can come broadly
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS73BOX 2.9A Primitive List of Information IndicatorsInformation StructuresBooks produced (general/textbooks)Cable TV access/trunk lines
Number of cinema seatsNumber of computer systems/databasesNumber of database subscribers
Number of journal articles/technical reportsNumber of libraries/archivesNumber of modems
Number of movies releasedNumber of newspapersNumber of online subscribers
Number of personal computersNumber of registered computer usersNumber of satellite dishes
Number of telephonesNumber of TVs/radiosNumber of periodicals published (general/scientific)
Number of public telephonesNumber of radio/TV channelsNumber of telephone access/trunk linesCommunication BehaviorsCirculation of library volumesDomestic/international mail trafficFirst-class letters mailed
Hours spent accessing the InternetHours spent listening/viewing radio/TVaccepted measures of access, use, and the impact of information and informationtechnology.  One particular outcome could be the aggregation of the kinds of

microindicators listed in Box 2.9 into broadly accepted macro information indi-
cators such as the following:ÑInterconnectivity index.  
A measure of the facility of electroniccommunication, and an evaluation of the development of this dimension of
the information infrastructure;ÑInformation quality of life index.  
Similar to an index produced bythe Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, an index that
would attempt to evaluate the qualitative levels of communication available
to individuals;ÑLeading information indicators.  
An index that would attempt topredict the growth of the information infrastructure;Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYÑHome media index.  
An index of the state of penetration of commu-nications technologies in the home that might qualify as a leading index of
the potential for future consumption of information; andÑMarginalization index.  An index that would measure the extent to
which specific populations are excluded from participation in the informa-
tion infrastructure.
Were such a set of indicators developed, funding agencies like the NationalScience Foundation might have a standardized tool in hand through which to
assess the outcomes of the research that they sponsor.¥Impacts of information technology on labor market structure.  In-
formation technology has been linked to wage inequality and other changes in
the structure of the labor market (more detail is provided in section 2.3).  Un-

derstanding the extent to which and the mechanism by which computers may
affect increased wage inequality is important in determining the nature and
extent of public policy responses.  This research should acknowledge that com-

puters, by themselves, are not causal agents.  Rather it is the entire constellation

of economic and organizational strategies, managerial perspectives, and work
practices within which computing technology is embedded that affects wage
inequality.One possible response is improved training of workers for IT-related jobs.Understanding the needs for education and training requires better definition of
the skills required to make use of IT.  Results from such research would benefit

both policy makers and the private sector as they seek to better match education
and training to workplace skill requirements.¥Productivity and its relationship to work practices and organizationalstructures for the use of information technology.  Extracting the benefits ofnew technologies depends in part on organizational adaptation to them.  As

discussed in more detail above, industrial exploitation of the benefits of the
electric dynamo in the early part of this century required new approaches to
manufacturing.   Organizations using information technology today are at a simi-

lar learning stage.A major impediment  to determining optimal work practices and organiza-
tional structures has been the lack of a clear picture of what data already exist.
Developing such a list would help speed up research in this area.   There are a

number of places where specific research needs are already apparent, such as the
collection of time series data to help clarify the role of technology in organiza-
tional changes.Understanding the productivity benefits of information technologyÑillumi-nating the so-called productivity paradoxÑalso is worthy of continued research.Important questions include how to better quantify what have been consideredFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS75ÒunmeasurableÓ economic inputs, such as organizational knowledge, and 
Òun-measurableÓ outputs, such as product quality, associated with computers.
As recognition grows that productivity gains from information technologyincreasingly depend not just on the introduction of new technology but also on
finding new ways and organizational structures to use it, it is worth noting that
advances in the technology have owed much to government-supported computer
science research.   Advances in economic productivity would benefit from analo-

gous research on how to better use information technology in the workplace.
This is one facet of the broader question of learning how to better use information
technology to achieve a host of social and economic goals.  There are already

moves to increase research in this domain; one example is the National Science
FoundationÕs interdisciplinary Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence initiative.¥Intellectual property issues.  Information technology raises many newquestions about optimal protection of intellectual property rights, posing chal-
lenges to policy makers revising intellectual property law or international agree-
ments as well as to commercial interests considering particular intellectual pro-
tection schemes.  Many new schemes have been advanced for protection of

intellectual property, and more needs to be known to choose among them.  While

considerable research has been conducted on the effect of different patent re-
gimes on innovation, little has been studied regarding the consequences of differ-
ent copyright protection schemes (see section 2.4.1).  Theoretical work and em-

pirical research on different copyright protection regimes will help inform future
actions to protect intellectual property.¥Social issues addressed at the protocol level.  
The Internet has givenrise to many new social issues in intellectual property, privacy, and data filtering.
Addressing these social issues at  the protocol level
Ñthrough policies, rules, andconventions for the exchange and use of informationÑis a promising area forinterdisciplinary research.  Examples include:
ÑPICS, the Platform for Internet Content Selection, which implementsa set of protocols for rating Web sites (Resnick and Miller, 1996);ÑP3P,35 a project for specifying privacy practices;
ÑLanguage specifying the terms and conditions by which intellectualproperty is managed; andÑOpen Profiling Standard,36 a method for individual users to selec-
tively release information about themselves under specific conditions.
Each of these projects involves both technological and social dimensions.For example, PICS raises issues not only about how best to encode ratings for
Web sites, but also about how to represent them; cognitive issues about how
elaborate the rating schemes should be; and economic issues about how rating
bureaus can recover costs.  Another issue is how users can evaluate the trustwor-

thiness of the labels provided by ratings services.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYNOTES1.See Tyack and Cuban (1995) for an analysis of why earlier technologies for improving teach-
ing and learning never achieved their promise. See also references in CSTB (1994b, 1996c).2.ÒActive interventionÓ refers to deliberate intervention
Ñsuch as the introduction of new tech-nology or educational practicesÑfor the purposes of research.3.While this discussion focuses on this question in a U.S. domestic context, in much of the rest of
the world, socioeconomic disparities and the gap between urban and rural access are much
greater.4.See <http://www.hotmail.com>.
5.Note, however, that not all forms of communication necessarily reduce localness.  For ex-
ample, Wiley and Rice (1933) postulated that the telephone, a point-to-point medium, rein-forces locality whereas broadcast media tend to diminish the importance of locality.6.This work updated earlier work conducted at a time when computing was less prevalent.

7.The 
Òoutput effectÓ also includes changing tastes or desires, e.g., the changes in preference for
cars rather than horses or for word processors rather than typewriters.8.One might expect software development to contribute to increased demand for skilled work,
but recent work by Brynjolfsson (1997) found that it was not a major factor, at least not in mostindustrial countries. Although the U.S. software industry is fairly large and growing, it is stillnot large enough to explain any significant share of the effect.9.See Brynjolfsson (1993), Attewell (1994), Sichel (1997), and CSTB (1994a) for empirical
studies of the productivity paradox.   See CSTB (1994a), Baily and Chakrabarti (1988),
Brynjolfsson (1993), Wilson (1995), and Brynjolfsson and Yang (1996) for reviews.10.Concurrent engineering refers to the practice in which personnel from every phase of product
developmentÑe.g., from design to production engineering, quality control, and serviceÑcol-laborate in product development beginning at the earliest stages.11.Note that improvements in the technology for transmitting and manipulating image data in-
creasingly remove this limitation.12.With the exception of the retirement-planning task force, the studies of differential benefits
cited in this section used survey analysis of naturally occurring differential use.  Statistical
techniques were used to control for the effects of other variables, but because people were not
randomly assigned to the use (or nonuse) of technology, strict causal claims are not warranted.In the retirement-planning study, still-employed and recently retired people were randomlyassigned to task forces with and without access to technology.  Because of the random assign-

ment, causal claims are warranted.13.U.S. Copyright Office records on documents registered for copyright are available via the
Library of Congress Information System (LOCIS) for 1978 onward.14.Figures on literacy are not always reliable, in part because the definition of literacy is some-
what vague. The numbers given in this discussion were taken from contemporary accounts.15.Early expectations were that interactive cable services providing video on demand (VOD) or
near-VOD would be lucrative and popular.  However, early experiments by the cable industry
showed that consumer response to VOD was unlikely to generate sufficient revenue to justifyinvestment in interactive cable systems.  Investment in two-way capabilities in the cable indus-
try today is predicated on a market for broadband data delivery (including Internet as well astelephony and video conferencing) to both the home and small businesses, in addition to videoprogramming.16.See <http://www.cyberpatrol.com/>.
17.This set of protocols was adopted as a standard by the consortium that sets standards for the
World Wide Web.18.EPIC (see <http://www.epic.org/privacy/privacy_resources_faq.html>) contains an extensive
list of online resources on privacy issues.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS7719.This study is based on a sample of 1,009 computer users derived from a sample representative
of 2,204 persons, age 18 or over, living in households with telephones and located in the 48contiguous states.20.Note that federal legislation passed in 1994 (which did not come into effect until 1997) allows
people to restrict the release of personal information from state motor vehicle records.21.See <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/resources/infoecon/Security.html>.

22.See <http://www.melvyl.ucop.edu/>.
23.Branding is an effort to transform something perceived as generic into something with which
people associate a brand name.  A recent example is the 
ÒInside IntelÓ campaign, which built
up significant brand awareness for CPUs, something that the average individual cared littleabout.24.ÒPushÓ technologies send information to an intended consumer without that consumer having
requested it, while ÒpullÓ technologies send information only in response to a specific request.
Radio and television broadcasting and e-mail are examples of push technologies, because theyboth transmit information regardless of whether or not anyone specifically requested it; the
World Wide Web is an example of pull technology since a page must be requested before it issent.  Note that push technologies can be used over the Internet as well; examples include the
PointCast system, which delivers customized news to usersÕ computer desktops.
25.The National Library of Medicine
Õs MEDLINE system makes extensive bibliographic informa-tion covering the fields of medicine and health care available free of charge to the publicthrough a Web site.26.The Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system makes available to the public
through a Web site much of the information companies are required to submit to the U.S.Securities and Exchange Commission.27.Such a gap exists, for example, between various socioeconomic groups, between urban and
rural areas, and between industrialized and developing countries.28.Also see Markus (1987) on the theory of critical mass for interactive media.
29.See <http://raven.stern.nyu.edu/networks>.
30.Herodotus describes the use of auctions in Babylon as early as 500 BC.  It is remarkable that a
venerable economic institution like an auction has found a receptive audience on the Internet.The Internet Auction List (<http://www.usaweb.com>) lists more than 50 sites that have regu-lar online auctions, and more are being added every day.  Computer equipment, air tickets, and
Barbie dolls are being bought and sold daily via Internet auctions. Even advertising space isbeing sold via auction on AdBot (<http://www.adbot.com>).31.There have, however, been problems due to overbidding (the so-called 
ÒwinnerÕs curseÓ phe-
nomenon, described in Box 2.8) and signaling. Signaling can occur in multiround auctionswhen the bid values are used to signal the intent of the bidder, in violation of the rule againstthere being any collaboration or collusion between auction participants.  For example, a bid of

$1,000,202 might indicate that a bidder has a particular interest in the market with telephonearea code 202.32.See Jussawalla et al. (1988); Machlup (1962); and Porat (1977).

33.See Bell (1973); Katz (1988); Machlup (1962); and Schement (1990).
34.See Dordick and Wang (1993); Ito (1981); and Kuo (1989).
35.See <http://www.w3.org/Privacy/Overview.html>.

36.See <http://www.w3.org>.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY783DataÑThe Basis for New KnowledgeAs the basis for exploration and rigorous analysis of observed phenomena,systematically collected data are critical to investigations of the economic and
social impacts of information technology.  Moreover, more timely data collection

and analysis are likely to be useful in informing future policy decisions.  Several
data-related issues arise for researchers working at the intersection of information
technology and socioeconomic issues.  As discussion at the workshop made

clear, among the most important is the need for more extensive, more timely, and
new sources of relevant data.3.1TYPES AND USES OF DATA
Social scientists collect data from and about a variety of social units, rangingin degree of aggregation from individual human beings to corporations, econo-
mies, and nations (Box 3.1).  Their time perspective may be historical or longitu-

dinal (Box 3.2).  The kinds of data collected and the methods of collection also

depend on the overall purpose of the study.  Special-purpose data sets are gener-
ally constructed by researchers to address a particular questionÑsuch as the
extent to which information technology contributes to economic productivity.
Multipurpose data sets can be used to study a wide variety of issues in a range of
social science disciplines.  As such, multipurpose data sets are part of the infra-

structure of social science research.1  The scope and range of such data sets are
illustrated by the top-level categories of the data in the archives maintained by the
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (see Box 3.3).Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE79BOX 3.1Some Major Sources of Social Science Data with Examples ofTypes of Data CollectedPeople¥As personal observers (e.g., verbal Òthink-aloudÓ responses gathered in studies
of decision making and problem solving; responses to interviews and question-naires)¥As corporate or community representatives (e.g., descriptions of corporate de-

ployment of information technology elicited in interviews with chief information of-ficers)¥As performers (e.g., scores from educational testing; patterns of participation in

groups)¥As decision makers (e.g., data revealing consumer preferences or choices)
Documents and RecordsÑHistorical and Contemporary¥Diaries (e.g., details of personal situations)
¥Media content (e.g., indicators of cultural themes)
¥Commercial records (e.g., data on the diffusion of the telephone)
¥Public records (e.g., data from birth and death records indicating population

changes over time)Organizations¥Performance measures collected from publicly reported data such as earnings

reports; other financial measures
¥Personnel statistics
¥Product performance data
Communities¥Data on voter turnout or library circulation rates as indicators of citizen partici-

pationGovernments¥Labor market statistics
¥National and regional economic statistics
3.1.1Data from Experiments
Experiments involve setting up control and experimental groups that differonly with respect to the presence or absence of the effect being studied and thus
permit researchers to conclude that a difference in outcomes in the two groups is
actually due to the difference in treatment.  The HomeNet project is an experi-

ment that examines the impacts of computers in the home (see section 2.1.1,
ÒComputer Use in the HomeÓ).  The Internet Demand Experiment (INDEX) at
the University of California, Berkeley, is attempting to measure user demand for
Internet Òquality of serviceÓ by offering different price-quality combinations and
observing what users choose.2  Offering an actual choice is likely to lead to more
accurate results than is asking hypothetical questions.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 3.2Some Major Study Designs for Collecting DataCase study:  in-depth study of one social unit
Ña family, a school, an organiza-tional work group, or a political campaign.  The researcher uses multiple means of
data collection (observation, interviews, document analysis) to develop a rich un-
derstanding of the interplay of factors operating in a single social setting.Cross-sectional study:  study in which data are collected on a relatively small
number of variables from a relatively large number of social units at one point in time,often from questionnaires or existing records.  The researcher often uses statistical
techniques to characterize how variables are associated with one another.Panel study:  study in which data are collected on the same variables from the
same social units at repeated points in time; supports investigating the impact of
particular events that occur over the time course selected (e.g., the impact of apresidential candidateÕs debate on a panel of voters or the impact of an advertisingcampaign on a panel of consumers) as well as trends over time.Experimental study:  study in which the researcher uses random assignment
techniques to allocate social units to different treatment regimes or experiences.
Experiments establish control groups and experimental groups that differ only withrespect to the presence or absence of the effect being studied.  When random
assignment is achieved, and social units have the same experiences in all ways
except for the experimental treatment, and there is a measured difference in out-comes associated with the different treatments, then the researcher has evidencefor concluding that the difference in treatment actually caused the difference inoutcomes.BOX 3.3Top-level Categories of Data in the Archives of theInter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
¥Census Enumerations¥Community, Urban Studies¥Conflict, Aggression, Violence¥Economic Behavior, Attitudes¥Education¥Elites and Leadership¥Geography and Environment¥Government Structures, Policies¥Health Care, Facilities¥Instructional Packages¥International Systems¥Legal Systems¥Legislative, Deliberative Bodies¥Mass Political Behavior, Attitudes¥Organizational Behavior¥Social Indicators¥Social Institutions, BehaviorFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE813.1.2Panel Data
Panel data is especially valuable because it enables answering questionsabout both cross-sectional and time-series variations.  For example, a panel study

of families can address such cross-sectional questions as how childrenÕs access tocomputers in the home is related to their educational performance in school
(holding constant other factors).  It also can address such time-series questions as

whether high school studentsÕ educational performance in school is related to
their access to computers in the home (holding constant other factors) and how
this relationship is affected by the age at which students first had home access.
Panel data also allows application of statistical techniques to control for unob-
served effects that vary across a population.  For example, the kinds of software

and hardware available in the home have changed substantially over the past 15
years and are continuing to do so.  An analysis of how the age at which students

first had home access to computing affects later educational performance in
school must take into account changes over time in the particular computing
resources available.A number of these multipurpose sets of panel data are collected by bothprivate research groups and the federal government.  Federal longitudinal studies

include the Current Employment Statistics program3 and the National Longitudi-
nal Surveys (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1998).The versatility and potential range of uses of multipurpose longitudinal stud-ies are illustrated by the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) administered
by the Institute for Social Research4 at the University of Michigan.  The original
purpose of the PSID, a longitudinal study begun in 1968 of a representative
sample of U.S. individuals and the family units in which they reside, was to study
factors influencing economic variables such as income, wealth, and earnings.
Recently the PSID undertook five major key initiatives: (1) studies of data qual-
ity; (2) a re-contact initiative; (3) coding of data on census tract, mortality, and
relationships; (4) supplements on wealth and health; and (5) early file release
through the Internet. These initiatives have increased the cumulative response
rate of the PSID; shown its continuing value as representing the U.S. population;
added enormously to the stock of knowledge about important areas such as health
and wealth; added detailed information on the residential areas in which respon-
dents live, on mortality, and on relationships among family members; and in-
creased the accessibility of the data to users.  As a consequence of low attrition

rates and the success of re-contact efforts, the sample size grew dramatically over
the period, from about 7,000 core households to almost 8,700.An extension of the PSIDÑthe new parent-child survey component that willinclude time-use questions covering use of computers by children both at home
and in schoolÑillustrates the sort of valuable information on use and impacts ofinformation technology that these extensive surveys can provide (see Box 3.4).Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY3.1.3Data from Time-Use Studies
Data obtained from time-use studies, which can take the form of cross-sectional, panel, or experimental studies, can help answer questions such as what
people do with computers.  Current information on that and related topics is
BOX 3.4Computer Use by Children:  The PSID Parent-Child Survey
The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is currently supplementing itscore data collection with data on parents and their 0- to 12-year-old childrenÑthePSID Parent-Child Survey.  The objective is to provide researchers with a compre-
hensive, nationally representative, and longitudinal database of children and theirfamilies that will enable study of the dynamic process of childhood development.The additions to the core data set include the following:  (1) reliable, age-grad-ed assessments of the cognitive, behavioral, and health status of 3,500 children(including about 550 immigrant children) in 2,500 families, obtained from the moth-
er, a second caregiver, an absent parent, the teacher, the school administrator,and the child; (2) a comprehensive accounting of parental and caregiver time in-puts to children as well as other aspects of the way children and adolescents
spend their time; (3) teacher-reported use of time in elementary and preschoolprograms; and (4) measures of use of resources other than timeÑfor example, thelearning environment in the home, teacher and administrator reports of school
resources, and decennial census-based measurement of neighborhood resourc-es.  (The survey questions may be found at the PSID Web site at <http://www.
umich.edu/~psid/>.)The data include those entered in two home-based time diaries for each childage 0 to 12, covering both school and nonschool days.  There are also data from
teacher-reported school-day diaries for about 75 percent of the children.  The

home-based and school-day diaries include a special coding for computer-relatedactivities.  In the home-based diary children can report time spent with TV, video
games, or computers.  In the school-day diary children
Õs use of time can be report-ed on in terms of their having had computers as the instructional mode.  Among
the parameters considered in the class time segments are the length of time spent;
who was present; whether the teacher was with the child; whether the activityinvolved groups, the whole class, or only the individual; and the teacherÕs assess-ment of the level of the childÕs involvement.  Collection and analysis of data on time
use entered in a diary have been established as a valid method for measuringactual time use.  This approach gives more accurate results than do respondentsÕreports about their allocation of time to different activities over a week.The Parent-Child Survey data will be released to the public in fall 1998, as soonas they are cleaned (erroneous or nonsensical data eliminated) and documented.The data collection will support studies of the ways in which time, money, technol-
ogy, and social capital at the family, school, and neighborhood levels, as well asparental psychological resources and sibling characteristics, are linked to the cog-nitive and behavioral development of children.  The researchers plan to reinterview

the children in 1999, again including time diary measures of computer use.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE83rather limited.  One source of such data is a 1997 Price Waterhouse Consumer
Technology Survey (Price Waterhouse, 1997), which asked 1,010 consumers
how they spent their time using computers.  Twenty-five percent of the consum-

ers had Internet access from the home.  On average, 43 percent of their time using

computers was spent accessing the Internet for research; 34 percent for e-mail; 9
percent for game playing; 5 percent for reading online magazines and newspa-
pers; 4 percent for online chat; 2 percent for online banking; and 1 percent each
for two-way voice communications and online shopping.Although these numbers are suggestive of how computers are used by consum-ers, they  certainly are not definitive, given that they describe computer use only by

adults at a particular point in time.  Ongoing studies that examine users of different

ages and from different population groups, along the lines of the parent-child time-
use studies referred to above, would be very helpful.  It might also prove useful to

use cluster analysis to discover patterns of usage that do not emerge from averages
over predetermined income, class, age, or population groups.3.1.4Metadata
ÒMetadataÓ are data about data, such as compendia or collections of data sets.
The Statistical Abstract of the United States (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1992) and
Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970, BicentennialEdition (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975) are two well-known examples.  A vitally

important part of the research infrastructure, these publications as well as metadata
sites on the World Wide Web such as STAT-USA (<http://www.stat-usa.gov>) are
enormously helpful to researchers, teachers, journalists, and policy makers even
though they generally do not present new data (Box 3.5).Metadata are valuable because they are selective and authoritative, and,moreover, they provide a context that assists users in interpreting the data se-BOX 3.5The Enduring Value of Compilations of DataThere are some who suggest that compendia of data will no longer be useful ornecessary in a computer-intensive future, when anyone with a computer and a
modem will be able to download whatever data series is of interest nearly instan-taneously and often without charge.  These commentators may be correct about
the future ease of access to data in digital format, but they are surely wrong to
suggest the imminent obsolescence of compendia.  Collections of compiled data
will not become redundant when the entire Internet in effect becomes one giganticrepository for statistics.  Indeed, with the decline in the cost of computer power one

can expect the volume of available data to reach unprecedented levels.  This ava-
lanche of alternatives will make research tools like compendia more valuable, notless so.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYlected together with warnings about pitfalls and possible misinterpretations andreferences to the debates and sources containing alternative measures.  Compila-
tion of metadata requires exacting research, intensive review, and refereeing by
the nationÕs and the worldÕs best experts.Unfortunately, in recent years government statistical agencies, operating un-der severe financial constraints, often have given the development of new compen-
dia or the maintenance of existing metadata sets a low priority.  The 
HistoricalStatistics volume, for example, has not been updated or revised for a quarter-
century; several years ago the Bureau of the Census abandoned its plans to take on
this effort.  Instead, the project has been taken up by a private publisher (Cambridge

University Press) in collaboration with a team of more than 70 scholars whose
volunteer contributions of time and expertise indicate how important the revision
of Historical Statistics is to the research community.
5Both public and private foundations devoted to funding research have tendedto resist underwriting the costs of preparing metadata sets, perhaps because they
view such projects as mere digitizing and collating efforts requiring little or no
scholarship or research.6  Although the 
Historical Statistics project may prove to
be commercially viable, efforts to revise and update other less widely used data
compendia may not be able to attract the aid of a private-sector sponsor.  Collabo-

ration between government statistical agencies and experts in academia and in-
dustry in preparing these resources might be facilitated by direct contracts and
grants or through informal partnerships between the agencies and experts from
the scholarly and business communities.3.2AVAILABILITY OF AND ACCESS TO DATA
In general, researchers must conduct their work within limited budgets andalso face the need to preserve long-term continuity in studies while capturing
rapidly changing phenomena.  Owing partly to constraints on federal data gather-

ing (see section 3.2.3 below),  government and academic researchers have been

relatively slow to refocus their data collection efforts on the emerging social and
economic impacts of information technology.  Myriad private-sector groups have

responded more quickly to businessesÕ appetite for timely information about the
technological challenges they confront.  For example, private-sector market re-

search organizations run household or consumer panels that administer monthly
surveys.  Particularly given the time lag required for careful analysis, investiga-

tion of rapid changes in peoplesÕ responses to technology requires that social
scientists have better access to data from a variety of sources.  Social scientists

need better access to each otherÕs data as well as to information that is collectedby the private sector and government.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE853.2.1Data Collected by the Private Sector
The significant private-sector resources devoted to data collection could beof great value to researchers and policy makers if properly leveraged.  Trade

associations such as the Semiconductor Industry Association gather detailed data
on industry output, prices, employment practices, demand forecasts, and manag-
ersÕ key concerns.  Rather than attempting to duplicate or replace these efforts, it
would be useful to coordinate collection of data for research with the data gather-
ing of industry groups.  Resources could be pooled and greater cooperation

fostered among participants.  Respondents to surveys are most diligent, for ex-

ample, when they can expect some return on their efforts.  The prospect of

obtaining feedback, typically in the form of aggregate results, is often an impor-
tant incentive.The fact that a private group is interested in gathering, or already has gath-ered, certain data suggests that the information is perceived by managers as
having real value.  Indeed, in some cases private-sector client groups may be

interested in helping to disseminate the results of research to at least a selected
audience, thus increasing the overall impact of the research.  Often a consulting

firm will broadly release at least a summary of a research study in order to bolster
the firmÕs reputation, although the proprietary nature of the results may inhibitwide dissemination in their full form.A major concern associated with the use of data collected by the privatesector is that private firms often lack academic standards of quality control such
as peer review.  Consultants, trade magazines, and industry groups may be less

than rigorous about survey design, sample selection, or other biases in the data,
and as a result their data may be unreliable or misleading.One approach to improving the reliability of findings is to use data frommultiple independent sources to the extent possible.  For instance, in his study of

information technology and productivity, Lichtenberg (1995) drew on data from
two distinct private-sector sources on firmsÕ capital investment in information
technology.  Although the correlation was far from perfect, the overall economet-

ric results were quite similar regardless of which data source was used, making
the results more credible.Another possible approach to ensuring quality is to work closely with privatedata-collection firms, although  private groups generally want to keep data and

results private and available for the exclusive use of clients.  Nevertheless, in at

least one instance, a team of researchers struck a bargain with a media group,
according to which the research team was to design several annual surveys,
supervise the sampling and data collection, and then conduct the analysis itself.
The media group paid all the costs of this undertaking and turned the data over to
the research team; in exchange, the researchers wrote a sequence of articles
summarizing the latest publishable findings, which were then presented each yearFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYin a special issue based on the surveys.  Such collaboration is currently the exception,
as is private-sector commitment to these sorts of long-term research endeavors.Indeed a difficulty in working with private-sector groups is that they areoften focused on whatever topic is currently Òhot,Ó and yesterday
Õs news, itseems, is of only academic interest.  The practical result is that time series of

more than a few years are difficult to obtain, which makes it difficult to conduct
statistical analysis.  Another drawback is that private-sector data collectors may

well change the definitions used in surveys and the nature of the groups sampled;
again, the focus is often how new data relate to the latest management question,
and not how recently collected data relate to past data.  In fact, many such firms

do not even attempt to preserve data for more than a year once it has been
collected, as Brynjolfsson and Kemerer learned when they sought to estimate the
value that consumers placed on various software features so that they could
determine how the quality-adjusted price of spreadsheets had evolved over time
(Brynjolfsson and Kemerer, 1996).73.2.2The Need for Firm-level Data
As observed by Ronald Coase more than 50 years ago, firms are the domi-nant way of organizing economic activity (Coase, 1937).  Any complete under-

standing of the economic and social impacts of information technology requires
examining activities at the level of individual firms.  Unfortunately, there are

significant gaps in the available data that describe this level, forcing researchers
to make extrapolations from other types of data to try to answer important ques-
tions about the effects of technologiesÕ use.  For instance, one recent research
study developed a theory of how companiesÕ growth would be affected by new
technologies but could only test it using industry-level data.  As the authors

lamented:  ÒEach industry contains thousands to tens of thousands of firms, so itmay seem odd to take industries as firms.  Unfortunately, there are no firm-level

data sets that span the economyÓ (Basu et al., 1997).
Although important insights can be gained from assessing industry-leveldata, trends at this level of aggregation may be quite different from trends at the
level of the firm.  For instance, income inequality could be increasing overall in

the economy even if gaps in wage levels within every individual firm were being
reducedÑif, for example, firms ÒoutsourcedÓ noncore work while specializing in
narrower functions.  In fact, important questions about causality, learning, and

lags in observed effects are best analyzed by studying a cross section of firms
over time.  One-time cross-sectional studies of firms will not suffice.
A few firm-level longitudinal data sets do exist, such as Standard and PoorÕsCompustat databases, which provide extensive financial data on publicly traded
firms, including their sales, stock prices, and employment statistics.  More detailed

firm-level data sets have been assembled in Europe, such as the data set assembled
by the Industriens Utrednings Institut (Industrial Institute for Economic and SocialFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE87Research) in Stockholm, Sweden, and data sets collected by the Institut frWirtschaftsforschung  (Institute for Economic Research) in Munich, Germany.
Many more finely focused firm-level data sets also exist for specific indus-tries and purposes in the United States and abroad.  One is the data set derived

from a minimum wage survey of U.S. firms.  Each of these data sets has proven

useful for addressing certain research questions.  However, very few of the firm-
level panel studies include data on information technology or important organiza-
tional variables.  In addition, the results of studies that examine smaller, more

focused samples of firms within specific industries cannot be readily generalized
to other industries or the broader economy.An economical approach to assembling a broader firm-level data set is tobuild on existing data sets and link them together.  For instance, to address

questions about information technology and productivity, Brynjolfsson and Hitt
(1996) combined data from Compustat with private-sector data from Interna-
tional Data Corporation as well as data obtained in their own surveys.  This

approach enabled them to identify a significant correlation between use of infor-
mation technology and firm-level productivity that could not be discerned from
conflicting case studies or coarser, economy-wide data.A number of lessons can be learned from prior work with firm-level data:¥Firms or business units are always changing and reorganizing, thus pos-ing challenges for measurement and data collection parallel to those arising from
changes in the set of individuals that constitute a household in studies such as the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics.  Of course if they are followed, the spinoffs of

changes are also potentially very interesting (e.g., in the study of the formation of
new enterprises).¥Firms need feedback.  For instance, most firms greatly value informationthat enables benchmarking:  knowledge of where one
Õs own firm stands in rela-tion to an aggregate of anonymous peers.  The opportunity to obtain such infor-

mation was the main incentive provided for respondents in the case of the Insti-
tute for Economic Research study.  Respondents in such data collection surveys

could even be given access to the database itself, although this approach can
substantially increase the workload associated with maintaining the data.8¥Firms are often very heterogeneous.  As a result, for some purposes it
makes sense to focus on firms that have something in common, such as an
industry group.  In other cases, it may be best to seek multiple respondents from

the same firm, each of whom may have a different perspective.  Even when one

individual is compiling the data for a firm, it must be understood that the informa-
tion may derive from a set of individuals with knowledge of different functional
areas of the enterprise.Once firm-level data are compiled, they can often be usefully linked to dataat other levels of aggregation, both higher and lower.  For instance, industry- and
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYfirm-level data can be combined to address such questions as whether productiveuse of information technology  correlates with one type of organizational struc-

ture in retailing and a different one in high-technology manufacturing.In other cases additional insights may be gained by combining firm-leveldata with finer-detail information about individuals in those firms.  This ap-

proachÑconstructing a  study covering a sample of firms that also includes data
on a sample of individual employees in those firmsÑwas used with remarkablesuccess by Greenan and Mairesse (1996) to measure the correlation between
computerization and productivity in firms.  Although Greenan and Mairesse had

complete production data for a large sample of French firms that enabled them to
estimate a variety of productivity measures, they did not have any direct data on
the extent of computerization at those firms.  Instead, they combined data from a

separate survey of individuals, which asked whether they used a computer at
work and what the name of their employer was, with the firm-level production
data.  They found that many of the firms in their first data set matched with one or

more individuals in the second data set.  If the sampled employee used a com-

puter at work, this was evidence that the firm was more computerized than its
competitors.  Although matching the data in this way was very difficult and

provided a fairly weak indication of the effects of computerization, the research-
ers were able to establish an overall positive correlation between computerization
and productivity for the French firms.3.2.3Data Collected by Government
The federal government collects a vast amount of data, much of which isreadily available via printed or computer-accessible media.  Among the advan-

tages of federally collected data are its high quality and objectivity, its accessibil-
ity for use by the public, and its free availability as material in the public domain
that can be used without raising intellectual property concerns.  The FedStats

Web site (<http://www.fedstats.gov>), launched in 1997 by the Federal Inter-
agency Council on Statistical Policy, is a directory of data collected by the U.S.
federal government and available online.Nevertheless, the availability of data has been curtailed in recent years due tobudget cuts, government reforms, and policy changes.  Overall federal govern-

ment collection of data is restricted by both the statutory goals of the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1995 and Administration targets for reducing the burden of
collecting information.  Structural and regulatory changes have also reduced the

availability of standardized, public data describing the telecommunications sec-
tor.  For example, deregulation of the telecommunications industry has reduced

the quantity and availability of data on telephony, and deregulation of terminal
equipment (e.g., telephone instruments) led the FCC to stop collecting data on
such equipment.  In addition, following privatization of the Internet and the end

of government funding for the NSF-run Internet backbone, data were no longerFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE89available on the size and characteristics of Internet traffic.9  It is ironic that the
communications industry, an object of intense scrutiny by policy makers, is more
poorly measured now than in the past.In ways that are important to setting communications policy, efforts to re-duce the data collection burdens imposed by the federal government and to
reduce the role of regulation in  telecommunications are at odds with the need for

good data on the telecommunications infrastructure and the changing nature of
consumer use of new technologies.  If social science researchers are to gain

insights into what information technology-related changes are taking place within
the home, how Americans invent ways to interconnect, and how access to new
communications media can affect economic growth and civic participation, then
more, not less, statistical data on the penetration and uses of media needs to be
collected, starting with use of the telephone (Box 3.6).3.3NEW TYPES OF DATA
3.3.1Documenting the Effects of Technology Deployment
Many social institutionsÑschools, libraries, hospitals, municipalitiesÑaregoing online.  Institutions may collect and report basic measures of use, such as

the number of times their online resources are accessed (ÒhitsÓ), but often localresources are not devoted to using such information to systematically document
the dynamics and the social and individual effects of system deployments.Individual institutions typically lack the time, expertise, motivation, andperspective to document the dynamics and effects of change resulting from the
use of information technology.  Indeed even the first step, measuring access to

and use of online resources, is a nontrivial problem.  Since each component of a

Web page (a graphic, text, or other item) will result in a separate hit, hits as a
measure of use will give different counts depending on the details of the contentÕsdesign.  Collecting meaningful data on use, especially where cross-comparisons

are to be made, depends on systematically defining such things as visitors, users,
and the like.10 Externally supported comparative research projects exploring the effects of
technology deployments could be enormously useful to at least four audiences.
Policy makers and citizens would be able to understand the benefits (and costs) of
online access to information and online interactions with social institutions.  Tech-
nologists and managers would be able to understand the effects of different technol-
ogy configurations and deployment strategies.  Scholars would be able to test and

revise existing theories of institutional participation with new kinds of data.  Future

generations of scholars and citizens would be able to study this transition period, as
institutions experiment with different modes of online service.Consider a specific example.  The Gates Library Foundation, established byMicrosoft Chief Executive Officer Bill Gates, will provide $200 million, matchedFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 3.6Challenges of Collecting Data on the Use of InformationTechnology: Telephones, the Census, and the CurrentPopulation SurveyTo understand the difficulties in answering the simplest questions about theuse of information technology, consider basic data on household use of telephony.Households that have telephone service constitute the conceptual basis for allmeasures of universal service.  The most widely used measure is the percentage

of households with telephone serviceÑsometimes referred to as telephone Òpene-tration.Ó1  Yet this measure, though seemingly straightforward, can harbor multiple
definitions, and studies designed to measure it are subject to errors.Prior to the 1980 census, precise calculation of telephone subscribershipÑi.e.,one definition of penetrationÑwas of little concern.  In the days of one phone, one
household, one service provider, telephone penetration was traditionally measured
by dividing the number of residential telephone lines by the number of households.As households added second lines and as the number of second homes increased,measurement based on the number of residential lines became subject to a large
margin of error.  By 1980, the penetration according to the traditional measure
(residential lines divided by the number of households) reached 96 percent in theUnited States, whereas the number of households that reported having telephones
in the 1980 census lagged at 92.9 percent.In 1980, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requested that theBureau of the Census include questions on telephone penetration as part of its
Current Population Survey (CPS), which monitors demographic trends betweendecennial censuses.  For national studies, use of the CPS has several advantag-
es:  (1) it is conducted every month by an independent and expert agency, (2) thesample is large, and (3) the questions are consistent.  Thus, changes in the results
can be compared over time with a great deal of confidence.Unfortunately, however, the telephone penetration results of the CPS cannotbe directly compared with the figures on telephone penetration obtained in eitherthe 1980 or 1990 census.  Differences in the sampling and survey methodologies

are a source of discrepancies.Although the CPS is conducted every month, not all of the questions are includ-ed every month.  Since the sample is staggered, the information that is reported for
1According to the Bureau of the Census, ÒA household includes the related family members and all the unre-lated persons, if any, such as lodgers, foster children, wards, or employees who share the housing unit.  A
person living alone in a housing unit, or a group of unrelated persons sharing a housing unit as partners, is
also counted as a household. . . . The figures for number of households are not strictly comparable from yearto year.  In general the definitions of household for 1790, 1900, 1930, 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970 are similar.
Very minor differences result from the fact that in 1950, 1960, and 1970, housing units with 5 or more lodgers

were excluded from the count of households, whereas in 1930 and 1940, housing units with 11 lodgers ormore were excluded, and in 1790 and in 1900, no precise definition of the maximum allowable number of
lodgers was made.Ó  (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975)
According to the CPS, ÒA household consists of all the persons who occupy a house, an apartment, orother group of rooms, or a room, which constitutes a housing unit. A group of rooms or a single room isregarded as a housing unit when it is occupied as separate living quarters; that is, when the occupants do not
live and eat with any other person in the structure, and when there is direct access from the outside througha common hall. The count of households excludes persons living in group quarters, such as rooming houses,military barracks, and institutions. Inmates of institutions (mental hospitals, rest homes, correctional institu-
tions, etc.) are not included in the survey.Ó (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1993)
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE91by $200 million in software provided by Microsoft, to connect the nationÕs publiclibraries to the Internet (Lohr, 1997).  Since not all libraries will go online at the
same time, the program offers the opportunity for a range of comparisons.  Lon-

gitudinal studies could document changes in a variety of social welfare indicators
(perhaps, for example, changes in circulation rates, civic participation, and con-
sumer awareness) as a function of Internet access and use.  More pragmatically,

they could document how different deployment strategies (e.g., location of Internet
stations; access and use policies; tie-ins with school, civic group, or municipal
any given month actually reflects responses over the preceding 4 months.  Aggre-
gated summaries of the responses are reported to the FCC, based on the surveysconducted through March, July, and November of each year.  Also, the questions

in the CPS were written long before the breakup of AT&T and reflect realities of themonopoly era, when having a telephone also meant having service.  But in the
post-divestiture era encompassed by the 1990 census, the question, Is there a
telephone in this house/apartment? inadvertently focuses on the telephone as aninstrument.  Instead the real issue is the presence of telephone service.  There-
fore, one potential for statistical bias stems from a literal response to this question.
In the case of the census, the respondent could truthfully answer yes to the ques-tion and confound the results with an upward bias; and since there is no follow-upto the census, the upward bias would go uncorrected.  In the case of the CPS,

follow-up questions and surveys may correct for this bias;2 however, they contain
the potential for a downward bias.  The follow-up, a telephone call repeated in
subsequent months, will catch a household that originally had telephone service
and lost it, but will not catch a household that did not originally have telephoneservice but subsequently received itÑthus, the downward bias.For the researcher, another difficulty is that the census is not strictly compara-ble with the CPS.  The differencesÑsome correctable, some inherentÑresult in agap in the final numbers.  According to the 1990 census, 94.8 percent of all house-
holds in the United States had telephones.  However, CPS data showed penetra-

tion at 93.3 percent for 1990.  This difference, which represents nearly 1.4 million
households, is statistically significant and appears to indicate that the CPS may beon the low side of the actual penetration rate, whereas the census may be on the
high side.Collecting comparable data on the use of the Internet, e-mail, or other newinformation technology, and measuring the penetration of telecommunications inan increasingly heterogeneous environment, clearly present a substantial chal-lenge.  For example, reliance on CPS data would carry with it an inherent bias

against the use of wireless and mobile services for telecommunications purposes.Address-based measurement excludes the presence of new wireless technologiesif they are used as substitutes for wired service to the home.2 The Current Population Survey includes households in the survey for the same 4 consecutive months in 2
consecutive years.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYgovernment programs) were associated with patterns of use and effects.  These
findings would be extremely useful to the later-deploying libraries.Similar longitudinal comparative studies should be designed and conductedto understand the dynamics and effects of increasing numbers of other social
institutions going online.  Projects that deploy new technologies, especially pro-

totypes, should be encouraged to build in the capture of such data.  Digital

libraries, distance learning, and efforts to use information technology to enhance
government services (Òdigital governmentÓ) would all be valuable areas in whichto incorporate study of the sociological and economic impacts of information
technology.3.3.2Data on Social Interactions from the Internet
A great deal of social behavior is visible on the Internet.  For example, one
can see how many Usenet groups or public distribution lists exist on what topics,
and what the level of activity is on each.  Snapshots of publicly accessible social
behavior could be captured and made available to social scientists studying group
behavior on the Internet.11  It might even be possible to study the complete
corpus of communication within a group of Usenet news or e-mail Òlistserves.ÓHowever, collecting data from the Internet presents technological difficulties and
may also raise legal questions.12In addition to Usenet groups and e-mail lists, another source of data isillustrated by Kaminer (1997), who has used the UNIX logs of natural scientists
to obtain data on their use of a variety of Internet features (telnet, FTP, and so on).
Using a multivariate approach, he has shown that increased use of the Internet
increases a scholarÕs research productivity (publications per year), other thingsbeing held constant.13Systematic longitudinal data on group behavior on the Internet would be avaluable resource for social scientists studying the formation and diffusion of
electronic communities.  Such data are in some measure the electronic equivalent

of the town records that historians have used to document and understand 19th-
century community formation and development.  But these electronic data on

Internet behavior are ephemeral.  Unless they are collected and archived now,

they will disappear, and researchers will have no systematic record of how group
behavior on the Internet is growing and evolving over time.  What databases

should be developed to support research in these areas?Tools used to analyze Usenet and e-mail data might also be applied to Web-based systems and emerging software systems for collaboration.  Application of

these approaches to new technologies will in some cases require a new focus on
data collection methodologies.  For example, methods are needed to factor out

distorting artifacts such as the use of proxies to access Web resources or the
activities of indexing robots.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE933.3.3The Internet as a Window into How Commercial
Transactions Are ConductedIn his position paper ÒElectronic InteractionsÓ in Appendix B of this volume,
Paul Resnick suggests that the Internet would also permit study of a number of
interesting topics in how commercial transactions are conducted.  For example:
¥Recommendations and referrals can help people to find interesting infor-mation and vendors.  There is a need for continued research on techniques for
gathering and processing recommendations (this is sometimes called collabora-tive filtering).  Compilation of 
Ògrand challengeÓ data sets of recommendations
would help this field advance.¥The structure of negotiation protocols and the availability of informationabout past behavior of participants will affect the kinds of outcomes that are
possible.  Economists have theoretical results regarding many simplified nego-
tiation scenarios, but there is a need for interdisciplinary research to apply andextend these results to practical problems of protocol design.¥In the transaction consummation phase, much effort has focused on se-cure payment systems.  Some transactions, however, require a physical con-
summation (mailing of a product, for example) and hence must rely on trust in
some form.  Research can explore the role of reputations in creating trustworthy
(though not completely secure) contract consummation.  Such transactions mayalso have lower transaction costs than secure payment systems, even in the
realm of purely electronic transactions.3.4TIME AND TOOLS FOR GATHERING AND
INTERPRETING DATA3.4.1The Time Required to Do Good Social Science
It is important to recognize that systematically gathering and analyzing so-cial science data are very time-intensive tasks.  The need for time can lead to

difficulties in synchronization of attention to the object of study, information
technology effects, and ways of studying information technology.  Although

information technology is developing at a very rapid pace, the speed at which
social science data have been acquired has changed little in the last few decades.
Analysis of quantitative data, after it has been acquired and prepared, has cer-
tainly been speeded up by the widespread use of computers, but analysis of
qualitative data has been much less affected.A few examples illustrate the time required for data collection and analysis.¥As previous research efforts have shown (see, e.g., Orr, 1990), it can takesignificant time for a researcher to enter a community, gain the trust of its mem-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYbers, and begin to understand how community members interact with one anotherand with technology.¥The Homenet field experiment to understand how families use Internettechnology was begun in 1994 and is still under way (Kraut et al., 1996; Kiesler
et al., 1997).  It has taken significant time to recruit families (both those who will

receive technology and those who will serve as a control group), to acquire and
deploy technology and train people to use it, and to administer questionnaires and
conduct interviews and home visits.  Data collection must be repeated at regular

intervals in order to investigate changes over time.  The systems that are deployed

in the Homenet study are not yet obsolete, but they are aging.  If researchers give

participants newer technology, they compromise their understanding of how
peoplesÕ use of a particular technology changes over time.  If they do not give
participants newer technology, their findings, particularly any negative ones, can
be dismissed because they were based on old technology.¥It takes at least 6 months after an interface is implemented, debugged, andregarded as stable to conduct a laboratory study of peoplesÕ social behavior in
responding to that interface (e.g., Sproull et al., 1996).  Thus interface designers

can develop new interfaces more rapidly than researchers can collect data on
social responses to each particular interface.These observations suggest that some mismatch is unavoidable between tech-nology development and social science research.  Researchers studying the ef-

fects of widespread deployment of a new technology must wait for widespread
deployment to occur.  By that time, however, the technology is no longer new.

For example, although electronic mail was invented in the 1960s, the first re-
search on e-mailÕs effects on patterns of organizational communication was notpublished until 20 years later, when noticeable numbers of organizations were
beginning to use it routinely.In addition to lags imposed by the need to wait until technology is widelydeployed, there are the normal delays inherent in social science research.  Data

collection and careful data set preparation take time, especially for large data
sets.Sometimes the mismatch between development of technology and researchon its effects can lead to criticism of studies for relying on older data, even
though more recent data of equivalent quality was not available.  Examples

include the RAND CorporationÕs analysis of home access to computing, whichis based on the 1989 and 1993 Current Population Survey data (Anderson et al.,
1995), and AttewellÕs analysis of the effects of home computers on educationalperformance, which is based on data from the 1988 National Educational Lon-
gitudinal Study (Attewell and Battle, 1997).  However, in many cases the

mismatch does not matter.  For example, researchers investigating the impacts

of alternative models of investment in technology would find data on corporate
expenditures on information technology enormously usefulÑsuch data wouldFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE95certainly be treated as proprietary when current but after a relatively brief timewould be considered obsolete for corporate decision-making purposes.  In some

cases, such as historical studies, older data is better.  For instance, data about

early adopters of technology can certainly be useful in better exploring advan-
tages that may accrue to early entrants in an industry (the so-called first-mover
advantage).3.4.2Appropriate Subject Pools and Instrumentation
In addition to benefiting from improved access to data (see section 3.2 above),
social scientists exploring the impacts of information technology also would
benefit from better access to appropriate subject pools for behavioral studies.
Most university-based subject pools, which do not operate during exam periods
and breaks, are best suited to short-term studies of the behavior of individuals.
To study the effects of technologies designed for groups, researchers need access
to groups.  Creating groups composed of strangers in an experimental laboratory
will not allow researchers to understand the long-term effects of technologies that
require or cause substantial changes in organizational procedures governing how
people work together.In addition, social scientists need new instrumentation for more rapid datacollection.  Data collection may be an area for fruitful collaboration between

social scientists and technologists exploring, for example, Internet-based survey
and interviewing technologies.  Use of these new sources of data would also

require attention to the privacy concerns they raise.3.5APPROACHES TO MEETING REQUIREMENTS FOR DATA
Based on discussions at the workshop and in position papers submitted byworkshop participants, the workshop steering committee developed a set of ap-
proaches to meeting requirements for data needed to advance research on the
impacts of information technology.  Listed below, these approaches are intended

as illustrations of ways to enable researchersÑin concert with government andthe private sectorÑto address the need for more extensive, more timely, and newsources of data.¥Making data related to the social and economic impacts of computingand communications available to the research community through a clear-
inghouse.  A clearinghouse would provide documentation and archiving of data
sets (but not an evaluation of data quality).  It might be necessary to develop

incentives for researchers to contribute data to this archive.  Journals could make

submission of data to an appropriate clearinghouse a requirement for publication.
For example, journals publishing research in the biological sciences typically
require authors to deposit genetic sequences and similar data in publicly acces-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYsible databases such as the National Institutes of Health genetic sequence data-base, GenBank.14  The terms of federal research funding could also support
efforts for a clearinghouse.  For example, the National Science Foundation ex-

pects grantees to share research data with other researchers (with safeguards in
place for the rights of experimental subjects and the like).  Depositing research

data in a clearinghouse could be an efficient way for researchers to satisfy this
expectation.  An explicit expectation that data be deposited in appropriate data

banks could also be added as a condition of receiving grants.In addition, a clearinghouse could encourage comparabilityÑin both formatand research methodologyÑacross data sets and the reuse of data, especially ifacademic researchers and also commercial data sources were to collaborate on
defining standards.A possible model for such a clearinghouse is the Inter-university Consortium forPolitical and Social Research located within the Institute for Social Research at the
University of Michigan.  Funded by subscribing member institutions, it provides

access to a large archive of computerized social science data.  A clearinghouse could
also derive support from grant funding and charges for access to data sets.Both the archiving and standards-setting functions would enable increasedsecondary use of data sets, which would of course depend on the social science
communityÕs ease of access to data in a clearinghouse. Joint work between socialscientists and technologists could lead to building new kinds of data clearing-
houses and new tools and techniques for making use of them.¥Exploring ways for researchers to gain access to private-sector data.Commercial data on firmsÕ capital investment in information technology is of
considerable value to researchers examining the social and economic impacts of
computing and communications.  Consultant, trade magazine, and industry group

data is another valuable resource (see section 3.2.1).Overall, however, several factors impede collaboration between researchersand the private sector.  First, data on individual firms is often protected because

of competitive concerns.  One remedy is for social scientists and the commercial
sector to explore aggregation and other ways of hiding individual corporate iden-
tity.  Second, incentives for collaboration by private-sector firms typically are

lacking, although one way of providing them is to establish an agreement whereby
researchers who use private-sector data then make research results available in a
useful form to the firm or organization that supplied the data.  To both protect

proprietary interests and increase incentives, strengthened institutional relation-
ships between the research community and industry associations would be valu-
able.It is important to note that private-sector sources of data may have a number ofpossible limitations, including a lack of consistent definitions and methods over
time and the tendency of private-sector firms to preserve only the current informa-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE97tion.  In many of these cases closer working relationships between researchers andthe private sector can provide solutions (see section 3.2.1 for examples).¥Increasing data collection efforts by government.  As described in
section 3.2.3, deregulation and privatization can reduce the quantity and avail-
ability of data on telecommunications and computing at a time when more, not
less, information is needed to guide policy decisions.  Budget constraints and

government reforms to reduce information gathering burdens also have reduced
data collection.  In addition, fewer resources have been available for analyzing

data and for making the data publicly available.Workshop participants noted that loss of such data sources inhibits socialscience explorations of the social and economic impacts of computing and com-
munications.  At a minimum, government decision makers need to be aware of

the cost of losing such data.  In some cases they may be able to find other ways to

gather valuable information.  For example, additional questions might be added

to the Census BureauÕs Current Population Survey (CPS) to measure wirelessphone or Internet use (see Box 3.6), as was done by the National Telecommuni-
cations and Information Administration and described in the report ÒFallingThrough the NetÓ (NTIA, 1995), which reported on computer and modem use
and explored the demographics of telephone, computer, and modem use in terms
of population density, ethnicity, age, and economic status.  However, this ap-

proach has been taken only once, because it is expensive to add supplemental
questions to the CPS.¥Exploring the development of new multipurpose data sets by the re-search community.  To what extent can multipurpose data sets based on suchtechniques as user diaries prove helpful to researchers examining the social im-
pacts of information technology?  Careful observational methods have been criti-

cal to specific deep organizational studies in such areas as computer-supported
cooperative work (e.g., the study of Xerox technicians described in section 2.3.4).
However such research has not typically relied on multipurpose public data sets.
As the body of observational data grows, it may be possible to start development
of such nonquantitative multipurpose data sets.  A precedent is the Human Rela-
tions Area Files at Yale University, which consist of ethnographic extracts orga-
nized in various categories.  Given a rich enough corpus of observational data in
a given domain, it may prove both possible and valuable to invest in the creation
of new, qualitative multipurpose data sets.¥Establishing stronger ties with industry associations to facilitate col-laborative research.  In general, proprietary concerns are likely to impede col-
laboration between academic researchers and private-sector firms.  Yet to explore

topics such as the relationships among organizational structure, the use of infor-
mation technology, and productivity, researchers need access to firm- and pro-
cess-level data that typically is not public.  Nonpublic data relevant to other social

and economic research includes details of pricing, employment, demand fore-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcasts, and the like.  Lack of experience in collaborative work between the two
communities is another barrier.Industry associations are a possible bridge between the communities, toallow each to benefit from the resources of the other.  One approach might

involve sponsorship of forums where academics and industry people can meet to
discuss common interests.  These events can create serendipitous opportunities

for cooperation that could not have been predicted or planned in formal brokering.
Industry associations might also help connect the academic and industry commu-
nities in more formal roles such as the following:ÑAs an intermediary that aggregates or otherwise makes proprietary dataanonymous so that firms will be more comfortable about providing it to
outsiders;ÑAs a matchmaker in bringing together industry and the research com-munity to work on projects of mutual interest;ÑAs a depository for research results based on industry-provided data (ifresearch reports are readily available to them, industries may be more willing
to provide data); andÑAs a sponsor of research on topics of interest to the membership.Note that limited financial resources may place constraints on such col-laboration.  Since trade associations are unlikely to have in-house resources

to cover the administrative costs of a research study collaboration, it may
prove necessary to structure such a project on a break-even basis for the
association.
¥Exploring, in workshop sessions, uses of the Internet as a source ofdata on social interactions.  As described in section 3.3.2, the Internet canprovide a wealth of information on group and community behavior.  It would be

very useful to convene a workshop of technologists, social scientists, academics,
and representatives of commercial interests to discuss and resolve such issues as
the following:ÑHow to develop indicators of group behavior that are publicly availableon the Internet;ÑThe feasibility of commercial services providing data such as those onuse of their forums and chat rooms;ÑAppropriate sampling and estimation procedures;ÑAppropriate publishing and archiving procedures;ÑStandards for data collection and exchange; andÑHow to establish relationships with possible providers of information(e.g., search engines or newsgroup archives).Such an endeavor would also need to address ethical and privacy issuesassociated with data collection, archiving, and reporting as well as the pro-
prietary interests of commercial Internet services.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATAÑTHE BASIS FOR NEW KNOWLEDGE99NOTES1.Many of them were developed for other users, but some have been able to provide useful input
to social science studies of information technology.  Multipurpose data sets are often collected
by organizations dedicated to this task such as the Institute for Social Research (ISR) at the
University of Michigan (see <http://www.isr.umich.edu/>), the National Opinion Research Cen-ter at the University of Chicago (see <http://www.norc.uchicago.edu>), and several other re-search organizations. Many such multipurpose data sets are maintained by organizations like
the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR, see <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/>), which is supported by member-university subscriptions.  ICPSR, located
within the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan, is a membership-based,
not-for-profit organization serving member colleges and universities in the United States andabroad.  Data sets can be found online at <http://www.isr.umich.edu>.
2.For details see the project description and related documents available online at <http://www.
INDEX.berkeley.edu>.3.Data sets and reports are available online at <http://stats.bls.gov/cesprog.htm>.
4.Information on the Institute for Social Research can be found online at <http://www.icpsr.
umich.edu>.5.Work to prepare the new edition (Susan Carter, Scott Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead,
Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright, editors, Historical Statistics of the United States from Colo-nial Times to the Present, Millennial Edition, Cambridge University Press, in preparation,scheduled for publication in 2000) has received partial support from the National ScienceFoundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.6.A workshop participant noted that university and college promotion committees seem to give
little weight to faculty contributions to such projects, perhaps because they, too, share thewidespread misunderstanding of the value of metadata and the scholarly research required tocreate a metadata set.7.Brynjolfsson and Kemerer knew that 
Software Digest, published by National Software TestingLabs (NSTL), a private firm, had regularly reviewed all the major spreadsheet products andconducted detailed feature evaluations. By matching these data with price data from Dataquest,another private firm, they could estimate the values that consumers placed on various software
features.The difficulties came in trying to get historical data. Only intervention by the president ofDataquest following a chance meeting at an industry dinner finally led the researchers to his-
torical data on prices. Obtaining data on software features required a different sort of interven-tion.  To save on storage space, NSTL had simply erased all information regarding previous
yearsÕ spreadsheet products because there was no market for that information.  Repeated que-
ries to various managers of the firm, as well as efforts to find the back issues in libraries, wereunsuccessful.  Finally, a mid-level employee of the firm came to the rescue. On his own
initiative, he had stockpiled back issues of Software Digest in the basement of his home, along
with thousands of other magazines. He agreed to ship several large boxes with the relevantissues to Brynjolfsson and Kemerer, where they were duly re-entered into a computer database.8.Dealing with people
Õs inquiries for data can be time consuming because people often needdifferent data formats, more detailed documentation, and follow-up explanations of what thevariables mean; make requests for related data; and have other requirements that need attention.At a minimum, such database support activities involve one or more conversations with people
at each participating company.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY9.The NSFNET backbone was originally the core of the Internet, and thus much of the total
Internet traffic passed through it, making useful measurement of total Internet traffic possible.When this backbone was replaced by a new architecture, data on total traffic became harder to
acquire.  Also, the architecture of the backbone had been designed to allow more measurements
than are now possible with the off-the-shelf router components that were used post-NSFNET,in order to satisfy deliverables of traffic measurement in the agreement with NSF.10.Web advertising is one area where an effort has been made to develop useful definitions of
access and use (Novak and Hoffman, 1997).11.For several years in the early 1990s Brian Reid, an employee of the Digital Equipment Corpo-
ration, collected and posted on the Internet data on Usenet groups.  Each month he used a
sampling plan to report estimates of Usenet readership and message traffic for all Usenetgroups.  Researchers were able to use ReidÕs data to track growth in overall group membershipover time, track the relative popularity of different groups at any one point in time, or identifygroups worthy of further study (e.g., Sproull and Faraj, 1995).  Reid stopped collecting and
reporting Usenet data in June 1995.12.Reid
Õs study of Usenet traffic is a case in point.  One reason Reid stopped collecting Usenet
data was that its relevance declined when the World Wide Web was invented and the ratio ofquality material to junk declined markedly.  Another reason was the evolution of the way

Usenet data was distributed, which made the studyÕs measurement techniques increasinglystatistically meaningless.  However, the ultimate reason for ending the study was not techno-
logical, but rather was related to the threat of legal challenges over privacy issues surrounding
collection, analysis, and publication of the Usenet data (personal communication, Brian Reid,Digital Equipment Corporation, 1998).13.This work replicated findings by Hesse et al. (1993) derived from analysis of electronic survey
data.14.GenBank, an annotated collection of publicly available DNA sequences, is part of the Interna-
tional Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration, which comprises the DNA Data Bank ofJapan, the European Molecular Biology Laboratory data library, and GenBank.  More informa-tion on GenBank may be found online at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Web/Genbank/
index.html>.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR FOSTERING INTERDISCIPLINARY REASEARCH1011014Options for Fostering InterdisciplinaryResearch and Improving Access to Results
Use of information technology within the workplace, the home, and commu-nity and other organizations continues to evolve at a rapid pace.  Mainframe

computers, desktop personal computers, and, more recently, computers linked by
both corporate networks and the Internet all have changed the nature of commu-
nication.  At least in some segments of society, use of computing and communi-

cations technology is rapidly becoming a mass phenomenon.  The implications

are now topics for consideration in a variety of contexts.Advances in identification and application of social and economic principlesbasic to understanding interrelationships between information technology and
society are important to those who make public policy as well as to those who
design, deploy, and use the technology.  Yet to help guide such efforts, there is

today relatively little interdisciplinary research, as well as insufficient dialog
between the technology and social science communities and insufficient contact
between the research and public policy communities.  Sociologists collaborate

relatively infrequently with economists, much less with computer scientists.  As

interactions at the June 1997 workshop suggested, however, a collaborative ap-
proach to problem solving can lead to a clearer understanding of where technol-
ogy is moving and what the social impacts may be.  Few social scientists, for

example, possess the detailed technical knowledge required to build useful data
sets from the new kinds of data available from the Internet.  But social scientists

and computer scientists working collaboratively could develop tools and tech-
niques that would make such data logs available to a wider community of social
scientists for use in their research.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBased on discussions at the June 1997 workshop and points in the positionpapers submitted by its participants, the workshop steering committee identified
several options for fostering interdisciplinary research and making the results of
such research more accessible to the public and policy makers.4.1ENCOURAGING INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
AND COLLABORATIONDiscussion at the June 1997 workshop indicated that there is a great deal ofinterest in and value to be gained from pursuing interdisciplinary work.  Although

some regularly held conferences such as the Telecommunications Policy Re-
search Conference or the Aspen Institute Telecommunications Roundtable are
essentially interdisciplinary, workshop participants observed that established
means of facilitating working relationships among social and computer scientists
are currently lacking.  Approaches suggested for encouraging fruitful interactions

included interdisciplinary workshops, curricula, and fellowships.¥Interdisciplinary workshops.
  Participants in the June 1997 workshop
remarked on the value of convening researchers from various relevant field to
explore interdisciplinary approaches to studying the impacts of computing and
communications.  Workshops and summer programs in a number of interdiscipli-

nary areas would be useful in fostering increased collaborative work.  At a mini-
mum, workshops bringing together investigators previously funded by the Na-
tional Science Foundation (NSF) to do joint technology/social science work might

be convened.  Expanding the focus of such workshops to include people from

industry who could comment on non-NSF-funded collaborative research could
also prove useful.  In addition, it is important for funding agencies to be able to

recognize good interdisciplinary work and for industry managers and academic
principal investigators to be able to understand some of the management chal-
lenges involvedÑopportunities for cross-communication that interdisciplinary
workshops can facilitate.¥Interdisciplinary curricula.
  Workshop participants suggested that seri-ous interdisciplinary work might also be promoted by preparing students directly
to engage in it.  For example, although computer science curricula already in-

clude courses in performance analysis, the systems analyzed are not typically
embedded in large-scale social systems, and so joint course development for
analysis of the performance of complex systems could produce useful results.
This step might be taken initially in the context of postdoctoral training and
masterÕs degree programs, given that currently not enough is known to be codi-
fied at the textbook level.  It was observed that development of interdisciplinary

curricula would help to strengthen the interdisciplinary research community as
well as raise awareness of interdisciplinary issues in computer science and engi-
neering and social science fields.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR FOSTERING INTERDISCIPLINARY REASEARCH103¥Interdisciplinary fellowships.  Also noted by workshop participants was
the potential value of having graduate or postgraduate fellowships for social
scientists interested in becoming familiar with social and economic aspects of
information technology and for computer scientists interested in exploring social
issues arising from the use of information technology.   Such fellowships would

encourage the intellectual cross-fertilization and professional networking crucial
to fostering productive research relationships.4.2FUNDING TO STRENGTHEN
INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCHArising from the June 1997 workshop activities were a number of sugges-tions for leveraging funding so as to strengthen cross-disciplinary work in com-
puter and social sciences.¥Evaluation of large technology system research proposals that recog-nize the value of including an interdisciplinary component.  Some workshop
participants expressed the view that behavioral, social, legal, and economic im-
plications of the design and deployment of  technology should be considered in

evaluating proposals for research on large technology systems.  Interdisciplinary
research has for some time been a significant component of a number of NSF-
sponsored computer science research programs, such as the national supercom-
puting centers.  Increasingly, support for interdisciplinary research has come to

include a social science component.  For example, the second phase of the

multiagency-supported Digital Libraries Initiative1 includes a 
Òhuman-centeredÓresearch component to investigate both the impacts of digital libraries and ways
of enhancing the potential uses of such libraries.  Part of this component covers

research on the long-term social, behavioral, and economic implications and
effects of new digital library capabilities.¥Synergistic use of major research programs that build or deploy pro-totypes of computing and communications systems for use by individuals or
organizations.  As workshop participants suggested, research programs that field
new information technology offer important opportunities to improve under-
standing of the technologyÕs impacts and to enhance the organizational or soci-etal outcomes of the research.  Funding that targets investigating the social im-

pact of new technologies has a precedent in the Department of Energy and
National Institutes of Health set-asides of about 3 to 5 percent of the total re-
search budget of the Human Genome Project to fund research and public educa-
tion on ethical, legal, and social issues (ELSI) related to the project.  Although

computing and communications research is not centered in a single very large
research effort like the Human Genome Project, overall advances in computing
and communications are, as workshop participants noted, posing societal chal-
lenges of a similar magnitude.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY¥Collaboration with private foundations.  In considering ways to
strengthen interdisciplinary research, workshop participants observed that gov-
ernment agencies are not the only source of research funding.  Private founda-

tions, such as the Kellogg, Markle, Mellon, and Sloan foundations, have become
interested in the economic and social impacts of using information technology
and have funded some related initiatives.   Moreover, important opportunities for

collaboration lie at the intersection of basic research questions, which are often
addressed by government investment in the development of new scientific and
engineering knowledge, and pressing social needs, which the grants and pro-
grams of foundations often are designed to address.¥Collaboration with industry.  Another suggestion arising from the work-
shop was that researchers increase their collaboration with industry.  Industry

research covers such social science-related topics as consumer behaviorÑinclud-ing who uses computers, how they are used, and related human factors in com-
puter use.  Researchers at several major computer companies were asked to esti-

mate the fraction of total research and development spending devoted by their
companies to social science research.  One researcher separated out social science

from other research and development by identifying which units in the research
laboratory conducted social science investigations, an approach indicating that
about 1 percent of the companyÕs research and development spending was used forsocial science research.  Taking a different approach
Ñconducting a rough assess-ment of social science content across the research and development portfolioÑresearch managers in two companies estimated spending on social science research
there at about 10 percent of the companiesÕ total research budget.
The private sector has funded a number of useful surveys and applied re-search projects. Several such research programs mentioned in this report are the
result of cooperation between private industry and academic researchers.  A

current example of a major investment in social and economic research, the IBM
Institute for Advanced Commerce, was announced in December 1997 and is
intended as a research partnership between academia and industry to study elec-
tronic commerce and the changing nature of technology, work, and industry
structure.  The planned partnership, with initial funding of $10 million, stems

from IBMÕs need for more academic research on the InternetÕs impact on elec-tronic commerce, an area in which IBM is expanding its business (Narisetti,
1997).As several participants in the workshop indicated, collaboration betweenindustry and academia could benefit both social science researchers and the pri-
vate sector.  For example, industry consortia funding for independent gathering

and publishing of basic information and analysis by independent scientists could
foster significant advances and ensure fair reporting of results.  Pooling of fund-

ing through consortia would allow for larger investments than any one corpora-
tion might be willing to make on its own.  In collaborative projects for develop-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR FOSTERING INTERDISCIPLINARY REASEARCH105ment of technology prototypes, both industry and social scientists might benefitfrom routine inclusion of performance assessment or evaluation up front.4.3MAKING THE RESULTS OF INTERDISCIPLINARY
RESEARCH MORE ACCESSIBLEWorkshop participants expressed a belief in the need for more effectivecommunication of the results of interdisciplinary social science research on com-
puting and communications issues to both the public and policy makers.¥Availability of an online guide to current, relevant research.  It was
noted that a perceived disconnect between research results and critical legal and
policy decision making is perhaps due in part to the dispersed nature of relevant
interdisciplinary research.  One suggested approach to improving access to perti-

nent results was to have an online resource (e.g., a Web page) containing head-
lines and abstracts of policy-relevant social science research, along with pointers
to the print and/or online published results. Such a site could also contain regu-
larly updated literature reviews summarizing the state of the art in various areas,
as well as directories of specialists in particular areas. With some effort, such a
resource could serve as a medium for communication not only among researchers
but also with individuals in the policy and business worlds.  The bibliography

prepared as part of this report could become part of such a resource.  An elec-

tronic newsletter providing regular updates on research findings would also be
useful.¥Supplemental ways of disseminating research results.  Some at the
workshop also pointed out that research results need to be presented in ways that
are most useful to policy makersÑin some cases written materials alone may notsuffice.  Interdisciplinary researchers might seek out and take advantage of op-

portunities to provide testimony at hearings;  professional societies might orga-

nize specialized briefings for policy makers.NOTE1.A research program jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation, Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency, National Library of Medicine, Library of Congress, National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration, and National Endowment for the Humanities.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY106BibliographyAssociation for Computing Machinery (ACM), U.S. Public Policy Committee.  1994.  
Codes, Keysand Conflicts: Issues in U.S. Crypto Policy.  ACM, New York.  Available online from <http://
info.acm.org/reports/acm_crypto_study.html>.Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index.  1996.  
Toward a More Accurate Mea-sure of the Cost of Living:  Final report to the Senate Finance Committee, December 4.  Advi-
sory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index.  December 4.  Available online from
< http://www.stat-usa.gov/BEN/publications.html>.Aiello, John.  1993.  ÒComputer-Based Work Monitoring: Electronic Surveillance and Its Effects,Ó
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 23(7):499-507.Alberts, David S., and Daniel S. Papp.  1997.  The Information Age: An Anthology on Its Impact andConsequences.  National Defense University Press, Washington, DC.Allen, Thomas, and Michael S. Scott Morton.  1994.  
Information Technology and the Corporationof the 1990s. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.
American Library Association.  1996.  ÒHow Many Libraries Are on the Internet?,Ó technical report,LARC Fact Sheet Number 26.  American Library Association, Chicago, IL.
Anderson, Robert H., Tora K. Bikson, Sally Ann Law, and Bridger M. Mitchell.  1995. 
UniversalAccess to E-mail: Feasibility and Societal Implications.  RAND Corporation, Santa Monica,
CA.  Available online from <http: /www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR650/>.
Arthur, Brian W.  1989.  ÒCompeting Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-in by Historical
Events,Ó  Economic Journal, 99(394):116-131.Arthur, Brian W.  1994.   
Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy.  University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.Arthur, Brian W.  1996.  ÒIncreasing Returns and the New World of Business,Ó 
Harvard BusinessReview, 74(4):100-109.Attewell, Paul.  1994.  ÒInformation Technology and the Productivity Paradox,Ó 
OrganizationalLinkages: Understanding the Productivity Paradox, Douglas Harris (ed.), National Academy
Press, Washington, DC.Attewell, Paul, and James Rule.  1989.  ÒWhat Do Computers Do?Ó  
Social Problems, 36(3):225.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY107Attewell, Paul, and James Rule.  1994.  
ÒComputing and Organizations: What We Know and WhatWe DonÕt Know,Ó Social Issues in Computing,  Chuck Huff and Thomas Finholt (eds.)
.McGraw-Hill, New York.Attewell, Paul, and Juan Battle.  1997.  
ÒHome Computers and School Performance,Ó technical report.
Department of Sociology, Graduate School and University Center, City University of New York.Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger.  1997.  
ÒComputing Inequality: Have ComputersChanged the Labor Market?,Ó NBER Working Paper 5956.  National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.Bailey, Joseph, and Erik Brynjolfsson.  1997.  
ÒIn Search of ÔFriction-Free Markets:Õ  An Explor-
atory Analysis of Prices for Books, CDs and Software Sold on the Internet,Ó  technical report,
MIT Internet Commerce Group.  Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA.Baily, Martin Neil, and Alok K. Chakrabarti.  1988.  Innovation and the Productivity Crisis. BrookingsInstitution, Washington, DC.Baily, Martin Neil, and R.J. Gordon.  1988.  
ÒThe Productivity Slowdown, Measurement Issues andthe Explosion of Computer Power,Ó Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (2):347-431.Baker, Michael A., and Alan F. Westin.  1972.  
Databanks in a Free Society: Computers, Record-keeping, and Privacy.  Quadrangle Books, New York.
Bakos, Y. 1997.  ÒReducing Buyer Search Costs: Implications for Electronic Marketplaces,Ó  Man-agement Science, 42(12):1676-1692.
Bakos, Y., and E. Brynjolfsson.  1997a.  
ÒAggregation and Disaggregation of Information Goods:Implications for Bundling, Site Licensing and Micropayment Systems,Ó Internet Publishingand Beyond: The Economics of Digital Information and Intellectual Property, D. Hurley, B.Kahin, and H. Varian (eds.). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Available online from <http://
ccs.mit.edu/erik/>.Bakos, Y., and E. Brynjolfsson.  1997b.  
ÒBundling Information Goods:  Pricing, Profits and Effi-
ciency,Ó technical report.  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Available
online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik/>.Banker, R.D., and R.J. Kauffman.  1988. 
ÒStrategic Contributions of Information Technology: AnEmpirical Study of ATM Networks,Ó Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference onInformation Systems.  Association for Computing Machinery, New York.Banker, Rajiv, Robert Kauffman, and Mo Adam Mahmood.  1993.  
Strategic Information Technol-ogy Management: Perspectives on Organizational Growth and Competitive Advantage.  Idea
Group Publishing, Harrisburg, PA.Baruch College-Harris Poll.  1997.  
ÒBaruch College-Harris Poll on Internet Advertising,Ó  BusinessWeek, September 25.  Available online from <http://www.businessweek.com/1997/40/
b3547025.htm>.Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball.  1997.  
ÒAre Technology Improvements Contra-dictory?,Ó  technical report. Department of Economics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Baym, Nancy K.  1993.  
ÒInterpreting Soap Operas and Creating Community: Inside a Computer-Mediated Fan Culture,Ó Journal of Folklore Research,
 30:143-176.
Belinfante, Alexander. 1991.  ÒMonitor Report: Telephone Penetration and Household Family Char-acteristics,Ó Common Carrier Docket No. 80-286. Common Carrier Bureau, Federal Communi-
cations Commission, Washington, DC.Bell, D.  1973. 
The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting. BasicBooks, New York.Bell, David G., Daniel G. Bobrow, Olivier Raiman, and Mark H. Shirley.  1997. 
ÒDynamic Docu-ments and Situated Processes: Building on Local Knowledge in Field Service,Ó Informationand Process Integration in Enterprises: Rethinking Documents, Toshiro Wakayama, SrikanthKannapan, Chan Meng Khoong, Sham Navathe, and JoAnne Yates (eds.).  Kluwer Academic

Publishers, Norwell, MA.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBender, D.H.  1986. 
ÒFinancial Impact of Information Processing,Ó Journal of Management Infor-mation Systems, 3(2):22-32
Benjamin, Robert et al.  1984. 
ÒInformation Technology: A Strategic Opportunity,Ó Sloan Manage-ment Review.  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches.  1994. 
ÒChanges  in the Demand for Skilled Labor
Within U.S. Manufacturing Industries,Ó Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109:367-398.Bernard, H. Russell, Eugene C. Johansen, Peter D. Killworth, Christopher McCarty, Gene A. Shelley,and Scott Robinson.  1990. 
ÒComparing Four Different Methods for Measuring Personal SocialNetworks,Ó Social Networks, 12:179-215.
Berndt, Ernst R., and Zvi Griliches.  1993.  
ÒPrice Indexes for Microcomputers: An ExploratoryStudy,Ó pp. 63-93 in 
Price Measurements and Their Uses, M.F. Foss, M.E. Manser, and A.H.Young (eds.). NBER Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 57. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.Berndt, Ernst, and Catherine Morrison.  1995. 
ÒHigh-Tech Capital Formation and Economic Perfor-mance in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis,Ó Journal of Econometrics,65(1):9-43.Berndt, Ernst R., Iain Cockburn, and Zvi Griliches. 1996. ÒPharmaceutical Innovations and MarketDynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Anti-depressant Drugs,Ó pp. 133-188 inBrookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics.  Brookings Institution, Washington,
DC.Berring, Robert C.  1995.  Finding the Law,10th ed. West Publishing, St. Paul, MN.Besen, Stanley M., and Joseph Y. Farrell.  1994. ÒChoosing How to Compete: Strategies and Tacticsin Standardization,Ó Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8:117-131.Bier, Melinda. 1996. ÒPersonal Empowerment in the Studies of Home Internet Use by Low-IncomeFamilies,Ó Journal of Computing in Education, 
28(5):107-121.Bikson, T.K., J.D. Goodchilds, L. Huddy, J.D. Eveland, and S. Schneider.  1991. 
ÒNetworked Infor-mation Technology and the Transition to Retirement,Ó technical report. RAND Corporation,
Santa Monica, CA.Bollier, David, and Charles M. Firestone.  1995. 
The Future of Community and Personal Identity inthe Coming Electronic Culture. Aspen Institute, Washington, DC.
Bollier, David, and Charles M. Firestone.  1996. 
The Future of Electronic Commerce. Aspen Insti-
tute, Washington, DC.Borko, H., and M.J. Menou.  1983. 
Index of Information Utilization Potential: The Final Report ofPhase II of the I.U.P. Pilot Project. UNESCO, Paris.Bradley, Stephen, Jerry A. Hausman, and Richard L. Nolan.  1993. 
Globalisation, Technology, andCompetition: The Fusion of Computers and Telecommunications in the 1990s. Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, Boston, MA.Bresnahan, Timothy.  1986. 
ÒMeasuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe Com-puters in Financial Services,Ó American Economic Review, 76(4):742-755.Bresnahan, Timothy.  1997. 
ÒComputerization and Wage Dispersion: An Analytical Reinterpreta-tion,Ó unpublished technical report. National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.Brock, Gerald.  1994. 
Telecommunication Policy for the Information Age. Harvard University Press,Cambridge, MA.Browning, John.  1997.  
ÒCyber View: Universal Disservice,Ó  Scientific American, 276(February):40.Bruce, Harry W.  1996.  
ÒA User-Oriented View of Internet as Information Infrastructure,Ó Ph.D.
dissertation, University of New South Wales, Australia.Brynjolfsson, Erik.  1993. 
ÒThe Productivity Paradox of Information Technology: Review and As-sessment,Ó Communications of the ACM, 36(12):66-76.  Available online from <http://
ccs.mit.edu/erik.html>.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY109Brynjolfsson, Erik.  1996a.  
ÒInformation Assets, Technology, and Organization,Ó  ManagementScience, 40(12):1645-1662.Brynjolfsson, Erik. 1996b.  ÒThe Contribution of Information Technology to Consumer Welfare,ÓInformation Systems Research, 7(3):281-300.Brynjolfsson, Erik. 1997. ÒHow Do Information Technology and Work Place Organization AffectLabor Demand?  Firm-level Evidence,
Ó  technical report.  Sloan School of Management, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.Brynjolfsson, E., and C. Kemerer.  1996. 
ÒNetwork Externalities in Microcomputer Software: AnEconometric Analysis of the Spreadsheet Market,Ó Management Science, 42(12):1627-1647.Brynjolfsson, E., and J.Y. Bakos.  1996. 
ÒBundling Information Goods: Pricing, Profits and Effi-ciency,Ó technical report. Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, Cambridge, MA.  Available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik.html>.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and L. Hitt.  1996.  
ÒParadox Lost?  Firm-level Evidence on the Returns to
Information Systems Spending,Ó Management Science, 42(4):541-558.Brynjolfsson, Erik, and L. Hitt.  1997.  
ÒComputers and Productivity Growth:  Firm-level Evidence,
Ótechnical report.  Sloan School of Management, Massachussetts Institute of Technology, Cam-
bridge, MA.Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Shinkyu Yang.  1996. ÒInformation Technology and Productivity: A Reviewof the Literature,Ó  Advances in Computers, 43(February):179-214.Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Shinkyu Yang. 1997. ÒThe Intangible Costs and Benefits of Computer Invest-ments:  Evidence from the Financial Markets,
Ó  Proceedings of the International Conference onInformation Systems, Atlanta, Georgia.  Available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik/>.
Brynjolfsson, E., A. Renshaw, and M.V. Alstyne.  1997.  
ÒThe Matrix of Change,Ó Sloan Manage-
ment Review, 38(2):37-54.Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1994.  ÒRepetitive Tasks Loosen Some WorkersÕ Grip on Safety and
Health,Ó technical report. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington, DC.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1998.  ÒLabor Market Experiences and More:  Studying Men, Women
and Children Since 1966,Ó technical report, National Longitudinal Surveys.  Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Washington, DC, January.Burtless, Gary.  1988. 
The Work Response to a Guaranteed Income: A Survey of ExperimentalEvidence.  Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Campbell, Karen E., and Barrett A. Lee.  1991. 
ÒName Generators in Surveys of Personal Net-works,Ó Social Networks, 13:203-221.
Carter, D.E., and B.S. Baker.  1991. 
Concurrent Engineering:  The Product Development Environ-
ment for the 1990Õs. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.Castells, Manuel.  1996.  
The Rise of the Network Society. Basil Blackwell, Cambridge, MA.
Cavoukian, Ann, and Don Tapscott.  1997. 
Who Knows:  Safeguarding Your Privacy in a Networked
World.  McGraw-Hill, New York.
Cerf, Vinton.  1997. 
ÒComputer Networking: Global Infrastructure for the 21st Century,Ó ComputingResearch: Driving Information Technology and the Information Industry Forward. ComputingResearch Association, Washington, DC.Chandrasekaran, Rajiv.  1998.  
ÒGovernment Finds Information Pays,Ó  Washington Post, March 9,p. A1.Chung, Woo Young.  1998.  
ÒWhy Do People Use the Internet?,Ó  doctoral dissertation (in progress),
Boston University, Boston, MA.Coase, R.H.  1959. 
ÒThe Federal Communications Commission,Ó Journal of Law and Economics,2:26-40.Coase, Ronald.  1937. 
ÒThe Nature of the Firm,Ó Economica, 4:385-405.Colebourn, John.  1996.  
ÒNet Listings ÔInvade PrivacyÕ: Victoria Blasted Over  Property Info,
ÓVancouver Province,  September 26, p. A4.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYColwell, Rita.  1996. 
ÒGlobal Climate and Infectious Disease: The Cholera Paradigm,Ó Science,274(December):2025-2031.CommerceNet/Nielsen Media Research.  1997.  
ÒDemographic and Electronic Commerce Study,Ótechnical report. CommerceNet/Nielson Media Research,  Palo Alto, CA, Spring. Summary
available online from <http://www.commerce.net/work/pilot/nielsen_96/press_97.html>.Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy.  National Research Council.  1987. Technol-ogy and Employment, Innovation and Growth in the U.S. Economy, Richard Cyert and DavidMowery (eds.).  National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Computer Intelligence. 1997.  ÒConsumer Technology Index.Ó  Computer Intelligence,  La Jolla, CA.
Available in part online from <http://www.ci.zd.com/news/ctic97.html>.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1991. 
Com-puters at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age. National Academy Press, Washington,DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1993.
  Com-
puting Professionals: Changing Needs for the 1990s. National Academy Press, Washington,DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994a.
Information Technology in the Service Society: A 21st-Century Lever.  National AcademyPress, Washington, DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1994b.  Re-alizing the Information Future: The Internet and Beyond. National Academy Press, Wash-ington, DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994c.
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed Work.  National Academy Press, Wash-ington, DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994d.
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities, Dorothy Denning andHerbert S. Lin (eds.). National Academy Press, Washington DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1995. 
Evolv-ing the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕsInformation Infrastructure. National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1996a.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Com-puting, Communications, and Entertainment. National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1996b.
CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Society, Kenneth W. Dam and Herbert S. Lin(eds.).  National Academy Press, Washington, DC.  Available online from <http://www.nap.edu/
readingroom/records/0309054753.html>.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1996c. TheUnpredictable Certainty: Information Infrastructure Through 2000. National Academy Press,Washington, DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1997a. Forthe Record: Protecting Electronic Health Information. National Academy Press, Washington,
DC.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1997b.
More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the NationÕs Information Infra-structure. National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Computing Research Association.  1997. 
ÒComputing Research:  Driving Information Technology
and the Information Industry Forward,Ó technical report.  Computing Research Association,
Washington, DC.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY111Congressional Budget Office.  1996. 
Emerging Electronic Methods for Making Retail Payments.U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.Cook, Thomas.  1975. 
Sesame Street Revisited. Russell Sage, New York.
Costa, Arthur, and Rosemarie Liebmann.  1997. 
Supporting the Spirit of Learning: When Process IsContent, Corwin Press, Thousand Oaks, CA.Cron, W.L., and M.G. Sobol.  1983. 
ÒThe Relationship Between Computerization and Performance:A Strategy for Maximizing the Benefits of Computerization,Ó Information and Management,6(3):171-181.Cuban, V.  1994. 
ÒThe Promise of the Computer,Ó Social Issues in Computing, Chuck Huff andThomas Finholt (eds.), McGraw-Hill, New York.Culnan, Mary. 1991. ÒThe Lessons of the Lotus Marketplace: Implications for Consumer Privacy inthe 1990Õs,Ó technical report. School of Business Administration, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.Cummings, Jonathan, Lee Sproull, and Sara Kiesler. 1998.  ÒInternet Support Groups as an Adjunctto Patient Care,Ó working paper.  Boston University, Boston, MA.
Curley, Kathleen, and Philip Pyburn. 1982. ÒIntellectual Technologies: The Key to Improving White-Collar Productivity,Ó Sloan Management Review, 24(1):31-39.
Curtis, Pavel. 1997. ÒMudding: Social Phenomena in Text-Based Virtual Realities,Ó The Culture ofthe Internet,  Sara Kiesler (ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Rahway, NJ.
Cutler, David, and Mark McClellan. 1996. ÒThe Determinants of Technological Change in HeartAttack Treatment,Ó NBER Working Paper 5751.  National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA, September.Cutler, David M., Mark McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler. 1996. ÒAre MedicalPrices Declining?Ó NBER Working Paper 5750.  National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA, September.  Available online from <http://www.nber.org>.
Danziger, James N., and Kenneth L. Kraemer.  1986. 
People and Computers: The Impacts of Com-puting on End Users in Organizations. Columbia University Press, New York.
Danziger, James N., William H. Dutton, Rob Kling, and Kenneth L. Kraemer.  1982. 
Computers andPolitics: High Technology in American Local Governments. Columbia University Press, NewYork.David, Paul.  1989. 
Computer and Dynamo: The Modern Productivity Paradox in a Not-Too-DistantMirror, technical report. Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Palo Alto,
CA.David, Paul A.  1985. 
ÒClio and the Economics of QWERTY,Ó American Economic Review, 75(2):332-337.David, Paul A.  1990. 
ÒThe Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the ModernProductivity Paradox,Ó American Economic Review, 80(2):335-361.Denison, Edward.  1985. 
Trends in American Economic Growth, 1929-1982. Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC.Denning, Dorothy, and William E. Baugh, Jr.  1997. 
Encryption and Evolving Technologies as Toolsof Organized Crime and Terrorism. National Strategy Information CenterÕs U.S. WorkingGroup on Organized Crime (WGOC), Washington, DC.  Available online from <http://
www.cosc.georgetown.edu/denning/crypto/oc-abs.html>.Dertouzos, Michael.  1997. 
What Will Be: How the New World of Information Will Change OurLives. Harper & Row, San Francisco, CA.DiNardo, John, and Steve Pischke.  1997. 
ÒThe Returns to Computer Use Revisited: Have PencilsChanged the Wage Structure Too?,Ó Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1):291-303.Dordick, H.S., and G. Wang.  1993. 
The Information Society. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.Drexler, K. Eric.  1991. 
ÒHypertext Publishing and the Evolution of Knowledge,Ó Social Intelli-gence, 1(2):87-120.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYDutton, William. 1996a. Information and Communication Technologies: Visions and Realities. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, England.Dutton, William H. 1996b. ÒNetwork Rules of Order: Regulating Speech in Public Electronic Fora,ÓMedia, Culture & Society, 18:269-290.Earls, John.  1990.  
ÒSocial Integration by People with Physical Disabilities: The Development of AnInformation Technology Model Based on Personal Growth and Achievement,Ó Ph.D. thesis,
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia.Eason, Ken.  1988.  
Information Technology and Organizational Change. Taylor & Francis, NewYork.Economides, Nicholas, and Charles Himmelberg.  1995. 
ÒCritical Mass and Network Size withApplications to the US Fax Market,Ó Discussion Paper No. EC-95-11, Stern School of Busi-
ness, New York University, New York.  Available online from <http://raven.stern.nyu.edu/

networks/papers.html>.Economist, The.  1996.  ÒBangalore Bytes: Software in India,Ó March 23, Vol. 338, No. 7958,  p. 67.
Educational Testing Service.  1997. 
Computers and Classrooms: The Status of Technology in U.S.Schools, policy information report.  Policy Information Center, Educational Testing Service,
Princeton, NJ.Eisenstein, Elizabeth L.  1997.  
ÒFrom the Printed Word to the Moving Image,Ó Social Research,64(3):1049-1066.Electronic Industries Association.  1984-1990. 
Consumer Electronics Annual Review.  Consumer
Electronics Group, Electronic Industries Association, Washington, DC.Electronic Industries Association.  1992.  
The U.S. Consumer Electronics Industry in Review.  Con-
sumer Electronics Group, Electronic Industries Association, Washington, DC.Electronic Privacy Information Center.  1996. 
Who Owns Personal Information? Anatomy of aPrivate Case. Electronic Privacy Information Center, Washington, DC.
Electronic Privacy Information Center. 1997. Medical Privacy Public Opinion Polls. Electronic
Privacy Information Center, Washington, DC.Equifax.  1997. 
1996 Equifax-Harris Consumer Privacy Survey. Equifax, United Kingdom.Feldman, Martha, and James March.  1981. 
ÒInformation in Organizations as Signal and Symbol,ÓAdministrative Science Quarterly, 26:171-186.
Finarelli, Margaret.  1997. 
GLOBE: A Worldwide Environmental Science and Education Partner-ship. GLOBE Program, Washington, DC.  Available online from <http://www.globe.gov>.
Finholt, Thomas, and Lee Sproull.  1990. 
ÒElectronic Groups at Work,Ó Organization Science, 1:41-
64.Fischer, Claude S.  1977.
 Networks and Places: Social Relationships in the Urban Setting. 
FreePress, New York.Fischer, Claude S.  1982.
 To Dwell Among Friends: Personal Networks in Town and City. 
Universityof Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.Fischer, Claude S.  1992. 
America Calling: A Social History of the Telephone to 1940. University of
California Press, Berkeley.Forester, V.  1989. 
Computers in the Human Context: Information Technology, Productivity, andPeople. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Freeman, Chris, Luc Soete, and Umit Efendioglu.  1995. 
ÒDiffusion and the Employment Effects ofInformation and Communication Technology,Ó International Labor Review  134(4-5):587-604.
Freeman, Laura.  1996. 
ÒJob Creation and the Emerging Home Computer Market,Ó Monthly LaborReview, 119(8):46-55.
Friedlander, Amy.  1995a.  
Emerging Infrastructure: The Growth of Railroads. Corporation for
National Research Initiatives, Reston, VA.Friedlander, Amy.  1995b. 
 Natural Monopoly and Universal Service.
 Corporation for National
Research Initiatives, Reston, VA.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY113Friedlander, Amy.  1996.  
Power and Light. Corporation for National Research Initiatives, Reston,
VA.Froomkin, A. Michael.  1996.  
ÒFlood Control on the Information Ocean: Living with Anonymity,Digital Cash, and Distributed Databases,Ó technical report.  University of Miami School of
Law, Miami, FL.  Available online from <http://www.law.miami.edu/froomkin/>.
Furlong, Mary.  1989. ÒAn Electronic Community for Older Adults: The Seniornetwork,Ó Journal ofCommunication, 39(3):145-153.Galbraith, J. 1977.  Organizational Design. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.Galegher, Jolene, Lee Sproull, and Sara Kiesler. 1998.  ÒLegitimacy, Authority, and Community inElectronic Support Groups,Ó Written Communication, forthcoming.Gay, Martin.  1996. 
The New Information Revolution. ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA.Gelsinger, V. 1991.  Ò2001: A Microprocessor Odyssey,Ó Technology 2000: The Future of Comput-
ing and Communications, Derek Leebaert (ed.). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Glass, G.V., B. McGaw, and M.L. Smith.  1981. 
Meta-Analysis in Research. Sage Publications,Beverly Hills, CA.Glennan, Thomas K., and Arthur Melmed. 1996.  Fostering the Use of Educational Technology:Elements of a National Strategy. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA. Available onlinefrom <http://www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR650/>.Goodman, William.  1996. 
ÒThe Software and Engineering Industries: Threatened by TechnologicalChange?,Ó Monthly Labor Review, 119(80):37-45.Gordon, Robert J. 1990. The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. University of Chicago Press,Chicago, IL.Gottschalk, Peter.  1997. 
ÒInequality, Income Growth and Mobility: The Basic Facts,Ó Journal ofEconomic Perspectives, 11(2):21-40.Gottschalk, Peter, and Timothy M. Smeeding.  1997. 
ÒCross-National Comparisons of Earnings andIncome Inequality,Ó Journal of Economic Literature, 35(2):633-688.Graham, John.  1976. 
Making Computers Pay. John Wiley & Sons, New York.Greenan, N., and J. Mairesse.  1996. 
ÒComputers and Productivity in France: Some Evidence,ÓNBER Working Paper 5836.  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Griliches, Zvi.  1994. 
ÒProductivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint,Ó American Economic Review,84(1):1-23.Harris, Sidney, and Joseph Katz.  1991. 
ÒOrganizational Performance and Information TechnologyInvestment Intensity in the Insurance Industry,Ó Organization Science,  2(3):263-296.
Harris, V. (ed.).  1994.  
Organizational Linkages: Understanding the Productivity Paradox. NationalAcademy Press, Washington, DC.Hayek, F.A. 1945.  ÒThe Use of Knowledge in Society,Ó American Economic Review, 35(4):3-17.Heaviside, Sheila, Tija Tiggins, and Elizabeth Farris.  1997.  
ÒStatistics in Brief: Advanced Telecom-munications in U.S. Public Elementary and Secondary Schools, Fall 1996,Ó NCES report 97-
944.   National Center for Educational Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, Washington,
DC.Herring, Thomas.  1996. 
ÒThe Global Positioning System,Ó Scientific American, 274:44-50.Hesse, Carla.  1991. Publishing and Cultural Politics in Revolutionary Paris, 1789-1810. Universityof California Press, Berkeley, CA.Hesse, Bradford W., Lee Sproull, Sara Kiesler, and John P.  Walsh. 1993. 
ÒReturns to Science:Computer Networks in Oceanography,Ó Communications of the ACM, 36(8):90-102.
Hitt, L.M., and E. Brynjolfsson. 1997.  ÒInformation Technology and Internal Firm Organization: AnExploratory Analysis, Ó Journal of Management Information Systems, 14(2):81-101.Hitt, L.M., and Erik Brynjolfsson.  1995. 
ÒInformation Technology as a Factor of Production: TheRole of Differences Among Firms,Ó Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 3(4):183-
200.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYHittleman, Daniel R., and Alan J. Simon.  1997. 
Interpreting Educational Research: An Introductionfor Consumers of Research, 2nd ed.
 Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.Hoffman, Donna L., and Thomas P. Novak.  1998.  
ÒBridging the Racial Divide on the Internet,ÓScience, 280(5362)(April 17):390-391.Hoffman, Donna L., Thomas P. Novak,  and Alladi Venkatesh.  1997a.  
ÒDiversity on the Internet:The Relationship of Race to Access and Usage,Ó technical report. Vanderbilt University, Nash-ville, TN,  October.  Available online at <http://www2000.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/>.
Hoffman, Donna L., Thomas P. Novak, and Marcos A. Peralta.  1997b. 
ÒInformation Privacy in theMarketspace: Implications for the Commercial Uses of Anonymity on the Web,Ó discussion
paper prepared for the conference ÒAnonymous Communications on the Internet: Uses andAbuses,Ó November 21-23, University of California, Irvine.
Hoffman, Donna L., William Kalsbeek, and Thomas Novak.  1996. 
ÒInternet and Web Use in theUnited States: Baselines for Commercial Development,Ó Communications of the ACM, 39(12):36-47.  Available online from <http://www2000.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/papers/internet_demos_
july9_1996.html>.Howell, David.  1997. 
ÒInstitutional Failure and the American Worker: The Collapse of Low-SkillWages,Ó technical report. The Jerome Levy Institute of Bard College, Public Policy Brief,
Annandale-on-Hudson, NY.Howell, David, and Edward Wolf.  1993. 
ÒChanges in the Information-Intensity of the U.S. Work-place Since 1950:  Has Information Technology Made a Difference?,
Ó Technical Report 93-08,
C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics, New York University, New York.Huff, Charles, Lee Sproull, and Sara Kiesler.  1989. 
ÒComputer Communication and OrganizationalCommitment: Tracing the Relationship in a City Government,Ó Journal of Applied Social Psy-chology, 19:1371-1391.Huffy, Chuck, and Thomas Finholt.  1994.  
Social Issues in Computing. McGraw-Hill, New York.Iacono, Suzanne, and Rob Kling. 1996. ÒComputerization Movements and Tales of TechnologicalUtopianism,Ó pp. 85-105 in 
Computerization and Controversy: Value Conflicts and SocialChoices, Charles Dunlop and Rob Kling (eds.).  Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
International Data Corporation.  1997a. 
ÒInternet Leapfrog: The Impact of the Internet on GlobalEconomic Competition.Ó  International Data Corporation, Framingham, MA.International Data Corporation.  1997b. 
ÒNew IT Priorities and Technologies for the Year Ahead,Ótechnical report.  International Data Corporation, Framingham, MA.
Ito, Y.  1981. 
ÒThe ÔJohoka ShakaiÕ Approach to the Study of Communication in Japan,
Ó pp. 671-
698 in Mass Communication Review Yearbook, G.C. Wilhoit and H. de Bock (eds.).  Sage
Publications, Beverly Hills, CA.Johnson, Frank, and George Stafford.  1998.  
ÒTechnology Regimes and the Distribution of RealWages,Ó Microfoundations of Economic Growth:  A Schumpeterian Perspective, 
GunnarEliasson, Chris Green, and Charles R. McCann, Jr. (eds.). University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor, MI, forthcoming,Jorgenson, Dale, and Kevin Stiroh.  1995. 
ÒComputers and Growth,Ó Economics of Innovation andNew Technology, 3:295-316.Jussawalla, M., D.M. Lamberton, and N.D. Karunaratne.  1988. 
The Cost of Thinking: InformationEconomies of Ten Pacific Countries. Ablex Publishing, Norwood, NJ.Kahin, Brian, and Charles Nesson.  1997. 
Borders in Cyberspace.  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Kahin, Brian, and James Keller, eds.  1997.  
Coordinating the Internet.  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kahn, Alfred E.  1970.  
The Economics of Regulation: Principles and Institutions.  Volume 1:
Economic Principles.  John Wiley & Sons, New York.Kaminer, Noam. 1997.  ÒInternet Use and ScholarsÕ Productivity,
Ó Ph.D. dissertation,  University of
California, Berkeley.  Available online from <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~noam>.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY115Kang, Jerry, Radhika Karmarkar, and Lis Leidig.  1995.  
Privacy and the NII. National Telecommu-nications and Information Administration, Washington, DC.  Available online from <http://
www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/policy/privwhitepaper.html>.Kaplan, R.  1989.  
ÒManagement Accounting for Advanced Technological Environments,Ó Science,245:819-823.Karnow, Curtis E.A.  1994.  
ÒThe Encrypted Self: Fleshing Out the Rights of Electronic Personali-ties,Ó Conference on Computers, Freedom, and Privacy.  Artech Publishers, London.Karunaratne, N.D., and A. Cameron.  1981. 
ÒA Comparative Analysis of the Information Economyin Developed and Developing Countries,Ó Journal of Information Science, 3:113-127.Katz, Elizabeth, R. Grant Tate, and William A. Weimer.  1995.  
Survey of Telematics for Educationand Training: United States, Canada, and Australia, Volume 2.  European Association ofDistance Teaching Universities, Heerleen, The Netherlands.Katz, James E., and Philip Aspden.  1997a.  
Internet Dropouts:  The Invisible Group.  
Bellcore,Morristown, NJ.Katz, James E., and Philip Aspden.  1997b.  
Motivations for and Barriers to Internet Usage: Resultsof a National Public Opinion Survey. Bellcore, Morristown, NJ.Katz, Michael L., and Carl Shapiro.  1994. 
ÒSystems Competition and Network Effects,Ó Journal ofEconomic Perspectives, 8:93-116.Katz, R.L.  1988. 
The Information Society. Praeger, New York.Kedzie, Christopher.  1997. 
ÒA Brave New World or a New World Order?,Ó The Culture of theInternet, Sara Kiesler (ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Rahway, NJ.
Keen, Peter.  1995.  
Every ManagerÕs Guide to Information Technology, 2nd edition.  Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA.Kees, C.P., M. Knipscheer, and Toni C. Antonucci (eds.).  1990.  
Social Network Research: Substan-tive Issues and Methodological Questions. Swets & Zeitlanger, Amsterdam.
Kehoe, Colleen, Jim Pitkow, and Kimberly Morton.  1997.  
ÒGVUÕs Eighth WWW User SurveyReport,Ó  technical report.  Graphics, Visualization, and Usability Center, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, December.  Available online from <http://www.gvu.gatech.edu/
user_surveys/>.Keyes, Robert.  1993. 
ÒThe Future of the Transistor,Ó Scientific American, 268(6):70-76.
Khosrowpur, Mehdi.  1994.  
Information Technology and Organizations: Challenges of New Tech-nologies. Idea Group Publishing, Harrisburg, PA.Kiesler, Sara, and Thomas Finholt.  1994. 
ÒThe Mystery of RSI,Ó Social Issues in Computing, ChuckHuff and Thomas Finholt (eds.). McGraw-Hill, New York.Kiesler, Sara, Robert Kraut, Tridas Mukhopadhyay, and William Scherlis.  1997.  
ÒHomenet Over-view: Recent Results from a Field Trial of Residential Internet Use,Ó  technical report. Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.  Available online from <http://homenet.andrew.cmu.edu/
progress/research.html>.King, John Leslie, Rebecca E. Grinter, and Jeanne M. Pickering.  1997. 
ÒThe Rise and Fall ofNetville: The Saga of a Cyberspace Construction Boomtown in the Great Divide,Ó The Cultureof the Internet, Sara Kiesler (ed.).  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Rahway, NJ.
Kling, Rob.  1996. 
ÒComputerization at Work,Ó Computerization and Controversy: Value Conflictsand Social Choices, 2nd ed.  Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Kling, Rob, and Tom Jewett.  1994. 
ÒThe Social Design of Worklife with Computers and Networks:An Open Natural Systems Perspective,Ó Advances in Computers, volume 39, Marshall Yovits(ed.). Academic Press, Orlando, FL.Kling, V.  1996. 
ÒThe Centrality of Organizations in the Computerization of Society,Ó Computeriza-tion and Controversy: Value Conflicts and Social Choices, 2nd ed. Academic Press, San Diego,CA.Knight, Charles.  1854.  
The Old Printer and the Modern Press. John Murray, London.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYKollock, Peter, and Marc Smith.  1996. 
ÒManaging the Virtual Commons: Cooperation and Conflictin Computer Communities,Ó Computer-Mediated Communication, Susan Herring (ed.). John
Benjamins, Amsterdam.Korzick Garmer, Amy, and Charles M. Firestone.  1996.  
Creating a Learning Society: Initiatives forEducation and Technology.  Aspen Institute, Washington, DC.  Available online from < http://
www.aspeninst.org/dir/polpro/csp/Abstracts/CrLearn.html >Kozol, Jonathan.  1991.  
Savage Inequalities: Children in AmericaÕs Schools.  Crown Publishers,
New York.Kranerg, Melvin.  1989. 
ÒIT as Revolution,Ó Computers in the Human Context: Information Tech-nology, Productivity, and People, Tom Forester (ed.).  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Kraut, Robert, William Scherlis, Tridas Mukhopadhyay, Jane Manning, and Sara Kiesler.  1996.
ÒThe HomeNet Field Trial of Residential Internet Services,Ó Communications of the ACM,39:55-65.Kreuger, Alan.  1993. 
ÒHow Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from Micro-data, 1984-1989,Ó Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:33-60.Kulik, Chen-Lin, and James A. Kulik.  1991. 
ÒEffectiveness of Computer-Based Instruction: AnUpdated Analysis,Ó Computers in Human Behavior, 7:75-94.Kuo, E.C.Y.  1989. 
ÒTrends of Information in Singapore,Ó Symposium on International Technologyand Singapore Society: Trends, Policies and Applications.  Singapore University Press, Na-
tional University of Singapore, Singapore.Landauer, Thomas K.  1995.  
The Trouble with Computers: Usefulness, Usability, and Productivity.MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Lardner, James.  1987.  
Fast Forward.  W.W. Norton, New York.Lau, Lawrence J., and Ichiro Tokutsu.  1992.  
ÒThe Impact of Computer Technology on the Aggre-gate Productivity of the United States: An Indirect Approach,Ó  unpublished paper.  Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, August.Laudon, Kenneth C.  1996. 
ÒMarkets and Privacy,Ó Communications of the ACM, 39(9):992-104.Leavitt, Harold J., and Thomas L. Whisler.   1958.  
ÒManagement in the 1980s,Ó  Harvard Business
Review, 36(6):41-48.Leebaert, Derek.  1991. 
Technology 2001: The Future of Computing and Communications. MITPress, Cambridge, MA.Leiner, Barry M. et al.  1997.  
A Brief History of the Internet, Version 3.1, revised February 20.Available online from <http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/brief.html>.Lesk, Michael.  1997. 
Practical Digital Libraries: Books, Bytes, and Bucks. Morgan Kauffman, SanFrancisco.Levy, Frank, and R. Murnane.  1997. 
ÒWith What Skills Are Computers a Complement?,Ó technical
report.  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Levy, Frank, and Richard J. Murnane.  1992. 
ÒU.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: AReview of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations,Ó Journal of Economic Literature,30:1333-1381.Lichtenberg, Frank R.  1995. 
ÒThe Output Contributions of Computer Equipment and Personnel: AFirm-Level Analysis,Ó Journal of Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 3:201-217.Lohr, Steve.  1997.  
ÒGates to Aid Libraries, in Footsteps of Carnegie,Ó New York Times, June 24,p. C1.Louis Harris & Associates and Alan F. Westin.  1997.  
ÒCommerce, Communications, and PrivacyOnline,Ó American Business Information Service, Hackensack, NJ.
Luker, Jr., William, and Donald Lyons.  1997.  
ÒEmployment Shifts in High Technology Industries,1988-96,Ó Monthly Labor Review, 120(6):12-25.
Lyman, Peter.  1996. 
ÒBooks, Bricks, & Bytes,Ó Daedalus, 122(4):109-110.Machlup, F.  1962. 
The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States.  Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY117Machlup, Fritz.  1982. Knowledge: Its Creation, Distribution, and Economic Significance. PrincetonUniversity Press, Princeton, NJ.Malone, T.W.  1987.  
ÒModeling Coordination in Organizations and Markets,Ó Management Science,33(1):1717-1332.Malone, Thomas W., and Kevin Crowston.  1994. 
ÒThe Interdisciplinary Study of Coordination,ÓACM Computing Surveys, 26(1):87-120. Available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/CCSWP157.html>.Malone, Thomas, JoAnne Yates, and Robert Benjamin.  1987. 
ÒElectronic Markets and ElectronicHierarchies,Ó Communications of the ACM, 30(6):484-497.Malone, Thomas W., Kevin Crowston, Jintae Lee, Brian Pentland, Chrysanthos Dellarocas, GeorgeWyner, John Quimby, Charley Osborne, and Avi Bernstein.  1997. 
ÒTools for Inventing Orga-nizations: Toward a Handbook of Organizational Processes,Ó Technical Report 198.  MIT
Center for Coordination Science,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Marien, Michael.  1986. 
Ò125 Impacts of New Information Technologies,Ó Future Survey Annual.World Future Society, Bethesda, MD.Mark, Jerome.  1982. 
ÒMeasuring Productivity in Service Industries,Ó Monthly Labor Review, 105:3-8.Mark, Jerome S.  1987. 
ÒTechnological Change and Employment: Some Results from BLS Re-search,Ó Monthly Labor Review, 110:26-29.Markus, M.L.  1987. 
ÒToward a Critical Mass Theory of Interactive MediaÑUniversal Access,Interdependence and Diffusion,Ó  Communication Research, 14(5):491-511.Markus, M. Lynne, and Daniel Robey. 1988. ÒInformation Technology and Organizational Change:Causal Structure in Theory and Research,Ó Management Science, 34(5):583-598.Marsden, Peter.  1987. 
ÒCore Discussion Networks of Americans,Ó American Sociological Review,52:122-131.Marsden, Peter V.  1990. 
ÒNetwork Data and Measurement,Ó Annual Review of Sociology, 16:435-463.Martin, Michael.  1996. 
ÒWhen Info Worlds Collide,Ó Fortune, 
134(8):130-133.Marvin, Lee-Ellen.  1996. 
ÒSpoof, Spam, Lurk and Lag: The Aesthetics of Text-Based VirtualRealities,Ó Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 1(2).  Available online from <http:/
/www.usc.edu/dept/annenberg/jcmc>.McAfee, R.P., J. McMillan, and M.D. Whinston. 1989. ÒMultiproduct Monopoly, Commodity Bun-dling, and Correlation of Values,Ó Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114:371-384.McCall, William.  1996.  
ÒMan Who Gave Out Vehicle Records on the Net Forced off by Com-plaints,Ó Associated Press, August 8.
McConnell, Sheila.  1996.  
ÒThe Role of Computers in Reshaping the Work Force,Ó  Monthly LaborReview, 119(8):3-5.McKinsey and Company.  1995. 
Connecting K-12 Schools to the Information Superhighway. U.S.Advisory Council on the National Information Infrastructure, Washington, DC.McMillan, John.  1994. 
ÒSelling Spectrum Rights,Ó Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(3):145-162.McNeil, Barbara J., and Karyn Nelson.  1990. 
ÒMeta-Analysis of Interactive Video Instruction: A10-Year Review of Achievement Effects,Ó Technical Report ED321761. Educational Research
Information Center (ERIC), U.S. Department of Education, Washington, DC.Melmed, Arthur (ed.).  1995. 
The Costs and Effectiveness of Educational Technology: Proceedingsof a Workshop. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Memmott, Carol.  1997. 
ÒHistory Takes on Net Proportions,Ó USA Today,  June Bonus Issue.
Metcalfe, R.  1997. 
ÒPollinate Lets You Rent the Software You Need for Just the Right Amount ofTime,Ó Infoworld, 19(23):111.Milgrom, Paul.  1989. 
ÒAuctions and Bidding: A Primer,Ó Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3(3):3-32.Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts.  1980. 
ÒThe Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,Strategy and Organization,Ó American Economic Review, 80(3):511-528.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYMoris, Francisco.  1996. 
ÒSemiconductors: The Building Blocks of the Information Revolution,ÓMonthly Labor Review, 119(8):12-17.Morrison, Catherine, and Ernst Berndt.  1990. 
ÒAssessing the Productivity of Information Technol-ogy Equipment in the US Manufacturing Industries,Ó Technical Report 3582. National Bureau
of Economic Research Working, Cambridge, MA.Morrison, Ian, and Greg Schmid.  1994. Future Tense: The Business Realities of the Next Ten Years.William Morrow and Company,  New York.
Mueller, Milton.  1996. Universal Service: Interconnection, Competition, and Monopoly in the Mak-ing of the American Telephone System. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Mueller, Milton.  1997. 
ÒUniversal Service and the Telecommunications Act: Myth Made Law,ÓCommunications of the ACM, 40(3):39-48.Mueller, Milton, and Jorge Schement.  1996. 
ÒUniversal Service from the Bottom Up: A Study ofTelephone Penetration in Camden, New Jersey,Ó The Information Society. Taylor & Francis,New York.Murnane, Richard J., and Frank Levy.  1996.  
ÒTeaching the New Basic Skills: Principles for Educat-ing Children to Thrive in a Changing Economy.Ó  Publishers Weekly, 243(26):38.Murphy, Kevin M., and Finss Welch. 1993. ÒLessons from Empirical Labor Economics: 1972-1992.Inequality in Relative Wages,Ó American Economic Review, 83(2):104-109.Narin, Francis, Kimberly S. Hamilton, and Dominic Olivastro.  1997. 
ÒPublic and Private Research,Ótechnical report. CHI Research,  Haddon Heights, NJ.
Narisetti, Raju.  1997.  
ÒIBM Planning to Research Internet Trade,Ó Wall Street Journal, December
5, p. B10.Nass, Clifford, and Byron Reeves.  1996. 
The Media Equation: How People Treat Computers,Television and New Media Like Real People and Places. Cambridge University Press, Cam-bridge, England.Nass, Clifford, Jonathan Steur, and Ellen R. Tauber.  1994. 
ÒComputers Are Social Actors,Ó Pro-ceedings of CHI 94. ACM Press, New York.National Center for Education Statistics.  1997. 
Advanced Telecommunications in U.S. Public El-ementary and Secondary Schools, Fall 1996, Statistics in Brief, NCES 97-944. Office of Edu-
cational Research and Improvement,  National Center for Education Statistics, Department of
Education, Washington, DC.National Information Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIIAC).  1995.  
ÒA Nation of Opportunity: AFinal Report of the United States Advisory Council on the National Information Infrastruc-ture,Ó technical report. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).  1995.  
ÒFalling Through theNet: A Survey of the ÔHave NotsÕ in Rural and Urban America,
Ó technical report.  NTIA,
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC.   Available online from <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/
ntiahome/fallingthru.html>.National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).  1997. 
ÒPrivacy and Self-Regulation in the Information Age.Ó  NTIA, Department of Commerce, Washington, DC. Avail-
able online from <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/privacy/privacy_rpt.htm>.Netcraft.  1996. 
The Netcraft Web Server Survey. Netcraft Ltd., Bath, United Kingdom. Availableonline from <http://www.netcraft.com/survey>.Netcraft.  1997. 
The Netcraft Web Server Survey. Netcraft Ltd., Bath, United Kingdom.  Available
online from <http://www.netcraft.com/survey>.Network Wizards.  1998. 
Internet Domain Survey, January 1998.   Network Wizards, Menlo Park,
CA.  Available online from <http://www.nw.com/>.
Nordhaus, William.  1969. 
Invention, Growth, and Welfare. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Novak, T.P., and D.L. Hoffman.  1997. 
ÒNew Metrics for New Media: Toward the Development ofWeb Measurement Standards,Ó World Wide Web Journal, 2(1):213-246.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY119Noyelle, T.  1990.
 Skills, Wages, and Productivity in the Service Sector
. Westview Press, Boulder,CO.Nye, David E.  1997.  
ÒShaping Communication Networks: Telegraph, Telephone, Computer,Ó  So-cial Research, 64(3):1067-1091Office of Technology Assessment.  1987. 
The Electronic Supervisor: New Technology, New Ten-sions, OTA-CIT-333. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Office of Technology Assessment.  1995. 
Teachers and Technology: Making the Connection. U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel.  1994. 
ÒComputers and Output Growth Revisited: How BigIs the Puzzle?,Ó Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:273-334.
Oppenheimer, Todd.  1997. 
ÒThe Computer Delusion,Ó Atlantic Monthly  280(1):45-58.
Orlikowski, W.J.  1992. 
ÒLearning from Notes: Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementa-tion,Ó Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, J. Turner and R. Kraut (eds.).Association for Computing Machinery, Toronto.Orr, Julian E.  1990.  
ÒTalking About Machines: An Ethnography of a Modern Job,Ó Ph.D. thesis,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.Park, R.E. 1916. ÒThe City: Suggestions for the Investigation of Human Behavior in the UrbanEnvironment,Ó American Journal of Sociology, 20:577-612.Park, R.E. 1955. Society. Free Press, Glencoe, IL.Parks, Malcom R.  1996. 
ÒMaking Friends in Cyberspace,Ó Journal of Computer Mediated
 Commu-nication, 1(4):80. Available online from <http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/>.Pelgrum, W.J., Janssen Reiner, and T.J. Plomp. 1993. Schools, Teachers, Students, and Computers:A Cross-National Perspective.  International Association for the Evaluation of EducationalAchievement, Amsterdam.Perez, Carlota.  1983. 
ÒStructural Change and Assimilation of New Technologies in the Economicand Social System,Ó Futures, 15(5):357-375.Pool, Ithiel De Sola.  1984. 
Communications Flows: A Census in the United States and Japan.North-Holland, Amsterdam.Porat, M.U.  1977. 
Information Economy: Definition and Measurement. OT Special Publication77:12. U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC.Porter, Michael, and Victor Millar.  1985. 
ÒHow Information Gives You Competitive Advantage,ÓHarvard Business Review. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.PresidentÕs Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST). 1997. Report to the Presi-dent on the Use of Technology to Strengthen K-12 Education in the United States, PresidentÕsCommittee of Advisors on Science and Technology, Panel on Educational Technology, Wash-
ington, DC.  Available online from <http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/EOP/OSTP/NSTC/
PCAST/k-12ed.html>.Press, Larry.  1997. 
ÒTracking the Global Diffusion of the Internet,Ó Communications of the ACM,40(11):95-100.Price Waterhouse.  1997.  1997 Price Waterhouse Consumer Technology Survey, Price Waterhouse
ÕsEntertainment, Media and Communications (ECM) Group, New York.  (For information online

about the ECM group, see <http://www.pw.com/us/2d96.htm>.)Quarterman, John S. 1997. Ò1997 Users and Hosts of the Internet and the Matrix,Ó Matrix News, 7(1).Radner, R., 1992.  ÒHierarchy: The Economics of Managing,Ó Journal of Economic Literature,30:1382-1415.Regan, Priscilla.  1995. 
Legislating Privacy. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, NC.Resnick, Paul, and Hal R. Varian.  1997. ÒIntroduction to Recommender Systems,Ó Communicationsof the ACM, 40(3):56-58.Resnick, Paul, and Jim Miller.  1996. 
ÒPICS: Internet Access Controls Without Censorship,Ó Com-munications of the ACM, 39(10):87-93.  Available online from <http://www.w3c.org/PICS>.
Rogers, Everett.  1995. 
Diffusion of Innovation. Free Press, New York.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYRohlfs, Jeffrey.  1974. 
ÒA Theory of Interdependent Demand for a Communications Service,Ó BellJournal of Economics, 5(1):16-37.Romm, Celia T., and Nava Pliskin.  1997. 
ÒToward a Virtual Politicking Model,Ó Communications ofthe ACM, 40(11):95-100.
Rosenberg, Richard.  1997. 
The Social Impact of Computers, 2nd ed. Academic Press, San Diego,
CA.Rowe, Susan A.  1994. 
ÒManagement Involvement: A Key Element in Preventing MusculoskeletalInjuries in Visual Display Unit Users in Australia,Ó Social Issues in Computing, Chuck Huffand Thomas Finholt (eds.).  McGraw-Hill, New York.
Rubin, Andee.  1996. 
ÒEducational Technology: Support for Inquiry-Based Learning,Ó TechnologyInfusion and School Change: Perspectives and Practices, Model Schools Partnership ResearchMonograph. Transportation Emergency Rescue Committee, Cambridge, MA.Ryan, Alice.  1991. 
ÒMetaanalysis of Achievement Effects of Microcomputer Applications in El-ementary Schools,Ó Educational Administration Quarterly, 27(2):161-184.Sah, R.K., and J.E. Stiglitz.  1986. 
ÒThe Architecture of Economic Systems: Hierarchies and Poly-archies,Ó American Economic Review, 76(4):716-727.Schement, J.R. 1990. ÒPorat, Bell, and the Information Society Reconsidered: The Growth of Infor-mation Work in the Early Twentieth Century,Ó Information Processing and Management,26(4):449-465.Schmalensee, R.L.  1984. 
ÒGaussian Demand and Commodity Bundling,Ó Journal of Business,57:S211-S230.Scientific American.  1997. 
ÒThe Internet: Bringing Order from Chaos,Ó Scientific American,276(3):50-82. Available online from <http://www.sciam.com/0397issue/0397intro.html>.Scott, John T., and Albert N. Link.  1997. 
ÒAssessing the Infrastructural Needs of a Technology-Based Service Sector: A New Approach to Technology Policy Planning,Ó Best Practices inTechnology and Innovation Policy, Wolfgang Polt (ed.). Organisation for Economic Coopera-
tion and Development, Paris.Shapiro, Carl, and Hal Varian.  1997.  
ÒU.S. Government Information Policy,Ó technical report.
School of Information Management and Systems, University of California, Berkeley.  Avail-

able online at <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal/Papers/policy/policy.html>.Shapiro, Carl, and Hal Varian.  1998. 
InfoTactics: Competitive Strategy for the Information Economy.Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.Shy, Oz.  1998. 
ÒThe Economics of Software Protection and Other Media,Ó Economics of DigitalInformation and Intellectual Property, Debora Hurley, Brian Kahin, and Hal Varian (eds.).
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Sichel, Andrew.  1997. 
The Computer Revolution: An Economic Perspective. Brookings InstitutionPress, Washington, DC.Smart Valley.  1994.  ÒSmart Valley Telecommuting Guide.Ó  Smart Valley, San Mateo, CA.  Avail-able online from <http://www.svi.org/>.Smythe, D. 1977.  ÒCommunications: Blindspot of Western Marxism,Ó Canadian Journal of Socialand Political Theory, 1(3):1-27.Smythe, D. 1981. Dependency Road: Communication, Capitalism, Consciousness, and Canada.Ablex, Norwood, NJ.Solow, Robert.  1957. 
ÒTechnological Change and the Aggregate Production Function,Ó Review ofEconomics and Statistics, 39:312.Solow, Robert M. 1987.  ÒWeÕd Better Watch Out,Ó New York Times Book Review, July 12, , p. 36.Spence, Michael, and Bruce Owen.  1977.  
ÒTelevision Programming, Monopolistic Competition,and Welfare,Ó Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91(1):103-126.Sproull, Lee, and Sara B. Kiesler. 1992. Corrections: New Ways of Working in the Networked
Organization.   MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY121Sproull, Lee, and Samer Faraj.  1995. 
ÒAtheism, Sex, and Databases: The Net as a Social Technol-ogy,Ó pp. 62-81 in 
Public Access to the Internet, Brian Kahin and James Keller (eds.). MITPress, Cambridge, MA.Sproull, Lee, Mani Subramani, Sara Kiesler, Janet H. Walker, and Keith Waters.  1996. 
ÒWhen theInterface Is a Face,Ó Human-Computer Interaction, 11:97-124.Stefik, Marc.  1995. 
ÒLetting Loose the Light,Ó technical report. Xerox Palo Alto Research Center,
Palo Alto, CA.Stewart, Thomas. 1997. Intellectual Capital. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.Stipp, David.  1997.  
ÒThe Idol of the Geeks, What TheyÕre Reading in the Computer Biz,Ó  Fortune,March 3, p. 40.  Available online from  <http://www.pathfinder.com/@@y1yRBQUAcc@UN2
Gz/fortune/1997/970303/fir1.html>.Stoll, Clifford.  1995. 
Silicon Snake Oil. Second Thoughts on the Information Highway. Doubleday,New York.Sudweeks, Fay, Margaret McLaughlin, and Sheizaf Rafaeli (eds.).  1997. 
Network and Netplay:Virtual Groups on the Internet. AAAI/MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Tapscott, Don.  1996. 
The Digital Economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked Intelligence.McGraw-Hill, New York.Taylor, Lester.  1994. 
Telecommunications Demand in Theory and Practice. Kulwer AcademicPublishers, Boston, MA.Television Bureau of Advertising. 1991.  TV and Cable Factbook: The Authoritative Reference forthe Television, Cable & Electronics Industries.  No. 60. Warren Publishing, Washington, DC.
Thurow, Lester.  1987. 
ÒEconomic Paradigms and Slow American Productivity Growth,Ó EasternEconomic Journal, 13:333-343.Turkle, Sherry.  1984. 
The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. Simon & Schuster, NewYork.Turkle, Sherry.  1995a.  
ÒComputational Technologies and Images of the Self,Ó Life on the Screen:Identity in the Age of the Internet. Simon & Schuster, New York.Turkle, Sherry.  1995b.  
Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet.  Simon & Schuster,New York.Tyack, David B., and Larry Cuban.  1995. 
Tinkering Toward Utopia: A Century of Public SchoolReform. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.U.S. Bureau of the Census.  1975.  
Historical Statistics of the United States, Bicentennial Edition,Series R190. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1986, 1990, 1991, 1992.  Statistical Abstract
.  U.S. Department of
Commerce, Washington, DC.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1993.  Current Population Survey.  U.S. Department of Commerce,
Washington, DC.U.S. Department of Labor.  1991. 
What Work Requires of Schools: A SCANS Report for America2000. U.S. Department of Labor, Washington DC.U.S. Department of Labor.  1992. 
Learning and Living: A Blueprint for High Performance. U.S.Department of Labor, Washington DC.U.S. Senate.  1995.
 ÒCyberporn and Children: The Scope of the Problem, the State of the Technol-ogy, and the Need for Congressional Action,Ó J104-36, 104th Congress, hearing before theCommittee on the Judiciary, Washington, DC.van Alstyne, Marshall.  1997. 
ÒThe State of Network Organization: A Survey in Three Frameworks,ÓJournal of Organizational Computing, 7(3).
van der Poel, Mart G.M.  1993. 
ÒPersonal Support Networks,Ó Social Networks, 15:49-70.Varian, Hal R.  1995a. 
Pricing Information Goods. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.Varian, Hal R.  1995b.  
ÒThe Information Economy, How Much Will Two Bits Be Worth in theDigital Marketplace?,Ó Scientific American
, 30(1)(September):200-201. Subsequently published
in 1996 in  Educom Review, (January/February):44-46.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122FOSTERING RESEARCH ON IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYVarian, Hal R.  1996a. 
ÒDifferential Pricing and Efficiency,Ó First Monday.  Available online from
<http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue2/different/>.Varian, Hal R.  1996b. 
ÒEconomic Aspects of Personal Privacy,Ó technical report. University of
California, Berkeley. Available online from <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal/people/hal/papers.html>.Varian, Hal R.  1996c. 
Intermediate Microeconomics. W.W. Norton, New York.Varian, Hal R.  1997a. 
ÒBuying, Sharing and Renting Information Goods,Ó technical report. School
of Information Management and Systems, University of California, Berkeley.  Available online
from <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal>.Varian, Hal R.  1997b. 
ÒEconomic Issues Facing the Internet,Ó The Internet as Paradigm, CharlesFirestone (ed.). Aspen Institute, Washington, DC.  Available online from <http://www.sims.
berkeley.edu/~hal/people/hal/papers.html>.Varian, Hal R., and Richard Roehl.  1996. 
ÒCirculating Libraries and Video Rental Stores,Ó technical
report. University of California, Berkeley.  Available online from <http://www.sims berkeley.
edu/~hal>.Venkatesh, Alladi.  1996.  
ÒComputers and Other Interactive Technologies for the Home,Ó  Commu-nications of the ACM, 39(12):47-54.Vickrey, William.  1961. 
ÒCounterspeculation, Auctions and Competitive Sealed Tenders,Ó Journalof Finance, 16(1):8-37.Walsh, John P., and Todd Bayma.  1997. ÒComputer Networks and Scientific Work,Ó pp. 385-406 inThe Culture of the Internet, Sara Kiesler (ed.).  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Rahway, NJ.
Warnke, Jacqueline. 1996. ÒComputer Manufacturing: Change and Competition,Ó Monthly LaborReview, 119(8):18-30.Webster, Frank.  1997. 
ÒWhat Information Society?,Ó The Information Age: An Anthology on ItsImpact and Consequences, David S. Alberts and Daniel S. Papp (eds.).  National Defense
University Press, Washington, DC.Weill, Peter.  1992. 
ÒThe Relationship Between Investment in Information Technology and FirmPerformance: A Study of the Valve Manufacturing Sector,Ó Information Systems Research,3(4):307-333.Weiss, Laura.  1996.  Buildings, Books, and Bytes:  Libraries and Communities in the Digital Age: aReport on the PublicÕs Opinion of Library LeadersÕ Visions for the Future.
  Benton Founda-
tion, Washington, DC.  Available online from <http://www.benton.org/Library/Kellogg/

buildings.html>.Wellman, Barry.  1979. 
ÒThe Community Question,Ó American Journal of Sociology, 84:1201-1231.Wellman, Barry.  1997. 
ÒAn Electronic Group Is Virtually a Social Network,Ó The Culture of theInternet, Sara Kiesler (ed.).  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Wellman, Barry, and David B. Tindall.  1993. 
ÒHow Telephone Networks Connect Social Net-works,Ó Progress in Communication Sciences, Volume XII, W.D. Richards, Jr., and George A.Barnett (eds.). Ablex, Norwood, NJ.Wellman, Barry, and Milena Gulia.  1997. 
ÒNet Surfers DonÕt Ride Alone: Virtual Communities asCommunities,Ó Communities in Cyberspace, Peter Kollock and Marc Smith (eds.). Universityof California Press, Berkeley, CA.Wellman, Barry, and Scot Worley.  1990. 
ÒDifferent Strokes from Different Folks: Community Tiesand Social Support,Ó American Journal of Sociology, 
96(3):558-588.Wellman, Barry, Janet Salaff, Dimitrina Dimitrova, Laura Garton, Milena Gulia, and CarolineHaythornthwaite.  1996. 
ÒComputer Networks as Social Networks,Ó Annual Review of Sociol-
ogy, 22:213-238.Westin, Alan F.,  and Louis Harris & Associates.  1981. 
The Dimensions of Privacy. Garland, NewYork.Wiley, Malcolm M., and Stuart A. Rice.  1933. 
Communication Agencies and Social Life. McGraw-Hill, New York.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY123Wilson, Diane D.  1995. 
ÒIT Investment and Its Productivity Effects: An Organizational SociologistÕsPerspective on Directions for Future Research,Ó Economics of Innovation and New Technol-
ogy, 3:235-251.Wolff, Edward N.  1996. 
ÒThe Growth of Information Workers in the U.S. Economy, 1950-1990:The Role of Technological Change, Computerization, and Structural Change,Ó Technical Re-
port RR 96-41.  Department of Economics, New York University, New York.
World Research, Inc.  1997.  
ÒJunk Email Survey.Ó  San Jose, CA.  Available online from <http://
www.survey.com/junkresults.html>.World Wide Web Consortium.  1997.  
ÒPlatform for Internet Content Selection.Ó Available online
from <http://www.w3.org/PICS>.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.125APPENDIXESFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A127127AWorkshop Agenda and Participants
AGENDAMonday, June 30, 19978:00 a.m.Registration and Breakfast
8:30Welcome and Introductory Remarks
Hal Varian, Steering Committee Chair9:30Breakout Session 1
Session 1A:  Information
Moderator:  Clifford Lynch
Assigned Participants:  Haim Mendelson, Peter Lyman, Ken-
neth Kraemer, Marvin Sirbu, Thomas Malone, Paul ResnickSession 1B:  Deployment Case StudiesÑWeb and Collaboration
ToolsModerator:  Scott Shenker
Assigned Participants:  Jeffrey MacKie-Mason, John King,
Mark Weiser, Lee Sproull, Amy FriedlanderSession 1C:  Employment
Moderator:  Erik Brynjolfsson
Assigned Participants:  Frank Stafford, Alexander Field, N.
Venkatraman, Richard Sutch, Timothy Bresnehan12:30 p.m.Lunch
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128APPENDIX A2:00Breakout Session 2
Session 2A:  Commerce
Moderator:  Marvin Sirbu
Assigned Participants:  Richard Sutch, Timothy Bresnehan,
Alexander Field, Haim Mendelson, Michael Froomkin, Erik
BrynjolfssonSession 2B:  Communities
ÑExisting and NewModerator:  Jorge Schement
Assigned Participants:  Paul Attewell, Robert Kling, Claude
Fischer, Mark Weiser, Paul Resnick, Frances AllenSession 2C:  Intellectual Property and Privacy
Moderator:  Pamela Samuelson
Assigned Participants:  Michael Froomkin, John King, Clifford
Lynch, Carl Shapiro5:00Moderators from Monday sessions meet

6:00Dinner
Tuesday, July 18:00 a.m.Breakfast
Moderators for Tuesday sessions meet9:00Breakout Session 3
Session 3A:  Human Capital, Training, and Education
Moderator:  Richard Sutch
Assigned Participants:  Frank Stafford, Alexander Field,
Claude Fischer, John KingSession 3B:  Content Regulation and Free Speech
Moderator:  Paul Resnick
Assigned Participants:  Michael Froomkin, Pamela Samuelson,
Clifford Lynch, Peter LymanSession 3C:  Organizations
Moderator:  Erik Brynjolfsson
Assigned Participants:  Thomas Malone, John King, Mark
Weiser, Haim Mendelson, N. Venkatraman, Frances Allen12:00 p.m.Lunch

2:00Synthesis
ÑSteering Committee4:00Adjourn
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A129PARTICIPANTSEconomicsTimothy Bresnehan, Stanford UniversityJoseph Farrell, University of California, Berkeley
Alexander Field, Santa Clara University
Jeffrey MacKie-Mason, University of Michigan
Carl Shapiro, University of California, Berkeley
Frank Stafford, University of MichiganSociologyPaul Attewell, City University of New YorkClaude Fischer, University of California, Berkeley
Robert Kling, Indiana University
Robert Kraut, Carnegie Mellon UniversityHistoryAmy Friedlander, Corporation for National Research InitiativesInformationKenneth Kraemer, University of California, IrvineClifford Lynch, University of California, Berkeley
Peter Lyman, University of California, Berkeley
Haim Mendelson, Stanford UniversityLegal AspectsMichael Froomkin, University of MiamiPamela Samuelson, University of California, BerkeleyOrganizationsJohn King, University of California, IrvineThomas Malone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
N. Venkatraman, Boston UniversityTechnologyPaul Resnick, University of MichiganMarvin Sirbu, Carnegie Mellon University
Mark Weiser, XEROX Palo Alto Research CenterFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130APPENDIX AOBSERVERSJennifer Sue Bond, National Science FoundationEileen Collins, National Science Foundation
Edward J. Hackett, National Science Foundation
John E. Jankowski, National Science Foundation
Alan R. Tupek, National Science Foundation
Andrew W. Wyckoff, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and DevelopmentFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B131131BPosition Papers Submitted byWorkshop Participants
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132APPENDIX BFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B133RESEARCH ON INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY IMPACTSPaul AttewellGraduate School and University Center,City University of New YorkA few comments about past impact research are appropriate at the outset,because there are some important issues that ought to be considered before mov-
ing on to new topics and research priorities. We made some intellectual mistakes
in the past that we can avoid repeating in the future. Since some of the workshop
participants are new to this area of study, I think it would be helpful to lay out
some of these issues.Because technological change in information technology applications hasbeen so rapid during the last 25 years, there has been a constant temptation to turn
away from studies of current outcomes of existing information technologies and
instead turn toward a kind of futurology or speculative stance about what might
be the case in the future.  Examples are found in the agenda for this workshop,

where topics are articulated such as: ÒHow will the nature of the employment
contract change? . . .What will be the impact on K-12?Ó  The future is important,

and these kinds of questions are valid, but this stance has had some unfortunate
implications for impact research in the past. Among these are the following:¥A tendency to support the development of theoretical models to predict
what will be or 
might be the case, rather than pursue empirical studies of what
actually is happening now. Since theorizing tends to be cheaper than data collec-
tion, this has tended to skew funding toward the former, and has often given this
field a rather speculative feel. But speculation, even by very smart people, has
often been far off the mark.¥A tendency to fund studies of  Òcutting-edgeÓ applications, which tend to
be located in large, dynamic (and resource-rich) firms, or superior schools, rather
than looking at the kind of ÒordinaryÓ IT that is in place in average workplaces
and ordinary schoolsÑthe point being that what one observes in the largest, most
resource-rich, and most committed settings is not a good predictor of the typical
effects of a technology in the larger world. (In the field of program evaluation
there is a parallel phenomenon known as the demonstration effect: innovativeprograms are shown to work well initially in well-supported demonstration
projects but then prove much less effective when widely implemented in moreFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134APPENDIX Bordinary settings.) Studying cutting-edge applications in cutting-edge firms,schools, or universities is fascinating, but this is not the most rigorous approach
to understanding how technological change is affecting the larger population of
organizations and people. It tends to result in unrealistic scenarios.¥A tendency to direct money into prototyping new applications, and to relyon the authors of the prototype to do the impact assessment or performance
evaluation themselves or not do an evaluation at all.  This has occurred all over

the Òcomputer assisted cooperative workÓ field, as well as in the field of educa-
tional software.  It is naive to expect that people who toil over developing new

technology can provide an objective assessment of its performance, yet this ap-
proach dominates research.  There is no equivalent in IT research of the 
ÒdoubleblindÓ study, and replication is rare.  Perhaps this is one arena in which engineers
and social scientists could collaborate:  if federal funders insisted that all proto-

type and development projects include an armÕs-length performance assessment,this would be a major step forward.¥A tendency to discount findings that demonstrate negative or null impactsof  IT as being intellectually uninteresting on the grounds that such impacts

simply reflect early versions, or start-up problems, which will disappear when the
next generation of machinery or software comes online. Studies indicate that
there are large discontinuance/abandonment/non-use rates for important and
much-hyped IT products.  (Examples are Kemerer
Õs recent studies of abandon-ment of  fourth-generation software development tools and Detroit
Õs ripping outadvanced automated manufacturing from some plants.)  Users of 
Òwhat ifÓ deci-
sion-tools have been found to use them mechanistically even when shown that
they are producing inferior decisions.  Computer searches of databases using

current methods have been shown to generate large numbers of bad hits, and also
to miss large numbers of relevant items.If IT impact research were a normal social science discipline, such strikingfindings would be viewed as important scientific puzzles, unleashing a stream of
follow-up research seeking insights into human-computer interactions implied by
these failures.  By and large this has not occurred, because of a widespread

mentality that says that any problems with IT that impact studies unearth are
simply minor implementation issues and will be overcome by the next generation
of technology. This mentality reminds me of the anthropologist Evans-PritchardÕsstudies of Azande witchcraft.  Whenever he contrived to show African believers

in witchcraft that casting a spell/curse on someone did not work in a concrete
case, the believers were unshaken, retorting that of course witchcraft worked, but
that the spell had been performed poorly in this case.  IT 
does work, but impact
research should spend much more time looking at the many settings in which it
works very differently than intended, and should mine these cases, as well as the
successes, in order to understand the full picture.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B135¥One of the most common findings in prior IT impact studies has been thatoutcomes are far from uniform across all kinds of settings and contexts. In earlier
years we looked for the impact of IT on (say) organizational centralization, and
scholars tended to hew to one end or the other of a bipolar spectrum: centraliza-
tion versus decentralization; upskilling or  deskilling; job destroying versus job
creating.  What scholars found, in almost every case, was that this was an unpro-

ductive way to conceptualize the issue. One almost always found evidence of
both extremes of outcomes/impacts as well as many points in between (see
Attewell and Rule, 1989). We finally realized that we were asking the wrong
question. We should have asked, In what contexts does outcome A typically
predominate, and in what contexts does outcome B tend to prevail, and when
does one see A and B in equal measure?  We found that a technology does not

usually have an impact.  The context or setting in which the same technology is
used often produces strikingly different Òimpacts.Ó This phenomenon has been
discussed in terms of  ÒWeb ModelsÓ (Kling), or 
Òstructural contingency theoryÓ(Attewell), or RobeyÕs ÒPlus Ca ChangeÓ model.  All imply that we fully appre-
ciate the role of context in technology outcomes, and that we therefore expend
sufficient research effort to measure the context, and to delineate its interactions
with the technology. If we fail to do this, we return to the old Òblack boxÓparadigm, that is, attempting to measure only the input (say, a particular software
program) and the outcome (say, kidsÕ test scores) without bothering with the
context (the classroom, the kidsÕ family backgrounds) or the causal mechanisms.
Black box research on impacts often discovered ÒinconsistentÓ outcomes across
studies but proved unable to show why there was so much variation, because it
neglected to measure the contextual variables that were moderating the effects of
the input upon the output.  For example, the old paradigm would phrase a re-

search question so as to ask whether or not home PCs would improve kidsÕ school
performance.  In contrast, research within the current contextual paradigm would

ask under what conditions having PCs at home affects studentsÕ school outcomes.
A piece of my own work has indicated, for example, that having a home PC
currently has a minimal effect on the school performance scores of poor and
minority kids but is associated with substantial positive effects on the school
performance of kids with high socioeconomic status (SES), when other factors
are controlled for (Attewell and Battle, 1997).  Race and class/SES, in this ex-

ample, prove to be very important contextual features moderating the impact of
home PCs on school performance.¥Workshop organizers should be aware that because of the last three de-cades of research and the importance of context as discussed above, many distin-
guished scholars of technology avoid the term Òtechnology impact.Ó  Using this
term in framing the question would be viewed by some of them as indicating an
ignorance of the body of scholarship in technology studies. For them, the term
ÒimpactÓ connotes a kind of technological determinism that is very dated and
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136APPENDIX Bwidely discredited.  Personally, I am not so averse to the term Òimpact,Ó but I doagree with their larger point about avoiding models based on simple technologi-
cal determinism.Distilling these arguments into positive recommendations:  (1) future re-
search should pursue empirical studies of existing technologies in real settings, as
distinct from speculative or purely theoretical exercises; (2) care should be taken
to include representative organizations/settings, not just cutting-edge or high-
tech ones; (3) studies of unintended consequences of IT, such as failures and
discontinuance, are important for what they tell us about these technologies and
about the process of change more generally.  Researchers should be interested in
the full range of  ÒimpactsÓÑintended and unintended; (4) projects aimed atdeveloping technology prototypes should routinely include a performance assess-
ment or evaluation, and the latter should be conducted at armÕs length from theformer; (5) contextual variables should be studied rigorously, and their moderat-
ing effects on technology outcomes should be a major part of inquiry; (6) we
should reconceptualize what we are doing as social and economic studies of
computing and communications technologies rather than technology impact stud-
ies, and try to avoid technological determinism.To move to the request about specific areas for research, here are somesuggestions:1.The Òproductivity paradox,Ó in my opinion, remains an important and
unresolved issue. However, I suggest that we should move beyond dichotomous
thinking (Does information technology have a payoff, or not?) and ask, In what
areas/applications/settings do we see payoffs and in what areas donÕt we, andwhy?  What mechanisms can be identified that attenuate potential payoffs, and

how do we measure them?  What interactions and contexts explain variation in

productivity outcomes?2.Skills.  There is anecdotal evidence that the range in performance levels in
computer-related work is greater than that found in noncomputerized tasks.  In

other words, the gap between skilled and mediocre users is larger in computer-
related work.  This suggests that skills in computer work are less well diffused, or

are shared less than in other kinds of tasks. We need research on what constitutes
skilled versus unskilled performance in computer work of various kinds, and a
better understanding about why so many of us make mediocre use of these tools.3.Teenagers.  I suspect that personal computers are changing the lives of
teenagers more than most other age cohorts, and that is both an opportunity and a
concern.  Computerized communication affords powerful opportunities for social

affiliation (e.g., Sproull and Faraj, 1995) and for playing with identity, both
preoccupations of adolescence.  There have already been studies that suggest that

teenagers are spending less time watching TV and more on the Web. There are aFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B137host of policy issues surrounding their use.  But our knowledge base of how
young people are using the Web, and what they are getting out of it, is too sparse.4.Education.  As a researcher I find the literature on educational computing
quite maddening. There are exciting claims of accelerated learning using comput-
erized tools, but the research rarely gets replicated, and even the most lauded
programs (e.g., the algebra tutor at Carnegie Mellon) never seem to cross into
public use, in part because these prototypes are built on UNIX platforms in
esoteric languages.  As a result the field does not progress in a cumulative man-

ner.  There is clearly room for a serious review and analysis of the state of the art

in educational software, and for research on the barriers to future progress of IT
in education. Universal access to the Web is the only area I know that has
received systematic treatment.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138APPENDIX BWHAT IF ALL INFORMATION WERE READILYAVAILABLE TO ALL?Joseph FarrellDepartment of Economics, University of California, BerkeleyRapid improvements in information technology raise two grand issues.  First,
are we moving toward a world in which, to a reasonable approximation, all
ÒinformationÓ (not, of course, the same as knowledge) is readily available to all,
or are there major obstacles in the way that may prevent us from getting to that
point?  For instance, is there no such thing as 
Òall informationÓ relevant to a
particular topic?  Are standards problems, intellectual property rights problems,

database search limitations, or other issues likely to bound us well away from that
Òall information availableÓ state?
Second, if we do get to that state, what will it be like?  Much of today
Õsemployment consists of clumsily dealing with information.  Will the demands of

more information be greater or less?  If the problem gets 
ÒsolvedÓ rather than just
increasingly addressed, what are the other main things that need to be done in an
advanced societyÑin other words, what will todayÕs information manipulatorsdo instead?Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B139CRITICAL ISSUES RELATING TO IMPACTS OFINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: AREAS FOR FUTURERESEARCH AND DISCUSSIONAlexander J. FieldSanta Clara UniversityThere are several key issues that concern me as a scholar.  First, as an
economic historian and as someone who looks retrospectively as well as prospec-
tively, I believe we face a major issue involving the archiving of data.  There are
two main issues.  People say about magnetic media that it lasts 5 years or until it
wears out, whichever comes first.  That is probably a bit pessimistic.  But even if

the media persist, what about the input-output devices?  It is getting more and

more difficult to find a 5.25-inch drive, and woe to him or her who has data on 8-
inch floppies!  Tape backups are sometimes even worse.  New backup software is

sometimes not backwards compatible, so that one needs old copies of backup
software as well as a compatible tape drive in order to restore data.  We need

mechanisms to ensure the retrievability of records that previously would have
been stored as printed records.  This issue is at least as important for individual

records (both personal and professional) as for those pertaining to the corporation
or organization as a separate legal entity.  Whatever media are used, we need

them to be at least as durable and stable as microfilm.  Ideally these media should

be relatively inexpensive, and equipment to read and/or write on them should be
standardized and widely accessible.  Will individual and private enterprise be

sufficient to ensure retrievability?  Is there an externality in terms of ensuring

access that would warrant government subsidy or intervention in this area, per-
haps as part of the activity of the National Institute of Standards and Technology?A second issue:  As a scholar I look forward to tremendous opportunities in
terms of the archiving of old journal runs.  This has an enormous potential capital

savings impact (consider the linear feet of bookshelves in faculty offices that
might be liberated).  I look forward to being able to access 100-year runs of

journals such as the American Economic Review, from CD-ROM or over a net-work through software such as Adobe Acrobat (thus text is searchable).  I see this

as less important for books and monographs (where being able to read through an
entire volume, which presumably has some coherence) will still be desirable.
Nevertheless, the ability to search the text of scholarly monographs would be
useful.  The cost of converting newly published material to this form will be

small, since most of it now exists in machine readable form before it goes to be
typeset.  The real challenge will be older works.  There is a potential for enor-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140APPENDIX Bmous efficiencies here in terms of research libraries and scholarly research.  But
who will pay?  Is there a role for the Library of Congress?  Can we get to the point

that interlibrary loan involves the simple downloading of a large file?  Will

scholars assemble libraries of CD-ROMs attached to personal computers?  Will

they invest in juke boxes so that the disks are available and retrievable when
needed?  (CD-ROMs can be as inconvenient as the computers were prior to the

advent of hard disksÑone can never seem to find the disks when one needs them,and their smaller size renders them more vulnerable to misplacement than books.)
Or will the material be available through servers in libraries or over commercial
networks?  Obviously, copyright issues are relevant for recently published works,

but I am interested in materials for which copyright is no longer relevant.  How

will this affect the publishing business?Finally, let me comment on ways in which new instructional technologieswill affect the craft of teaching.  I believe firmly that advances in information

technology will play an important role in complementing rather than eliminating
traditional classroom instruction.  The advent of television and the video tape

recorder were both heralded as sounding the death knell of traditional instruction.
There is no evidence that this has occurred, nor that recent advances will have
this effect either, any more than computers have eliminated the use of paper or
videoconferencing facilities have spelled the demise of the 747.  The effective

instructor acts in a complex mixture of roles.  In one role the instructor is a

supplier of services to students (particularly when they are enrolled in course
work beyond the age of compulsory schooling laws).  In terms of this relationship

students are in a real sense customers.  But the effective instructor occupies

another role as wellÑas, in a sense, a supervisor of students, and plays a role inmotivating, encouraging, evaluating, and developing students that is totally for-
eign to the service provider-customer model.  For any topic there will always be

a small percentage of prospective students with the necessary background, moti-
vation, and self-discipline to learn from self-paced workbooks or computer-as-
sisted instruction.  For the majority of students, however, the presence of a live

instructor, will, in my view, continue to be far more effective than a computer-
assisted counterpart in facilitating positive educational outcomes, just as for most
work relationships, a live supervisor is going to be more effective than a com-
puter replacement.The most important impact of information technology will likely occur inincreasing the productivity of the hours students spend outside of the classroom.
Several years ago many universities, including my own, built computer class-
rooms with networked computers for every one or two students.  While these

have proved effective for training in the use of various kinds of software, in most
cases they proved disastrous for standard classroom instruction.  The computers

created line-of-sight obstacles between the instructor and students, and students
could sometimes not resist the temptation to play computer games during class
time.  In some instances such labs have been ripped out.  Nor am I persuaded that
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B141the increasing use of presentation software on average improves the efficacy ofclassroom communication.  The dimming of lights and the focusing of attention

on an overhead screen distracts attention away from the facial expression and
body language of an instructor, which gives away two of the most powerful
benefits of live instruction.  Expensive overhead cameras that convert documents

to a video feed currently have lower resolution than standard overhead projectors.The greatest potential for new information technology lies in improving theproductivity of time spent outside the classroom.  The norm of accrediting agen-
cies is 2 hoursÕ outside work for 1 hour in class.  Making syllabi, solutions to
problem sets, and, where copyright law will permit, assigned reading materials
available on an inter- or intranet offers tremendous convenience.  E-mail and

more sophisticated groupware vastly simplify communication between students
and faculty and among students who may be engaged in group projects and face
enormous logistical challenges in setting up group meeting times.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142APPENDIX BCOMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATIONSClaude S. FischerDepartment of Sociology, University of California, BerkeleyAlthough not currently studying computing and communications, I nonethe-less have several observations to make based, in some measure, on my past
studies in the social history of technology.  Most generally, I suggest caution.

The major risk is to be carried away by the exaggerated claims about the conse-
quences of computer-mediated communications (CMC).  It is especially a risk for

those of us who both heavily use and are fascinated by CMC.  We should keep in

mind that big devices can have small effects; that the effects of a technology can
be contradictory and even self-canceling; that the extent of diffusion does not
necessarily demonstrate social significance (cf. the VCR and the ATM, both
nearly universal, with the cotton gin and the ÒpillÓ); and that the effects of atechnology can be substantial but only in a specific section of society, such as the
white-collar workplace.Thinking about these issues requires focus and distinctions.  One set of
distinctions concerns the subject. ÒInformation technologyÓ is too large a field,
including, among other items, television and photocopying.  Clearly the interest

is in the consequences of CMC, particularly e-mail and the Internet.  Is that all?

On the effects side, it would help to distinguish at least three contexts: (1) com-
merce and the workplace; (2) public institutions, such as government and schools;
and (3) private life, including families and other social networks.  (Some might

suggest an additional realm:  the psychological.)   Not only are the dynamics

likely to be different in each sphere, but so also are the quantity and nature of the
available data.  It is much easier to find out how marketing and job creation are

affected by CMC than it is to find out how kin ties or neighborhood dynamics are
affected.  My own focus is on the third context.
What do we know about the social consequencesÑinstitutional or privateÑof CMC? My impression is:  not much.  We have some crude estimates of com-

puter diffusion in U.S. households, by key demographic categories, but we know
little about who uses CMC and for what, and probably know nothing about the
implications of that CMC use.  (Even our knowledge of who uses the household

telephone, why, and with what end, is crude.)  Perhaps some of that basic infor-
mation is available in proprietary sourcesÑand perhaps those sources could beopened to researchers.  Much of  the published research that I have seen tends to
be small scale, focused on select groups, and often of marginal quality.  In any
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B143case, we seem to have little that explains the who, what, when, where, why, andhow of domestic CMC use.  And even answers to these questions, as I cautioned
above, may not tell us the answer to the key questionÑSo what?What do we need to know about (in the private sphere)?  And how would we
find out?  We need to know more accurately and in greater detail who uses CMCs

for nonwork purposes, how often, with whom or what, to what ends, and why;
and conversely, who does not.  Beyond those basics, several bigger questions

have been raised, for example:¥Does use of CMC significantly affect use of other media?  What is 
Òdis-placedÓ by CMC?  (Is, for instance, entertainment or social interaction displaced?)
More generally, does CMC use significantly affect time budgets?¥Does CMC use significantly affect spatial activities?  Does it, for in-
stance, replace some number of trips?  If so, which sorts of trips?
¥Does CMC use significantly affect personal social networks?  Are some
social relationships developed? Some reinforced? Some ignored? Some dropped?
(E.g., do CMC users shift some attention from, say, family, to distant friends?)These types of questions might be answered with high-quality surveys andintensive ethnographies of individuals.  Ideally, one might even design field
experiments on some of these topics.While important, the answers to these questions do not necessarily tell uswhat the aggregate, social effects of CMC are.  Understanding these effects

involves broader-scale and more difficult questions, such as the following:¥Does the diffusion of CMC significantly affect the spatial pattern oftowns?  (Are we ever going to get the dispersed world of telecommuting, first

predicted in 1893?)¥Does the diffusion of CMC significantly affect subcultural segmentation?Does it contribute significantly to the formation and sustenance of specialized
Òsocial worlds,Ó marked, for example, by 
ÒnicheÓ magazines?
¥Does the diffusion of CMC significantly affect political mobilization?These types of questions cannot be easily answered by simply looking atindividual use; these concern macro- or aggregate effects.  Here, we need com-

plex longitudinal and/or comparative studies of institutions or communities or
even nations as CMC diffuses within them.  (There are a couple of examples in

the study of television.)When journalists ask me, because I wrote a book on the early social historyof the telephone, to comment on the effects of the Internet and such, I usually
demur.  Ask me after the dust settles, I often reply; itÕs too soon to tell now.  Butthe policy challenge is to estimate where this CMC ÒfootballÓ is going to land
even while it is still bouncing around on the field.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144APPENDIX BIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY:BEHAVIORS AND METRICSAmy FriedlanderCorporation for National Research InitiativesBarriers to the diffusion of information technologies and their commercialapplication are many:  resolution of ambiguities in intellectual property and the

relative importance of patent, copyright, and contract law; development of a
viable financial model or models; and appropriate contexts for deploying tech-
nologies that provide security, afford adequate protection of personal privacy,
and offer reasonable protection of free speech. Disputes and controversies that
surround these issues make assumptions, usually silently, about who is doing
what with information technologies. We appear to be in a phase of technology
push more than demand pull.  But whether we believe that technology is techno-
logically, economically, or socially constructed, it is generally the business of the
social and behavioral sciences to understand the context in which a technology or
set of technologies is thrust.The behavioral sciences, which span everything from history to social psy-chology, rely on observation of behavior whether embodied in dusty census records
or recorded by telemarketers.  The implications of this type of research in the

networked information environment are potentially substantial. The mental model,
which assumes that the audience can be characterized statistically and in some
sense commodified, represents an (if perhaps dubious) achievement in radio, where
ways to measure and characterize the audience were developed.  These methodolo-

gies subsequently migrated into television.  Conclusions drawn from this research

are embedded in programming, commercial, and regulatory decisions.These methods are hardly without controversy in broadcast communications,and their utility in the networked information environment is questionable. The
simplest example is the problem of inferring the numbers of users.  All too

frequently, the interpretation of server logs conflates usage with users, i.e., it
makes one file request the equivalent of one reader.  But national caching as a

way of improving network performance means that readership in Australia, for
example, is greatly underreported in the server logs of the home directory.  Proxy
NOTE:  The opinions and views expressed herein are those of the author and do not reflect those
of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B145servers and bootleg mirror sites compound the problem, as do printing and hand-to-hand sharing of information whether in hard copy or on disks.  There are a

number of studies that are experimenting with ways around these issues (e.g.,
Carnegie Mellon UniversityÕs HomeNet Project, which basically controls samplesize and composition), but the issue of method seems to be one in which future
research is warrantedÑthat is, research projects in which method is the focus ofthe research and is not incidental to it.  (
ÒCookies,Ó code that resides on a user
Õscomputer, which is launched by the server when the user requests a file, have
been proposed as a way around this problem.  But the strategy is not without

controversy.)Accurate demographic characterizations are one dimension of use.  Another
is the cluster of issues typically subsumed into human-computing interactions,
which is the subject of research at the University of MarylandÕs Human Com-puter Interaction Laboratory, the University of Michigan, and elsewhere.  Many

of these research efforts use the library context as an experimental setting and
rely on two research traditions:  (1) observation of users and (2) two information
retrieval metricsÑprecision and recall.  The former is typically limited to small
samples and is vulnerable to oversimplification of the research design.  The latter

(precision and recall) were invented to assess the adequacy of indexing schemes
and were subsequently adopted by researchers to evaluate searching behavior
where the assumption was one of batch processing and the notion of iterative
searching and query refinement did not exist. Neither metric considers user satis-
faction but measures instead the relationship between what was found and what
was available to be found.In March of this year, Ron Larsen of DARPA called for developing newmetrics to replace precision and recall, but more broadly, we have to ask how far
the library paradigm can be pushed.  That is, many information-seeking behaviors

are captured in the way that people use libraries, both real and virtual.  But the leap

from the local reference desk to Yahoo or Excite deserves to be questioned, and the
range of information-seeking behaviors requires attention.  There is a clear bias in

research projects toward research in academic settings, where so-called ÒexpertsÓhold doctorates and ÒnovicesÓ are undergraduates.  It is intuitively obvious that the
way a physicist does a literature search is different from the way I might look for
information on flight schedules.  IBM has taken the approach that technologies

appropriate for libraries will successfully migrate to other structured settings, nota-
bly corporations, where the economic pay-offs are potentially substantial.  Never-

theless, in order for applications in the networked information environment to
accommodate the variation in users and in uses (which is appreciated but not fully
understood), much more research is required on information-seeking behaviors
outside formal library and/or academic settings.There is much in the future of advanced information technologies that willprobably turn out to be familiar, including the need to understand the texture of
use, whether we adopt a model of technology push or demand pull. However, theFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146APPENDIX Btools by which we will do that as well as the shape and form of products andservices to be offered are likely to change.  In the near term, this will closely

resemble contemporary research that evaluates usersÕ demand for and satisfac-
tion with products and services.  But the specifics will change as content and

applications evolve in ways we have yet to imagine.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B147FIVE CRITICAL ISSUES RELATING TO IMPACTS OFINFORMATION TECHNOLOGYMichael FroomkinSchool of Law, University of MiamiThe Argus State?Decreases in the cost of video, audio, and other sensor technology, as well ascheaper data storage and information processing, make it likely that it will be-
come practicable for both governments and private data-mining enterprises to
collect enormously detailed dossiers on all citizens.  This prospect raises a host of

issues requiring research and debate.  Among them:
¥Who currently collects what data about individuals?  How is it used?
How is it shared?  What are the trends?
¥What are the existing default rules in different jurisdictions relating to thecollection of information?  Does the nature of default rules meaningfully alter

outcomes?  Do prohibitions on data collection (e.g., data protection laws), for

example, affect outcomes?  To what extent are existing rules vulnerable to for-

eign Òdata havensÓ and other regulatory arbitrage?  To what extent do/will con-
sumers choose alternatives to the default rules when such an option is available?¥What are the possible political, social, and economic consequences ofextensive individual profiling?  Is extensive profiling likely?  Is the absence of a

great deal of the privacy now taken for granted compatible with freedom?  What
difference does it make if the profiling is undertaken by (or available to) demo-
cratic governments?  Non-democratic governments?  Private industry?  What

would the economic and social consequences be of making profiling data avail-
able to some? To all? At a cost? At no cost?  Would it be socially valuable to

prohibit the creation of individualized dossiers?  In an era of distributed data-

bases, would it be technically practical to enforce such a prohibition?¥To what extent do different types of electronic cash and electronic com-merce enable or disable profiling?  To what extent do concerns about the control of

electronic money laundering imply the power to restrict free speech or anonymous
commerce?  To what extent does the protection of free speech and a private social

and economic space require the protection of anonymous speech and/or anony-
mous commerce?  What are the current national policies regarding anonymous

speech and commerce?  In a networked world, what are the external and extraterri-

torial effects of one nationÕs policies regarding anonymous speech and commerce?Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148APPENDIX BLegal Issues Affecting Digital Commerce¥Non-repudiation?  How to find an accommodation between the stated
requirement that (at least some) commerce based on certificate-verified digital
signatures be non-repudiable (the X.509 tradition) and the traditional norms of
consumer law in most countries which are designed to protect consumers from
themselves as well as others (e.g., U.S. rules on credit card misuse).¥Choice of law issues.  As it becomes clearer in at least some jurisdictionswhich domestic rules apply to certificates, digital signatures, and electronic com-
merce generally, the issue of selecting among, or meditating between, possibly
conflicting rules in the various states and countries that could be associated with
the transaction will become inescapable.  A first step toward resolving these

issues would be to undertake a considerable project of description, one that would
look not only at the applicable substantive law, but also at the diverse choice-of-
law rules that states might apply to transjurisdictional electronic commerce.  With

this in hand, it would be possible to identify more clearly the extent to which e-
commerce actually contributes to Òregulatory arbitrageÓ and the extent to which it
merely replicates and expands existing practices.¥Certification authority policies issues.ÑIt would be interesting to survey the content of existing certificationauthority (CA)  policies (and background law) and especially to track them

over time:  Are they converging?  Are they stratifying by quality of assur-

ances offered to clients and relying partiesÑi.e., Òrace to the bottomÓ or
Òstruggle to the topÓ or 
Òproduct differentiationÓ?  These data would inform
any discussion of the regulation of CAs, as well as the debate over efforts to
harmonize international standards.ÑOne could also explore whether it is possible to design a standardsemantics of CA policiesÑand perforce of applicable background nationallegislationÑthat could form the basis for users to set up rule-based decisionmaking that could be built into e-commerce software.  This software would

allow the user to define properties that a certificate must have before it would
be accepted.  This would be an interesting case study of the potential for

technological solutions to reduce (although they could not eliminate) the
need for legal services, because currently users must make each decision
manually for every certificate, either on advice of counsel or, if this is im-
practical for cost reasons, then based on the reputation of the CA.The Economics of Trust and ReputationIt would be interesting and useful to know more about the psychology andeconomics of trust and reputation, between individuals and also between persons
and institutions.  Trust and reputation appear to be integral to the usefulness of

networked communications between strangers.  In an era of information overload
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B149and rapidly growing numbers of Web pages of indeterminate quality, does thefuture belong to editors and other reputation-enhancing quality certification orga-
nizations?  This issue has obvious implications for news and other current infor-

mation.  But it also applies to many other things, such as education, in which one

can imagine ÒInternet modelÓ degree-granting institutions that certify the qualityof various distance learning courses, and attest to the rigor of exams or administer
exams directly.Interesting questions for both empirical and theoretical study include, Towhat extent can ÒtrustÓ meaningfully be transferred?  Can transitive trust be
modeled?  If A trusts B, to what extent does B
Õs assertion that C is trustworthyactually induce A to trust C?  How much (and in what circumstances) 
should Atrust C?  What indicia other than a naked statement (or certificate) could/should B

offer A regarding C?  The answer presumably varies enormously with the con-

text:  different assurances are required regarding, e.g., scientific bona fides, gen-
eral sincerity, and creditworthiness.Distributional Effects of the Internet on Work and EconomyAlthough there has been speculation about the distributional effects of theInternet on the labor force and on institutional providers of services, there seems
to have been little empirical work.  It would be interesting to do sectoral studies,
looking at provision of services such as travel services and banking, and the
retailing of ÒcommodityÓ products such as CDs and perhaps a 
Òmade to orderÓproduct also, in order to determine what effect the Internet has on industrial
concentration, and on employment patterns.Rule Formation in (Partial) ÒAnarchyÓUntil very recently, the Internet has developed its technical standards andsocial practices without much government intervention.   Of course, the Internet

developed against an elaborate background of regulation of telecommunications,
electricity, and many other things necessary to its operation.  Nevertheless, in

important ways both the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)-based standards
process and the ÒInternet normsÓ of Usenet, e-mail, and mailing lists evolved in a
meaningfully anarchic way.  To what extent is the IETF decision-making model

transferable to other realms?  Can the fundamentally consensus-based model

survive the growth and commercialization of the Internet?  Is it possible to

educate (socialize) large numbers of new users?  Does the method produce Òbet-terÓ decisions (and according to what metric)?  Is it fairer?  Is self-selection a
viable method for decisions that do not relate to technical standards, and which in
most cases apply to issues that are neither life-threatening nor of widespread
salience?  What sort of social practices is the vigilante-style Internet method of

enforcing social norms suited to?  Where is it inappropriate?
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150APPENDIX BCULTURAL INFLUENCES ON THE PROCESS ANDIMPACTS OF COMPUTERIZATIONRob KlingCenter for Social Informatics, Indiana UniversityMost of the popular, professional, and scholarly literature about computer-ization treats (1) computer-communication systems (CCS) as tools, (2) their adop-

tion and use as parts of largely rational social processes, and (3) the impacts of
CCS use as knowable by examining the social system of CCS users and the
technical characteristics of CCS. This kind of conceptualization dates back (at
least) to Leavitt and Whisler (1958) who argued that (upward reporting) organi-
zational MIS would lead to a relative thinning out of middle managers and a
resulting Òhourglass shapeÓ in the structure of organizations. Since the 1960s, the
number of popular, professional, and scholarly books and articles about the social
consequences of computerization have grown from a thin rivulet (1960s) to a
stream (1970s) to a river (1980s) and now to a flood (1990s). The number of
academic studies has grown at a modest pace and in the late 1980s and 1990s has
been swamped by the volume of professional and popular writing.In this seemingly vast literature, one can find a number of analytical strate-gies for understanding the social consequences of computerization. In popular
and much of the professional writing it is easier to find elements of technological
determinism. But in the academic studies, Leavitt and WhislerÕs technologicaldeterminism is relatively pass” (although technological determinism reappears in
various guises, such as the Òcues filtered outÓ arguments in Sproull and Kiesler
ÕsCMC studies summarized in their book, Connections: New Ways of Working inthe Networked Organization (1992).
In scholarly studies, the main alternatives to technological determinism havebeen various contingency analyses (with different stances about which social and
technological factors are important contingency makers) and nondeterministic
social process theories (such as Markus and RobeyÕs (1988) Òemergent processtheoriesÓ).  For example, deterministic analysis would hold that documentary
networks such as Lotus Notes would encourage the sharing of information within
organizations, whereas a contingency analysis would treat the organizational
incentives for sharing information within specific groups as an important influ-
ence on the ways that Notes would be used in specific organizations.In addition, some analysts have noted the ways that CCS of a given generictype can be implemented with important technical variations and social conven-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B151tions for using them. For example, electronic forums differ in such respects aswho has access to them, who controls their content, the nature of documentary
archiving, the technological complexity faced by people who use them, and so
on.Most people who use CCS know about their possibilities through a combina-tion of personal experience and accounts in the professional and popular media.
When professionals were the primary users of CCS, the roles of computerization
movements (Iacono and Kling, 1996) were specially important, although usually
overlooked.  Today, popular usage alters the social processes by which people

come to learn about the possible social roles of new forms of CCS.It is hard to estimate the role of the mass media in popularizing the Internetand the WWW in 1993-1994; but the enthusiasm of reporters and the sudden
broad visibility of URLs in national media in 1994-1995 should not be ignored.
However, ideas about the social shaping of CCS and social influences on their
use have diffused rather slowly into professional and popular writing.Many of the questions addressed in this workshop are answered, in part, bybeliefs about how the public (including various professionals) will use CCS (and
related services).  I believe that we should take the popular cultural representa-

tions of CCS as serious influences on the ways that people will use these sys-
temsÑand on their likely social impacts. These representations are not alwayshomogeneous, and they will change over time (for example, from CCS as ÒgiantbrainsÓ in the 1950s through Òproductivity machinesÓ in the early 1980s throughÒcommunication mediaÓ in the 1990s). However, as vendors develop new tech-
nologies and services, the media play important roles in giving them meaning and
popularizing them (e.g.,  how did Java become so popular so fast?).
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152APPENDIX BQUESTIONS FOR RESEARCHJeffrey K. MacKie-MasonDepartment of Economics, and School of Information,University of MichiganWhat is currently known? What questions need to be addressed?Costs are falling exponentially for technologies built primarily with siliconand sand: computing cycles and bandwidth. The decline in data storage costs
would also seem remarkable but for the comparison.Almost, but not quite the same thing: technological progress in these areas isaccelerating. (Possible research question:  Is it?  How is it measurable?)  Ignoring

cost, remarkable new things are possible each year. (A thousand IBM 360s con-
nected with RS-232 cables would not a parallel-processing supercomputer have
made.)We have a long history of adapting to falling costs and technologicalprogress.  But we are not well adapted to such fast change.  In the context of our
history and institutionsÑsocial, political, cultural, at leastÑsuch rapid advance-ment is deviant. Deviancy threatens existing institutions.Institutions (conventions; standard practices; social,  business, and political
norms) evolve to deal with problems that undermine the ideal of a competitive
market equilibrium:  positive externalities (standardization), public goods (gov-

ernment provision), and transaction costs (default rules, social conventions).  But

when relative costs and technological opportunities change rapidly, the problems
that the institutions solved are no longer the same.Problems are changing rapidly, but institutions change slowly and reluc-tantly.  New problems, old institutions: things break, or progress is delayed.

Examples:¥International spectrum allocation:  need for global bandwidth reservations
for low earth orbit satellites and other wireless networks.¥Governance of the Internet: need for assignment of domain names andInternet protocol numbers, routing policy, content control.¥International banking and currency control.¥International taxation, currently largely source-based:  Where is cyber
activity taking place? How easy will  income shifting to find a low-tax-rate base

become?Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B153¥Church, school, and other local community institutions being challengedas core communications channels for shared values, culture, and social norms.
Rise of disembodied, asynchronous ÒcommunityÓ (e-mail, Usenet, special inter-
est groups).  Paradox of improved communications channels increasing

balkanization?So, at least one set of fundamentally important questions for research in-volves looking beneath specific impacts to uncover the institutional structures,
assumptions, and rigidities that are becoming dysfunctional, and then considering
how to facilitate the transition to new institutions that are likely to accommodate
the effects of exponential decreases in the costs of sand and silicon.¥What government core institutions underlie market interventions, subsidyand tax policies, and trade policies?  What educational structures?  What legal

institutions?¥What do we take for granted about intellectual property (before we get tothe question of protection)?¥What mechanisms for establishing trust, evaluating, authenticating, andproviding assurance underlie conventional commerce, and how can a system of
trust be evolved for electronic commerce?¥What law applies to artificial agents who participate in information ex-change? What socially acceptable policies exist for dealing with deadly threats to
the public health like outbreaks of Level IV computer viruses (Ebola-PC, Ebola-
Mac)?¥What does universal service mean? When should government treat emer-gent network services with large potential positive network externalities as public
goods that should be subsidized?¥Good advice:  Assume CPU cycles and bandwidth are free.  What then?
What will be useful methods to determine answers to such questions?The cycle of change strains some traditional methods.  It is hard to get data
from Ònatural experimentsÓ on which generalizable hypotheses can be tested.
For example, Internet congestion seems to be a problem.  Various approaches to

allocating scarce, easily congested resources have been proposed, including dif-
ferent types of usage-sensitive pricing.  Lots of concern:  Will this increase

information inequality?  Squelch creative explosion of Internet applications?

Slow adoption?  Chase away independent, voluntary provision of content in

exchange for industrialized creation and control of mass-market content?  Some

fundamental research questions:  How much consumer surplus is lost due to

congestion?  (How much does waiting 
ÒhurtÓ?  What applications are we not
getting to use because they canÕt tolerate unpredictable congestion, and howmuch are those worth to us?)  How would different classes of users respond to

usage-sensitive pricing (if it constituted a small fraction of their consumptionFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154APPENDIX Bbudget)?  Thus, would the benefits (of less congestion in current services, and
new services enabled with guaranteed quality of service) outweigh the adverse
effects on adoption rate and social externalities of communication, reduced inno-
vation, change in content, change (not necessarily increase!) in information in-
equality?To answer these questions, we might normally run consumer demand studiesto estimate user valuation of various service qualities at different prices, looking
for natural experiments to assess the value of social externalities.The problem:  no data!  And even as data start to become available, the data-
generating process is nonstationary (stationarity is a prerequisite for classical
statistical estimation and analysis): new services are introduced, users are on a
learning curve, participation externalities are riding up the adoption curve.  Ex-

ample: How much do we learn about future Internet demand if we study pre-
WWW demand?  And if we wait to observe, strong network externalities and

resulting standardization may lock us into policies and standardized solutions
that are inefficient, inflexible, and limiting (e.g., Wintel architecture; the Òmis-takesÓ of QWERTY and VHS standards). The traditional pace of research and
institutional adaptation is too slow.Possible implication:  Social science research may need to do more field and
lab experimentation, rather than waiting around for the real world to toss up
natural experiments.There may also have to be some merger between traditional social scienceand engineering methodologiesÑsome attempt to learn from results that are notfully general, developed, and rigorously tested following a modernist hypothesis
testing method.   Thus, look to findÑand designÑsystems, policies, and institu-tions that Òjust work.Ó  Think about how to make them work better, without
clinging too tightly to the ÒoptimalityÓ paradigm.  Internet litmus  test: 
Òrunningcode that works.ÓLikewise, traditional conceptual structures may need reworking.
Many observersÑbut not economists for the most partÑhave suggested thatÒtraditional economics is dead,Ó  that there is a 
ÒnewÓ economics of information.
Yet the ÒspecialÓ features of information problems are familiar in economics:
high fixed costs plus low variable costs, congestion externalities, positive net-
work externalities, and tipping. What may be new is that several of these become
simultaneously significant, and for a greater, more essential share of exchange.
We are used to thinking of these and designing policies for them as special cases.Nonetheless, we should not blithely discard hard-won principles. For ex-ample, some would have it that soon bandwidth will no longer be scarce:  it will

be infinite (effectively) and free.  Not by the laws of physics, of course.  Has

anything ever become infinite and free?  No, just relatively less scarce.  It seems
still very useful to study the relative scarcity of different resourcesÑsilicon,sand, labor, creativity, attentionÑand to focus on how relative scarcity is chang-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B155ing.  Where the change in scarcity is occurring is where the opportunities and
problems lie. The end of scarcity is a red herring.A few areas on which to focus research:¥Information warfare: survivability of communications networks (civilianas much as military); institutions and policies for response to transnational terror-
ism and criminality (that uses or attacks information infrastructure);¥Artificial agent economies:  how to harness the efficiency, stability and
robustness of competitive economies for real-time management and control of
complex systems (electric grids, telecommunications networks, smart highways,
spread-spectrum bandwidth allocation); and¥Evaluation and social filtering:  the economics of attention, trust, and
reputation.  Funding models for information and information services, and their

effect on the creation and distribution of content.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156APPENDIX BELECTRONIC INTERACTIONSPaul ResnickAT&T LaboratoriesThe Internet offers new opportunities both to support and to study interac-tions among people who do not know each other very well.  I believe that recom-

mendations, trust, reputations, and reciprocity will play important roles in such
interactions and thus deserve attention from interdisciplinary research teams.There are interesting topics in all stages of commercial interactions, fromsearch processes to negotiation to consummation of transactions:¥Recommendations and referrals can help people to find interesting infor-mation and vendors.  There is a need for continued research on techniques for

gathering and processing recommendations (this is sometimes called collabora-
tive filtering). Compilation of Ògrand challengeÓ data sets of recommendations
would help this field advance.¥The structure of negotiation protocols and the availability of informationabout past behavior of participants will affect the kinds of outcome that are
possible. Economists have theoretical results regarding many simplified negotia-
tion scenarios, but there is a need for interdisciplinary research to apply and
extend these results to practical problems of protocol design.¥Finally, in the transaction consummation phase, much effort has focusedon secure payment systems.  Some transactions, however, require a physical

consummation (mailing of a product, for example) and hence must rely on trust in
some form.  Research can explore the role of reputations in creating trustworthy

(though not completely secure) contract consummation.  Such transactions may

also have lower transaction costs than secure payment systems, even in the realm
of purely electronic transactions.Noncommercial electronic interactions also offer many interesting opportu-nities. Electronically mediated interactions are visible and available for analysis
in a way that face-to-face interactions typically are not.  For example, ÒsoftbotsÓcould scour the Web to create various graphs of relations between people and
information resources.  Social network theorists have already devised a number

of techniques for analyzing such graphs.  One possible application would be to

hypothesize about and then analyze the credibility of information sources inFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B157various parts of a social network.  Another possible application of network analy-
sis would be to analyze the flow of reciprocity (or gift exchange, as Esther Dyson
put it) and perhaps devise ways to increase a social networkÕs level of reciprocity.In the last couple of years, I have become particularly interested in theconcept of social capital, as articulated by James Coleman, Robert Putnam, and
others.  Social capital is a resource for action that inheres in the way a set of

people interact with each other.  I
Õm still struggling for various ways to connectthis concept to specific research questions and projects.  Some of the ideas above

are born from those struggles, and IÕd welcome any project ideas or new ways ofthinking about these problems.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158APPENDIX BSOCIAL IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFrank StaffordUniversity of MichiganA great deal of attention has been given to new information technology asthe main empirical force changing the wage structure and giving rise to wage
inequality. Yet something on the order of skill-biased technical change is usually
given no formal representation.  The theory that could actually explain the chang-

ing wage structure is some type of unbalanced growth model.   In fact the theory
that could apply is not too hard to imagine. It is a closed economy ÒtradeÓ modelwith ÒbiasedÓ technical change (Johnson and Stafford, 1998).  Skilled and un-
skilled workers produce different goods.  Suppose that there are three goods.

Throughout, skilled workers produce Good A (professional services, most obvi-
ously), and less skilled workers produce Good C (including basic retailing).
Initially, let us suppose that there is a large Good B sector, such as manufacturing
and some other services, produced by less skilled workers.  Then the new tech-

nology appears.  It improves the ability of skilled workers to produce the Good B

output, previously the domain of the less skilled workers.What in general will happen to the equilibrium when this skill-biased tech-nological progress occurs?  The average real wage will rise, but the skilled

workers will get more than 100 percent of the benefit, implying that the real wage
of less skilled workers will fall.  In contrast, if the new technology had allowed

the skilled workers to be more productive at their traditional specialty (Good A),
then the real wage of all workers would have risen.A model of this simple sort would go a long way in organizing thought aboutsome of the patterns reported in the literature on changing wage structure. Skilled
workers have been substituted for less skilled workers in many Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development manufacturing industries, for example.
In that (Good B) industry there has been a rise in the ratio of nonproduction to
production workers, and overall growth in manufacturing productivity has been
strong. In contrast, high-skill service-sector (Good A) productivity growth has
been generally slow.  One need only think of higher education and legal services
(and possibly medicine) as cases in point.  The terms of trade within the domestic

economy could be defined as the prices of goods produced by skilled workers and
others. The price of the Good B sector has fallen because of biased technical
change, and as additional less-skilled workers become available to produce moreFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B159traditional Good C products such as retail services, they experience deterioratingterms of (internal) trade.  For some countries with rather little trade, such as the

United States, the closed-economy aspect of such a framework is most empiri-
cally relevant. For other countries, such as Japan, both trade and external as well
as internal technological effects will be important to incorporate in an assessment
of wage pressures.Consider the price of tuition and the price of routine health care assistanceprovided by home health care aides.  Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics

wage series show the latter to have been falling below the level of inflation since
1973.  On a more optimistic note, if the new technology can be applied to

improve the productivity of skilled workers in their traditional domains, both
skilled and unskilled workers would be better off. The new information technol-
ogy is so far helping the nonmarket productivity of skilled workers: use of the
Internet will be providing a huge array of services via the household sector.  Data

available to study this aspect of technical change are close to nonexistent.  The

real standard of living may come to depend more on the nonmarket sector.  We

have developed a methodology for studying the value of nonmarket output though
the use of time-use diary data, based on a grant from the National Science Foun-
dation in the mid 1970s and early 1980s. We are currently studying the access of
children under the age of 12 to information technology with time-use diaries both
in the home and in schools. The data are being collected as a special supplement
to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, funded by the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development.  Copies of our instruments are available at

<http://www.umich.edu/~psid/>.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160APPENDIX BTHE UNCALMING EFFECTS OF DIGITALTECHNOLOGYMark WeiserXerox Palo Alto Research CenterThe important waves of technological change are those that fundamentallyalter the place of technology in our lives.  What matters is not technology itself,

but its relationship to us.In the past 50 years of computation there have been two great trends in thisrelationship:  the mainframe relationship and the PC relationship. Today the

Internet is carrying us through an era of widespread distributed computing toward
one of ubiquitous computing, characterized by deeply imbedding computation
throughout the world.  Ubiquitous computing will require a new approach to

fitting technology to our lives, an approach we call Òcalm computing.Ó Calm
computing is not a natural result of increased use of technologyÑin fact un-bridled digital technology naturally decreases calm.Imagine the following experiment; or if you are brave, try it.  Find two empty
cardboard toilet paper tubes, and tape them over your eyes so that you are looking
out through them. You now have no view up, down, left, or right, only a narrow
cone of view straight in front. Now walk. What happens?  You have lost the flow

of information from the periphery into the center, and have only the center.
Everything that you see is a surprise, because it just pops in without warning.
Your head must constantly swivel or you will trip, run into things, miss people
passing you, and generally bumble.If you wear toilet paper tubes for a few hours you will feel exhausted andhighly anxious.  Your head will have been constantly swiveling to try to partially

compensate for the lack of peripheral vision. You will feel overloaded with all the
work you did to keep up with your world.  You will be emotionally drained by all

the surprises when things popped into view and when you had to compensate for
the unexpected.Wearing toilet paper tubes is like living in the digital age, where the feelingof exhaustion is called Òinformation overload.Ó  Digital technology, like toilet
paper tubes, tends to deliver information with a set of biases.  These biases push

us toward the center of our awareness and tend to leave out the essential periph-
ery that helps us make sense of and anticipate the world around us.  More and

more of the economy and business and life are mediated through digital technol-
ogy.  If we lose the periphery, we may be smarter about whatever is right in front
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B161of us, but stupid to the point of ignorance about what is nearby but out of sightbehind the toilet paper tube.Proper action has always meant keeping the periphery and center in balance.The center is the domain of conscious, symbolic thought and action.  The periph-

ery is the domain of flow, of context, of intuition, and of understanding.  The

center is the domain of explicit knowledge of what to do, the periphery the
domain of knowing how to do it.  Take away either of these and near paralysis

results.There are 10 biases in todayÕs digital technology that contribute to unbalanc-ing center and periphery. These are saying, homogenizing, stripping, reframing,
mono-sensing, deflowing, defamiliarizing, Òuglying,Ó reifying, and destabilizing.
1.Saying names the tendency of digital technology to make everything
explicit.2.Homogenizing is the delivery of digital information at an ASCII mono-
tone that puts all information into the same pigeonhole.3.Stripping is the loss of social context and frame that frequently comes
with digital transmission.4.Reframing results because there is always a social context and frame, and
after stripping, a confusing or illegitimate context may result.5.Mono-sensing is the emphasis on the eye over all other senses, reducing
our inputs, our style, and our intelligence.6.Deflowing is the loss of the context that lets us enter the 
Òflow stateÓ of
greatest intelligence and creativity, and so reduces our anticipation and history.7.Defamiliarizing is the loss of familiar social practices as we try to work
and live on the net.8.ÒUglyingÓ names, with an ugly word, the uncomfortable feeling with
which the low state of design in digital technology leaves us.9.Reifying results when implicit practices are cast in stone, removing the white
space that lets anything work, as when a company puts all its processes online.10.Destabilized is our emotional state after buffeting from all the above.
The above add up to a bias toward the center, and away from the periphery.Understanding the power of balance between focus and periphery, and car-ing about both, can be a tremendous source of advantage in the digital age.
Digital technology, through its homogeneous, ubiquitous, and voluminous provi-
sion of information, can enable an even richer periphery for action. The danger
comes if we believe that only focus is effective. Trying to focus on the increasing
volume of bits can overwhelm us, and we can badly misuse our full intelligence
by ignoring attunement, community, and peripheral awareness.  The opportunity
for focus is greater than ever before, but only if we recognize that there is no
focus without periphery, there is no center without a surround. If we can stay in
balance, we can expect a world of greater satisfaction and effectiveness.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C163163CCommissioned PapersFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164APPENDIX CFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C165INFRASTRUCTURE:  THE UTILITY OF
PAST AS PROLOGUE?Amy FriedlanderCorporation for National Research Initiatives, Reston, VirginiaIn 1890, advocates of direct current (DC) electric power systems employedalternating current (AC) to electrocute first a dog and then a condemned criminal
at the Auburn (New York) state prison in a flamboyant attempt to demonstrate
that AC was unsafe. The incident is perhaps the best-known episode in the so-
called ÒWar of the Systems,Ó which came to an end with the invention of the
rotary converter in 1892, which enabled existing DC distribution systems to be

integrated into the more efficient AC systems, and completion of the Niagara
Power Project in 1895, which showed that large generating plants and associated
transmission lines capable of meeting regional needs could, indeed, be built.1Electric power is one of four infrastructure history studies sponsored by theCorporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI).  The others address rail-

roads, telephones and telegraphs, and banking; a fifth, radio, is in progress.  These

studies collectively examine attributes of infrastructure through literature reviews
in American history, economics, political science, and sociology.  Initially, three
questions were posed:¥When and how did take-off occur?
¥What were the public and private roles?

¥And, how did an infrastructureÑcharacterized by access, Òshareability,Ó
and economic advantageÑemerge?These questions worked well for the first three studies:  rail, telegraphy/
telephony, and electricity. But the unspoken assumption behind these questions is
technologyÑthe application of engineering and science to accomplish a purpose.
In the course of the fourth study, banking, which turned out to be about informa-
tion, we began to look at the problem of infrastructure somewhat differently,
examining properties of ubiquity, interdependence, and reciprocity, independent
of a given technology or set of technologies.  This focused attention on the
NOTE:The opinions and views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI). © 1997 by the Corporationfor National Research Initiatives.  Reprinted by permission.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166APPENDIX Corganizational and management structures, which had formed important elementsof all of the preceding studies but had not occupied center stage.Finally, all four of the infrastructures were subject to regulation during theNew Deal.  Indeed, much of the current deregulation is designed to dismantle the

world that the New Deal put in place.  From a policy perspective, then, the studies

not only delineate more clearly what the relative and changing public and private
roles were but also explain how the New Deal approaches to regulatory policy
came to be, at least with respect to these four industries.The Perils of Drawing Historical AnalogiesThe remainder of this paper discusses themes and observations common toall four of the subject infrastructures.  But a word or two is necessary on the perils

of drawing historical analogies.  All four of these infrastructures obtained shape

and form during a period of extraordinary growth.  Between 1790 and 1850, the

western boundary of the United States moved from the Mississippi River to the
Pacific Ocean; population in the same period grew by an average of about 30
percent per decade.  After 1860, population growth fell off to a mere 20 percent

or so per decade until 1910.2  Urbanization increased dramatically after 1870.  In
1890, the U.S. Census Bureau announced that the frontier was closed, and three
years later, historian Frederick Jackson Turner proposed his frontier thesis, which
was at least partially a eulogy for this period in American history.  By 1920, more

than half of the nation
Õs population lived in cities.  This meant that through the
second half of the nineteenth century and into the twentieth, there was a grow-
ing concentration of demand for networked technologies such as water, power,
and communications as well as for inter- and intra-regional transportation and
financial services.  Moreover, the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries

saw prices fall so that construction of the physical infrastructure of electricity,
for exampleÑthe generating plants, transmission lines, power stations, andsubstationsÑtook place in an environment of declining real costs which couldbe passed off to consumers as lower rates while the companies still turned a
profit.The flip side was wages.  Real wages increased in the 1920s, the period in
which recognizably modern suburbia proliferated, creating an environment of
new construction and consumer demand that made extension of power and phone
lines attractive, easy, and relatively cheap.  Indeed, the residential market for

electricity, with its demand in the evening hours, now became more attractive as
a means of continuing to balance peak load.  The distribution system was largely

in place, and the marginal cost of the Òlast mileÓÑthat is, connections to indi-vidual residencesÑwas relatively low compared with the total construction costof the system, including the generating plant and long-distance transmission
lines.  Economies of scale based on improvements to generating and transmission

technologies were increasing, and the cost as well as the price of electricity fell.3Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C167This stands in marked contrast to current debates over strategies for fundingconstruction of the Òlast mileÓ for the digital communications infrastructure.
The second cluster of differences concerns public/private roles.  At the birthof the republic, most people thought of the government as localÑ parish or
countryÑand perhaps as the state.  The federal government was a dim presence,known to most of the people in the form of the postal system.  Eligibility require-

ments, imposed by the states, meant that many men could not vote; universal
suffrage for men was not the norm until the 1820s, and women were first granted
the vote at the territorial levelÑin Wyoming in 1869.  (Wyoming granted women
the vote at the state level in 1890 when it entered the Union.)  African Americans,

enslaved or free, were denied the vote until passage of the 15th Amendment in
1870, and again, restrictive eligibility requirements excluded most blacks from
the vote, particularly in the Deep South, until the twentieth century.The vote is the most direct means of broad participation in civil life.  Just asthis participation was circumscribed on a number of grounds in the nineteenth
century, so, too, was the governmentÕs perception of its intervention in the life ofits citizens.  The Civil War (1861 to 1865) represented a massive intervention in

daily life, calling up ÒvolunteersÓ in both North and South; levying direct taxa-
tion; and affecting the economy significantly through the sale of bonds, federal
regulation of the currency, and procurement of goods and services, thus laying
the foundation for a number of private fortunes.  But these were the exception

rather than the rule.  Even the transcontinental land grants to the railroads
Ñwhich amounted to an area greater than California and Nevada combinedÑweremodest relative to the total cost.  Carter Goodrich concluded that combined state
and federal financial assistance to the transcontinental railroads amounted to
about 13.5 percent of their total construction cost, and that this assistance was
substantially less than that provided for canals.
4  Sustained intervention by the
government in American daily lives, as measured by per capita increase in gov-
ernment revenues and expenditures, appears to have increased consistently after1890 and to have begun with local
Ñnot federalÑauthority.5Federal regulation, marked by the organization of the Interstate CommerceCommission (ICC) in 1887 to regulate the railroads, was initially a forum for
resolving disputes and was embraced by some figures in the industry as a way of
setting uniform national policy in an environment of competing state policies.
However, by the New Deal, the regulatory agency was seen as a more active
instrument, and the government, rather than acting as a mediator, was seen as
having a positive obligation to ensure a minimal standard of security for its
citizens. This is obvious in both social and economic programs, e.g., the Social
Security Administration and the banking reform that expanded the scope of the
Federal Reserve, established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and
regulated the structure of the industry.6Thus, for most of American history, government was a distant presence.Research labs, like Thomas EdisonÕs in Menlo Park, New Jersey, arose withFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168APPENDIX Ccorporate support.  His was dominated by the telegraph giant, Western Union,
itself controlled by William Vanderbilt, who had financial interests in both rail
and telegraphy.  Not surprisingly, Western Union sponsored research into do-

mains that resonated with its business goals.  In 1873, Western Union announced

its willingness to reward handsomely any inventor who could achieve multiplex-
ing on its lines, thus increasing capacity without additional investment in the
wired plant.  This led directly to the simultaneous invention of the telephone by

Elisha Gray and Alexander Graham Bell.  Edison also came up with a receiver

design at Western UnionÕs behest.  His lamp and associated DC generating and
distribution system represented the most successful in a series of attempts to
challenge the gas companies by producing superior interior illumination at a
competitive price.7  Thus, the great nineteenth-century infrastructures arose by
processes of competition, compromise, and consensus in which the public pres-
ence was, at best, a facilitator and at times a mediator.What Falls Out?Economic growth, deflation, and different expectations of government arethree important differences that shaped the development of the infrastructures
studied.  But six themes do fall out as common to all four of the studies:
¥Period of experimentation,¥First-order substitutions and feedback effects,¥Evolution of new structures,¥Not always the ÒbestÓ technology,
¥Natural monopolies,  and
¥Physical plant and service.Each of these observations is discussed in greater detail in the next sections.Period of Experimentation: Winners and LosersAll of these examples witnessed a period of experimentation in which therewere winners and losers and in which a new technology or technologies per se
were necessary but not sufficient for take-off.  Railroads are the obvious ex-

ample.  Most of the technologies required for self-propelled steam engines on

rails (i.e., locomotives) were developed by the 1830s, but take-off, measured by
a leap in miles of rail construction, did not occur until the 1850s.  There were,

moreover, numerous small railroad companies that were gradually incorporated
into larger corporate systems.  But this was a surprisingly slow and at times

contentious process that required decades.The standardization of the gauge is a case in point. By 1860, there wereseven gauges for 30,626 miles of track. Of these seven, the standard, 4-foot, 8.5-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C169inch gauge represented the bare majority of mileage (53.3 percent). The secondmost common gauge was the 5-foot gauge, which was concentrated in the South,
a region that was further isolated by insufficient intra-regional rail links, includ-
ing a critical lack of bridges across major rivers. More generally, the effort by
many southern cities to secure an urban hinterland resulted in highly localized
lines emanating from the major cities but not connecting them.8Three considerations drove conformity to the ÒstandardÓ gauge, a precondi-
tion to interconnection: the big eastern railroad firms, eager to tap into the rapidly
expanding markets in the West, particularly for western grain, which required
transport across many states and many independent rail lines; the outbreak of the
Civil War, which underlined the need for efficient east-west transportation and
communications from both political and military perspectives; and finally, speci-
fication in 1862 of the 4-foot, 8.5-inch gauge for construction of the new trans-
continental roads.  Between 1870 and 1880, most of the companies outside the

South adopted the uniform gauge; 3 percent merely built a third rail. Following a
meeting among leading railroad interests in the South on February 2, 1886, the
southern lines were brought into conformity with the 4-foot, 8.5-inch gauge.9Standardization of gauge as well as increasing conformity in signaling, sched-uling, and administrative procedures (e.g., cross-licensing access to track; through-
ticketing and bills of lading; inventory control and management) enabled freight to
flow across tracks and equipment controlled by competing interests.  At the same

time, mergers and acquisitions meant that many of the smaller companies built to
service Portland, Maine, or Baton Rouge, Louisiana, were incorporated into larger
entities, resulting in a pattern of many losers and a few big winners.  Similar

patterns characterized both telephony and electricity.The Bell interests had enjoyed a 20-year patent monopoly in telephony, butwith the expiration of key patents in 1893, the number of telephone companies
serving local or regional markets exploded. Much to BellÕs corporate dismay, theorganization found itself confronted by a potential welter of services, technical
standards, and lively competition. Indeed, in 1903, more than half of the nationÕs1,051 incorporated towns and cities hosted more than one telephone company. In
1915, at least 40 percent of the telephone exchanges in cities with a population of
5,000 or more competed with another local exchange, and dual service continued
to exist in parts of the Midwest and Plains until 1924. By the end of that year,
however, AT&T, then under the jurisdiction of the Interstate Commerce Com-
mission (ICC), had bought 223 of the 234 independent telephone companies
subject to the agencyÕs jurisdiction.10Electricity tells a similar story. Until the widespread adoption of AC technol-ogy, service areas, limited by the short, one-mile range of DC distribution, tended
to be relatively compact.  It was fairly easy for a small electric utility to identify

a market.  Thus, between 1887 and 1892, 28 separate firms offering electric

service were formed in Chicago aloneÑnot including users who purchased inde-pendent, self-contained plants.  In their analysis of the structure of the electric
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170APPENDIX Cutility industry in 1897-1898, Hausman and Neufeld conclude that most firmswere only marginally profitable. Weaker firms found it difficult to raise capital,
which is one reason put forth for the founding of municipally owned electric
plants.11The integration of DC into AC systems meant that economies of scale andscope were technologically possible as well as desirable since high-voltage AC
transmission over distance was more efficient but meant higher threshold costs.
Hausman and Neufeld found that strong power companies offering a higher rate
of return tended to be older and larger, to have bigger generators, to rely on hydro
rather than steam, to have a strong commitment to AC generation, and to have a
better load factor (i.e., the ratio of average to peak demand). These firms had the
potential to enjoy substantial cost savingsÑconditions, the authors observe,Òwhich would be expected to presage a major period of consolidation,Ó and
which did, indeed, occur.  Power generation and transmission companies evolved

notions of holding companies as a way to leverage capital and manage broad
distribution.  Led by Samuel Insull of Commonwealth Edison, industry execu-

tives cultivated state regulatory agencies that mandated standardized service and
interconnection.  By 1924, 7 holding companies controlled 40 percent of the

nationÕs generating capacity, and 16 holding companies generated three-fourthsof the nationÕs electrical power.  Thus, even the publicly owned municipal utili-
ties, which provided service to end-users, were dependent on private power pro-
viders and transmission line companies for access to bulk power.12First-Order SubstitutionsSo far, we have discussed the overall shape and form of these industries.  In
each case, there was an initial period of expansion and proliferation followed by
consolidation into a fewÑor one, in the case of telephonyÑcorporate giants.This was in some cases pushed by the requirements of the technology, e.g.,
electricity.  But this was not necessary; telephony, for example, could have ex-

isted as a series of interconnecting yet independent companiesÑcorporate con-solidation and management were not necessary.In each of these cases, there was a product that let end-users or consumers dosomething or have something better.  The substitution effect is most obvious in

electricity.  There already existed a market in interior illumination provided by

candles, kerosene, and gas.  Edison intentionally set out to provide a superior

product that was cost-competitive with the equivalent gas service, and the pricing
of electricity was established in terms of competition with gas.13Telephony was also an improvement on existing local communications tech-nologies.  In 1873, Western Union enjoyed a monopoly over telegraphic service,

which was primarily between cities.  About 10 years earlier, the telegraph giant

had begun to experiment with combined telegraphic and delivery services as a
way to provide local communications connections.  Western Union also began to
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C171explore switching technologies that allowed financial information to flow fromseveral banks to a single clearinghouse and then from the clearing house back out
to the banks.  The initial market for telephony was believed to be local, thus

filling the gap in service.  Telephony was initially constrained by signal attenua-

tion to a range of about 20 to 30 miles in urban environments where cable was
laid below grade, although transmissions across distances of 800 miles could be
achieved with open-air lines.  By 1890, Bell interests were already pursuing inter-

urban transmission in head-to-head competition with the telegraph monopoly.Rail transport was also conceived of as a substitution, in this case, for trans-port via canal or overland.  Although canals had achieved the first major cost

savings, rail held the advantage in perishables and high-value goods, where the
desire for speed outweighed higher costs.14 The differential between rail and
water has been a matter of some debate. In general, though, competition between
rail and water tended to lower all freight charges.  Similar inter-product competi-

tion also tended to keep electric utility rates relatively low and encouraged utility
executives to cooperate with regulatory agencies, thus distancing themselves
from the contentious and adversarial positions taken by the gas companies.Evolution of New Structures:Niches, Organization, and EfficiencyEventually, niches for different services formed and new structures and ser-vices evolved.  For example, early nineteenth-century turnpike companies, never

as profitable as hoped, quickly gave way in the long-distance market to both
canals and railroads. On the other hand, expanding numbers of middle- and long-
distance routes via either rail or water increased the need for short-distance
overland services of 15 miles or less. This increased demand more than offset the
loss of long-distance business. Plank roads, constructed on the same principle as
wooden sidewalks, were introduced after the mid-1830s, and wagons dominated
the short haul, that is, distances less than 15 to 20 miles long, where the rate was
cheaper than either rail or canals and time was not a constraint.  This was seen as

an advantage to some entrepreneurs. John Murray Forbes of Boston, who con-
trolled the Michigan Central, avoided construction of branch lines and encour-
aged local construction of plank roads affording access to the railroad without his
having to expend capital to reach markets.  Water transport via coastal, lake, or

river steamer or by canal barge had the advantage in medium to long hauls,
averaging 650 miles, especially where the commodities shipped were high bulk
and low value. Innovations during the nineteenth century tended to reduce costs
mainly over medium to long distances. Waterways were good albeit not perfect
substitutes for rail and generally had the advantage in shipping high-bulk/low-
value goods over long distances.  Rail possessed the advantage in shipping high

value items over medium and long distances and in shipping high-bulk/low-value
commodities over medium distances.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172APPENDIX CSimilar differentiation characterized power.  Competition with electric com-
panies spurred gas producers to cut prices and improve the product.  ÒWaterÓ gas,
introduced in 1880s, was considered greatly superior to the earlier coal gas; it was
cleaner and provided better light. The manufacturing process required a larger
scale of operation, which increased the costs of entry but also resulted in econo-
mies of scale.  In a newly competitive environment, Consumers Gas of Chicago

was able to offer still lower prices, thus forcing the price of gas to fall from $3.00
to $1.75 per 1,000 cubic feet. The new gas technology resulted in similar price
competition in Houston and a 40 percent decrease in local rates.  With electricity

beginning to encroach upon the lighting market in upper- and upper-middle-class
households and commercial establishments, gas seemed poised to capture the
market of middle and working class homes where kerosene light was still the
norm.Discovery of natural gas fields and realization of the thermal applications ofgas led to further service and product differentiation.  Between 1900 and 1940,

higher-income urban households adopted electricity first and tended to prefer
electricity for lighting and natural gas for hot water and perhaps cooking, with an
oil burner for heat. Middle- and lower-income residents converted to new ener-
gies more slowly. They selected electricity for light first, then shifted from a coal
to a gas stove, and finally added a gas hot-water heater.15  Thus, consumers choseamong multiple energy technologies, and the urban energy landscape as late as
the 1920s was characterized by a mix of coal, oil, gas, and electricity.Applications of electricity in the heavy industries took place after WorldWar I as a result of continued advances in technology as well as soaring prices for
both coal and labor.  But the implications of electrification were more profound

than substitution of one power source for another.  Applications of central sta-

tion-generated electricity in manufacturing and industry had begun in the 1890s
among small users who realized the advantages of the small AC electric motor in
providing fractionalized power in highly segmented, labor-intensive processes
where needs were historically too small to justify a large investment in a steam
engine:  the apparel industries, chemicals, printing, and several equipment manu-

facturers (electrical, non-electrical, and transportation), and metal fabrication.
This cluster of industries remained at the forefront of electrification through
1954.  Large-scale enterprises, characterized by substantial sunk costs in existing

technology and by power- and heat-intensive processes (lumber, paper, petro-
leum, stone/clay/glass, and primary metals), consistently lagged in adopting elec-
tric power.  Given the scale of their facilities and the importance of the heat by-

product (e.g., steam) to their industrial processes, managers of these industries
tended to install self-contained electric generating plants when they did decide to
go electric after 1919.16Electricity thus offered small-scale enterprises access to power that formerlythey did not have.  In both the heavy and light industries and manufacturing

plants, electrification revolutionized the organization of work. Prior to the intro-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C173duction of electricity, industry relied on centralized, belt-and-shaft systems linkedto a single prime mover (either water or steam-powered).  The advent of electric-

ity and the electric motor enabled a restructuring of industrial processes to a more
efficient, decentralized unit drive system where energy was made available at the
point of use. Unit drive systems possess numerous advantages.  Elimination of

the centralized line shaft system reduced fuel inputs and increased energy effi-
ciency by reducing friction losses implicit in belt-and-shaft distribution.  Factory

structures no longer needed to support heavy mechanical systems, permitting
lighter, single-story factory layouts, which in turn permitted better materials
handling and flexible work flows.  Finally, components of the process became

independent, and having to fix a problem in one did not shut the entire system
down. Walter Devine, who has conducted the seminal work on electrification and
organization of industrial processes, argues that reduced energy requirements
resulting from efficient application of electricity in unit-drive systems resulted in
higher productivity of capital and labor. And economist Harry Oshima finds that
in textiles, six labor-intensive mechanized processes in the era of steam were
reengineered to 25 processes without a concurrent increase in labor inputs.17Thus, electrification enabled efficiencies in industrial and manufacturing pro-
cesses.Not Always the ÒBestÓ TechnologyThe efficiency cum labor substitution argument set forth by Oshima is part of
a larger literature that addresses the relationship between technology and growth
in the American economy in the late nineteenth and the twentieth centuries.  Two

themes in this literature resonate with contemporary concerns:  one is the rela-

tionship between technology and labor, and the second is the so-called Òproduc-tivity paradox.Ó  The productivity paradox consists in the fact that although
electricity was adopted as early as 1889, measurable gains in aggregate nationalproductivity began to appear only in the 1920s, after large industrial plants
Ñmetals, petroleum, transportationÑshifted to electric power.  Why the lag?
For one thing, early adopters were small, labor-intensive manufacturing
plants where good light and access to fractionalized power were important.  But

their impact on the total industrial sector was small relative to the heavy indus-
tries, which did not electrify until after 1919.  According to economist Arthur

Woolf, this transition occurred in the context of rapidly falling prices for electric-
ity, escalating prices for coal, and increased costs of labor.  Woolf concludes that

firms took advantage of cheaper energy costs to offset higher labor costs by
restructuring their operations.18His analysis has been criticized as overly reductionist and too reliant on thecosts of electricity and labor as the principal determinants without taking into
account the engineering flexibility and efficiencies that electric power enabled or
the process of incremental adoption that began with smaller enterprises.19 Fi-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174APPENDIX Cnally, the expectation that a new technology will be quickly recognized andadopted underestimates the significance of the process of experimentation, which
characterized all of the infrastructure technology we have studied, as well as the
implied costs of converting an installed base and investment in the status quo to
something new.  Indeed, the existing investment in DC systems and technologies

is one reason for the emotional intensity that characterized the ÒWar of theSystemsÓ in the 1890s.
The pace of adoption of electricityÑor any technologyÑis one dimension ofunderstanding technological diffusion.  A second is the 
ÒgoodnessÓ of that tech-
nology.  Here, a certain tautology tends to enter the discussion, which goes as

follows:  technology x enters the common use and is considered the 
ÒbestÓsolution because it has become the successful solution, and success is equated
with value.20  There is substantial evidence to the contrary.  The adoption of the
standard gauge, for example, was the consequence of tradition, the founder ef-
fect, and the advantages of a network.  The standard 110 volts in power distribu-
tion is a function of the economic analysis that one of EdisonÕs researchersundertook to determine the costs of a system that would be price competitive with
gas, where the principal cost was the price of copper.  Finally, William Paul

BarnettÕs dissertation on the diffusion of telephony challenges this tautology andelucidates the interaction between technology diffusion and demand.The explosion in demand and proliferation of companies after 1894 hadcreated a manufacturing bottleneck.  Western Electric, a wholly owned Bell

subsidiary, could not keep pace with the demand for equipment.  As a result,

lesser but still satisfactory devices were developed and used by the independent
companies. During the first decade of the twentieth century, there were basically
two competing technologies:  the common battery system, which presumed a

common power source and a physically centralized system; and the more primi-
tive ÒmagnetoÓ instrument, which relied on local, individualized battery power
contained in each device.21Barnett is interested in the relationship between technology and competition.He found that independent telephone companies offering combinations of local
and long-distance services both cooperated and competed with each other.  Suc-

cessful companies enjoyed cooperative relationships within a technological stan-
dard, even though that standard was not necessarily the most sophisticated tech-
nology available.   Thus, relatively primitive, single-exchange common-battery

companies, offering local service, thrived in complementary relationships with
multiexchange companies, providing regional long-distance service, so long as
local and regional servers shared a standard technology and interconnection was
possible.  Technological sophistication only appears to have mattered when two

companies competed for the same market niche, as in the competition for re-
gional long-distance service.  There, companies with a more advanced technol-

ogy enjoyed an advantage. Thus, Barnett describes a gradual process of success-
ful local and long-distance market/service differentiation within the context of aFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C175standardized and interoperableÑbut not necessarily the most sophisticatedÑtechnology.What is the ÒbestÓ technology then?  Barnett
Õs research suggests that it is thetechnology that satisfies end-users, which may or may not be the most sophisti-
cated available.  These results were confirmed by Kenneth Lipartito
Õs research ontelephony in the South. Lipartito found that Southerners did not necessarily want
the sophisticatedÑand expensiveÑservice offered by AT&T. When telephoneservice was introduced to Huntsville, Alabama, a local newspaper editor ob-
served that residents wanted connections to nearby townsÑnot to New York Cityor Washington, D.C.22Whither ÒNatural MonopolyÓ?We come now to the vexing theoretical question of natural monopoly.  Ex-
planations of natural monopoly begin with a model of the market based on supply
and demand, and focus their analyses on factors affecting supply (or production).
Thus, one definition of a natural monopoly looks at the production plant and finds
that natural monopolies are characterized by high fixed costs of the physical
plant.  Another definition of natural monopoly argues that a natural monopoly

exists if multiple producers will result in excess capacity and waste.The railroad companies quickly learned that excessive competition couldresult in overbuilding and waste. Frustrated by the Pennsylvania RailroadÕs domi-nance of the Pittsburgh market, for example, Andrew Carnegie financed William
VanderbiltÕs efforts to build a parallel line into Pittsburgh. Vanderbilt had hisown quarrel with the Pennsylvania Railroad:  the company had bought an interest

in the New York, West Shore, and Hudson, which, in 1881, proposed to build a
line into New York City on the west side of the Hudson RiverÑthus duplicatingthe exclusive rail route into Manhattan owned by VanderbiltÕ s New York Cen-
tral. By this time, however, J.P. Morgan had developed a substantial interest in
the rail companies as an underwriter as well as a financier.  Concerned by the

overbuilding and ruinous rate wars between the Pennsylvania Railroad and the
New York Central, he assembled the principals of both firms on his yacht, the
Corsair, and a deal was struck.23In the case of networked systems, the issue of competition is complicated bythe question of network externalitiesÑthat the value of the system increases asmore members join it.  Thus, with respect to telephony, the natural monopoly

thesis argues that the inherent value of a single, integrated network to consumers,
together with the wastefulness of multiple systems, meant that large systems
tended to devour small ones, and that efficiencies increase when the system
encompasses the maximum number of users. The theoryÑfrequently articulatedby AT&T representatives in the twentieth centuryÑseems to confirm the tradi-tional view of telephony as a natural monopoly, which provided cost-effective,
high-quality service to its subscribers.24Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176APPENDIX CThere are, however, a few problems.  For one, interconnected and networked
systems do not necessarily achieve economies of scale, a lesson railroaders
learned quite painfully and the telephone companies relearned when they tried to
design switchboards that could accommodate large numbers of users.25  For
another, the model presumes that demand is constant and homogeneous, a con-
tention that historical data do not support.Barnett demonstrated differentiated demand in Iowa and Pennsylvania, andLiparito also showed that Southern users were uninterested in superior technol-
ogy and long-distance connections; they prudently bought the cheapest service.
It is a rational decision from an economic point of view, but it is not consistent
with the theory.  Southern consumers clearly did not seek to maximize their

network access, and the nature of Southern demand was obviously different from
the interests clamoring for broader access. Even within the South, different strat-
egies were required in North Carolina from those that had worked in Georgia.26Finally, Claude FischerÕs analysis of the spread of telephony between 1900and 1940 finds that early subscribers wanted residential telephone service for a
combination of reasons.  Some, notably physicians, saw its commercial and

professional value.  Indeed, one of the entrepreneurs in Antioch, California, was

a doctor who, it is said, envisioned substituting telephone service for homing
pigeons to maintain communication with his dispersed, rural patients. A second
group of subscribers saw its social value; this group contained a disproportionate
number of women and rural residents, precisely the group left out of the AT&T
business plan, which, based on the example of Western Union, emphasized na-
tional service for businesses. But Fischer found that telephone service tended to
be adopted first among professional and socially elite households and then to
percolate more slowly through the local socioeconomic structure.27FischerÕs underlying interest concerns the diffusion of technology, and hesees in the example of the telephone evidence that consumer behavior and de-
mand affect technological development and expansion of service.  Thus, cheaper

alternatives such as direct dialing and party lines, initially resisted by corporate
AT&T because they might diminish AT&TÕs high quality of service, were imple-mented to capture the consumer market in some cases already served by indepen-
dent competitors.  Fischer also found that corporate advertising first focused on

business and commercial applications.  When the marketing message was ad-

justed again in the 1920s to stress the sociability of telephony, the change in
content came in response to patterns of consumer behavior, rather than in antici-
pation of them.28These studies all challenge the association of natural monopoly and tele-phony by demonstrating the importance of consumer demand (rather than pro-
duction efficiencies) to the process of diffusion of technologies and related ser-
vices. In Chapter 3 of his dissertation, Mueller constructs a series of purely
theoretical models in which he considers outcomes based on either a single
service, dual service, or concentration of demand.  He argues that dual service
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C177can exist in situations in which demand is concentrated but not uniform.  Con-
versely, interdependent demand and widely distributed communication patterns
tend to result in convergence. This finding resonates both with the patterns that
Lipartito found in North Carolina and Virginia as well as with the success of the
local independent company in Fort Wayne, Indiana, where communications de-
mand was primarily local and regional and could clearly be met by the local
independent company.29Finally, despite AT&TÕs undisputed technological advantage in long-dis-tance service, Mueller points out that demand for long-distance service was small
and concentrated in a limited stratum of business users.30  Theoretically, at least,this type of demand can sustain dual service, with different entities offering
service in complementary nichesÑjust as they, in fact, did in BarnettÕs analysis.Under the latter scenario, AT&TÕs superior long-distance capability could haveenjoyed complementary relationships with regional companies.  Since dual ser-

vice, which would have afforded integrated local/long-distance service through
cooperating organizations, is theoretically possible (hence monopoly is neither
natural nor inevitable), he looks elsewhere for an explanation, turning his atten-
tion to strategy.The key decision, he argues, was interconnection. Bell initially refused tointerconnect with the independent telephone companies, fighting competition
with lawsuits over alleged patent infringement and rate wars.  Independent com-
panies in Wisconsin and Ohio also initiated lawsuits, attempting to compel Bell
to provide them interconnections because the telephone was a common carrier
and therefore obligated to provide service impartially.  These suits were generally

either unsuccessful or were withdrawn, when independent companies realized
that providing access for Bell to their subscribers ceded a valuable asset. By
1897, both AT&T and the independents subscribed to a theory of competition,
which posited subscriber access territories (that is, the geographical areas in
which subscribers were physically located) as a fixed resource. Thus, telephone
service offered by one company necessarily diminished the potential market of a
second company.  Neither AT&T nor the independent companies recognized that

the distinct communication needs of urban businessmen and those of small-town
and rural residents might in principle have been served by overlapping telephone
service areas.31Physical Plant and ServiceBellÕs business model was consciously patterned on Western Union:  high-
end, national service to business clients under a single corporation that controlled
both the wired plant and the service delivery.  This was quite similar to the

railroads, which owned the roadbed and the rolling stock and provided transpor-
tation services. In their day, this was a departure from existing practices:  early
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178APPENDIX Cnineteenth-century turnpike companies constructed roads and charged a toll foraccess and use. They failed.Despite the innovation in management represented by the railroads, overtime the profitable and competitive enterprises were frequently those in which the
service was separated from the physical plant and in which the physical system
was segmented.  American Express is a case in point.  American Express was

begun as a fast freight service; shippers promised their clients rapid delivery,
used the railroads as a common carrier, and were able to charge a selection of
affluent clients what the market would bear.  This meant that American Express

targeted the lucrative end of the market, where the profit margins were high, and
did not bear the cost of maintaining the plant itself.  Rather, American Express

could take advantage of what competitive pricing did exist from the transport
companies while charging end-users for a special service.A similar differentiation in service occurred in the electrical power indus-try.  The industry evolved into a tripartite organization of large power-generat-

ing plants, transmission line companies, and local utilities that provided service
to end-users.  The most profitable part of this system was in long-distance

transmission.  Transmission line companies did not have to bear the extremely

high cost of constructing power generating plants but controlled access to bulk
power by the local utilities. In this case, the profitability was in segmenting the
service and controlling the intermediary function. This wasÑand isÑalso thecompetitive part of the industry, suggesting that monopoly control is not neces-
sary for profitability even though excessive competition can result in over-
building and  ruinous competition, as the railroads discovered and the 
Corsairincident illustrates.A Word on BankingAll of the above examples have been drawn from the infrastructures thatdeveloped around science and technology.  Banking feels like the odd man out.

Banking is fundamentally a service industry based on information; it is the sum
of a series of informational transactions, based on shared concepts, procedures,
and relationships that enabled commodities and funds to flow within and among
regions.  Banking is, therefore, an infrastructure of and about information
Ñinformation in the form of discounts, interest, and prices, and information (or
misinformation) that allowed consumers (including other bankers and investors)
to make decisions about spending and saving.Eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century merchants considered banking anauxiliary of trade. After about 1840, the volume and complexity of financial
transactions, which resulted from expanding population, public works, and eco-
nomic development, precipitated specialization among the emerging financial
services.  Finance became separate from commerce, and banking segmented into

commercial and investment houses.  The range of financial intermediaries, which
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C179included savings and loans, brokerages, and insurance companies, enabled thenationÕs savings to be invested in countless projects ranging from home mort-gages to railroads.  Of these, commercial banks were probably the most impor-

tant,32 and much of the shape and form of banking varied within increasingly
restrictive thresholds and boundaries established by state and federal laws, medi-
ated by local demands for credit and opportunities for investment.Antebellum banks provided a source of credit and a circulating medium ofexchange by issuing redeemable bank notes.  An antebellum bank made money if

it invested wisely, and if its notes stayed in circulation.  Most of the bank
Õsinvestment capital came from its investors.  If a bank failed, not only did the

investors lose whatever they had put into it, but the various noteholdersÑwhoranged from small merchants and households to other banksÑalso suffered be-cause the bank notes were now unredeemable and hence worthless. Thus, early
banking is largely about managing currency, but in the process, a series of coop-
erative structures emerged.The Suffolk system (1819 to 1858) in Massachusetts was one response to theproblem of shaky bank notes and represented an attempt to stabilize the system
by increasing confidence, or trust, in bank notes.  The Suffolk Bank intended to

reverse GreshamÕs Law by driving out bad money with good; to a large extent thebank succeeded, partially by threatening to redeem large numbers of notes issued
by irresponsible banks, and partially by compelling other banks to participate in
the system and to maintain reserves with the Suffolk bank as security for their
notes.33  Free banking (1837 to 1863) was another strategy; states established
minimum entry requirements and stipulated purchase of public securities that
were held as security against bank note issues.  Finally, discount rates, which

emerged in the context of domestic money markets, were a key indicator of the
relative risk associated with a given bankÕs notes, and the market itself discrimi-nated between good money and bad, while facilitating flows of capital within and
among regions.34Two antebellum tools, reserve requirements and discount rates, remain fea-tures of the modern banking infrastructure and have become instruments of regu-
latory policy.  Vestiges of three other antebellum innovations also survive in

modern practice:  cooperative bank insurance, correspondent relationships, and

the clearinghouse. Of these, the clearinghouse may be the most significant as an
example of emergent cooperative behavior in a competitive system.New York City emerged as the nationÕs financial center in the 1850s, and notsurprisingly, many innovations originated there or in Albany.  The New York

Clearinghouse was organized in 1853.  Like Suffolk, it relied on cooperation

among interdependent institutions to achieve greater operational efficiency and
institutional stability among the members and hence to instill greater public
confidence in the banking system. Clearinghouses required reserves, instituted
disclosure requirements, and came to act as a lender of last resort by issuing loan
certificates, which member banks used during periods of financial stress.  Inter-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180APPENDIX Cdependence among banks was furthered by correspondent relationships amongbanks and bankersÕ balances (reserves deposited by one bank in another as secu-rity for checks and notes), which were codified by New York state law.  The New

York state hierarchical model of country and city banks took on national propor-
tions, and by the Panic of 1857, actions by New York City bankers had wide
impacts.35  Not surprisingly, the Civil War legislation, which mapped out a
pyramid of relationships among banks patterned on New YorkÕs law and prac-tice, also set New York City at the apex.  Elements of the clearinghouse system

were even perpetuated in the Federal Reserve system (1913), including check
clearing, hierarchical organization based on the size of the bank and the popula-
tion it served, and voluntary membership.  The irony
Ñand the conundrumÑisthat structural interdependence, which strengthened the position of any one mem-
ber, also enabled weakness in one part of the system to travel throughout it,36 as
evidenced in crises in 1857, 1907, and 1929-1930.More QuestionsThis paper carries a question in its title.  If the utility of history is to providesolutions, then the answer is Òproceed with caution,Ó because the solutions that
were right in 1890 are unlikely to work in 1990, and it would be folly to map rate
structures from 1900 to 2000.  Indeed, the Bell system
Õs initial decision to patternits business strategy on Western UnionÕs successful national monopoly funda-mentally misunderstood the implications of telephony as a social phenomenon,
and the error brought Bell intense competition in many local and regional mar-
kets.  But if the point is to provide a common framework and baseline of experi-
ence, then history has something to offer.Whether by abstracting service delivery from the physical plant or by seg-menting the system, differentiation of services as a means of providing competi-
tion and introducing a profit incentive carries a few questions.  How will the

physical plant be built and who will maintain and upgrade it?  And what can be

done about cream-skimming, that is, offering services that skim off the lucrative
end of the market so that serving the entire market becomes unprofitable?  His-

torically, both the telephone company and the electrical power companies have
used cross-subsidization among market segments as a pricing strategy.  In the

1920s, residential electric rates subsidized industrial rates, and from the end of
World War II until 1974, long-distance telephone rates subsidized local rates.Federal intervention has been one means of ensuring fairness, either throughregulation or by creating incentives through tax-advantaged or below-market
loans in the case of rural electrification. Indeed, the Rural Electrification Admin-
istration (REA) is considered a success story. In 1930, about 10 percent of the
farms in the United States had access to electricity; by 1946, half of the nationÕsfarms were electrified and the program was solvent.  Nearly every dollar that had

been loaned out had been repaid. The REA did result in the organization of moreFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C181than 1,000 decentralized, small-scale cooperatives serving 5 million families. Inthe postwar period, it also led to competition with local utility companies that
effectively increased their range of service.  In some instances, the power compa-

nies skimmed off the most lucrative customers by building their lines through the
most profitable areas, thus depriving local cooperatives of an important segment
of their customer base.  Moreover, in the late 1940s, efforts by the Truman

administration to continue to expand public power were frustrated by CongressÕrefusal to fund construction of transmission lines. In 1952, transmission line
construction was included in the appropriation to Southwest Power. Through a
combination of REA funding and federal flood control policies, which resulted in
hydroelectric dam construction, national electrification was accomplished in the
1950s.37Federal intervention clearly resulted in expansion of electricity to under-served rural populations.  However, it is less clear whether public intervention

has historically best served the interests of the consumer or those of the producer.
Consider the example of banking.  Key concepts and relationships of the banking

infrastructure, which were invented to improve its stability and shore up public
confidence, migrated from the private to the public sector, where legislation and
regulation broadened the scope of their impact.  These include the discount rate,

reserves, checks and check clearing, and interdependence through cooperative
structural relationships. Many historical and contemporary observers argue that
banking remains sound and profitable so long as public confidence in it remains
strong; panics occur when the public loses confidence.  But when voluntary

private cooperative solutions seemed to fail, public reform efforts have stepped
in, and public requirements, whether in the form of free banking thresholds or
New Deal mandates, have become a means of building public confidence in what
is ultimately a private system.On the other hand, the contents of the New Deal reforms do not appear tohave addressed the underlying economic causes of the Great Depression,38 and
the separation of investment from commercial bankingÑthe core New Deal re-formÑin fact met the needs of bankers themselves.  During the expansionist
1920s, the distinctions between investment and commercial banking had blurred.
Real wages were rising, and large numbers of small accounts became attractive,
since they could accumulate into significant pools of capital. In this new market,
the commercial banks enjoyed several advantages.  They had access to a new

source of funds through depositorsÕ accounts; both investment banks and trust
companies had traditionally relied on the resources of a select clientele. It was
very successful.  Between 1927 and 1930, the percentage of bond issues that

originated with banks and their affiliates doubled, while the influence of private
investment banking shrank accordingly. But when the crash came, more people
experienced the collapse directly, and their bankers became their targets.  Faced

with hostile hearings on Capitol Hill, private investment bankers, who had seen
commercial banks encroach upon their securities business in the 1920s, lined upFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182APPENDIX Cbehind the separation of investment and commercial banking, thus reducing com-petition in a declining market.  Commercial bankers themselves came on board in

part to forestall more severe regulation and in part because the new legislation
promised to exclude investment banks from demand deposit business, relieving
commercial banks from the need to pay interest on demand deposits and securing
them a part of the market.39Proponents of the capture theory of regulationÑwherein the industry subjectto regulatory authority ÒcapturesÓ or subverts the commission or agency to its
own endsÑcan easily see in the structure of early regulatory agencies how stabi-lization of the industry met corporate needs by limiting competition.  Indeed,

Gregg Jarrell argues that utility and power companies that were subject to regula-
tion after 1912 actually saw relatively higher profits, higher rates, and lower
output after regulation than before.  Thus, he believes that state regulation at the

turn of the century was a Òproproducer policy.Ó40  William Emmons in his disser-
tation in business economics comes to somewhat similar conclusions with
respect to  regulation in the 1930s.  Namely, state regulation appears to have

had little or no effect upon prices, but prices tended to fall when competition
was present.  Thus, competition
Ñnot regulationÑresulted in lower prices toconsumers.41Whether the private sector would have expanded into otherwise unprofitableor marginal markets in electrical power or telephony without federal involvement
through mandates, preferential loans, and hydropower construction projects is a
separable and as-yet unanswered question.  Moreover, as the history of banking

illustrates, with liquidity crises and panics occurring with depressing 20-year
regularity between 1800 and 1930, the price of competition may be a level of
instability that is considered unacceptable.For the near term, we are likely to live out the curse of interesting times. Butbased on these historical examples, I would venture a few predictions:1.There will be several, not one, 
Òkiller appsÓ in the information technolo-
gies and they will possess the following characteristic.  They will be 
services that
clearly meet usersÕ immediate needs
Ñproduct substitutionÑand enable consum-ers to begin to do things differently, just as small consumers of central power
sources took advantage of fractionalized delivery of power to obtain interior
illumination and to begin to mechanize their labor-intensive processes. We have
already seen this in the introduction of word processing and spreadsheet pro-
grams as well as the deployment of intranet and e-mail technologies. Recall, too,
that the demand is differentiated, and not all ÒusersÓ are conventional end-users.
For example, there will be a market for intermediate services just as there exists
a machine tool industry to support manufacturing. The information technologies
will thus ripple through our institutions, so becoming ubiquitous, sometimes
noticeable, like the lamp on the wall, and sometime invisible, like the wiring
behind it.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C1832.These 
Òkiller apps,Ó like Edison
Õs lamp, will not be ends in themselvesbut will unlock an underlying technology and science that are sufficiently robust
to support other kinds of activities, just as the significance of the lamp was not
interior illumination but the system of power generation and delivery that eventu-
ally enabled the creation of a power infrastructure.  Many of today
Õs informationapplications themselves will thus migrate into the information infrastructure
wherein the defining characteristic is the ability to support more advanced appli-
cations and services.3.There will be winners and losers. We have already seen this exemplified
in former household names that are now barely memories.  This is not an aberra-

tion of the high-technology world but rather characterizes all of the infrastruc-
tures we have studied from railroads to banking.  How stability and fairness will

be achievedÑwhether through government regulation and/or incentives, orthrough market mechanisms, such as pricing strategies, or through a combination
of public and private strategiesÑremains to be seen.  History is replete with
examples and experiments, some of which succeeded and some of which failed.
What they show conclusively is that we humans are inventive and time will tell.NOTES1.Thomas P. Hughes, 
Networks of Powers:  Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930
 (Balti-
more and London:  The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983), 108;  Thomas P. Hughes, 
ÒTheElectrification of America:  The System Builders,
Ó Technology and Culture 20 (January 1979):143.2.Population data are based on the U.S. census and are tabulated in the appendices to Bernard
Bailyn et al., The Great Republic (Lexington, Massachusetts:  D.C. Health and Company,
1977), xviii.3.David E. Nye, 
Electrifying America:  Social Meanings of a New Technology 
(Cambridge,Massachusetts:  MIT Press, 1990), 260
Ð61.4.Carter Goodrich, 
Government Promotion of Canals and Railroads, 1800-1890 (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1960), 271.  On the size of the grants, see Lloyd J. Mercer, 
Rail-roads and Land Grant Policy:  A Study in Government Intervention
 (New York:  Academic
Press, 1982), 7.5.See J.B. Legler, R. Sylla, and J.J. Wallis, 
ÒUnited States City Finances and the Growth ofGovernment, 1850-1902,Ó  Journal of Economic History 48 (1988):  347-56.
6.The expansion of federal authority into social welfare issues during the New Deal is discussed
in Robert L. Rabin, ÒFederal Regulation in Historical Perspective,Ó Stanford Law Review 38
(1986):  1192, 1243-1261.
7.On corporate support for Edison
Õs research, see Hughes, ÒThe Electrification of America,Ó130-32; on Western UnionÕs competition and the invention of the telephone, see David A.Hounshell, ÒBell and Gray:  Constrasts in Style, Politics, and Etiquette,
Ó Proceedings of theIEEE 64 (September 1976), 1306; on the significance of Edison
Õs systems approach, seeHughes, Networks of Power, 21; on prior experiments in electric lamp design, see Robert
Friedel and Paul Israel, EdisonÕs Electric Light:  Biography of an Invention 
(New Brunswick,N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1986), 115;  on the competition with gas, see ibid., 123, 206-
207.8.George Rogers Taylor and Irene D. Neu, 
The American Railroad Network, 1861-1890 (Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1956), 14, 42-45, 48.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184APPENDIX C9.Taylor and Neu, 
The American Railroad Network, 52-58; Goodrich, Government Promotion ofAmerican Canals and Railroads, 179-81; Thomas E. Root, 
Railroad Land Grants from Canalsto Transcontinentals (Tulsa, Oklahoma:  Natural Resources Law Section Monograph Series,
No. 4.  Section of Natural Resources Law, American Bar Association and the National Energy
Law and Policy Institute, University of Tulsa, 1987), 19-20.10.William Paul Barnett, 
ÒThe Organizational Ecology of the Early American Telephone Industry:A Study of the Technological Cases of Competition and MutualismÓ  (Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California, Berkeley, 1988), 12;  Milton Mueller, 
ÒThe Telephone War:  Inter-
connection, Competition and Monopoly in the Making of Universal Telephone Service, 1894-
1920Ó (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 1989), 3;  Peter Temin and Louis
Galambos, The Fall of the Bell System:  A Study in Prices and Politics
  (Cambridge:  Cam-
bridge University Press, 1987), 11.11.William J. Hausman and John L. Neufeld, 
ÒThe Structure and Profitability of the U.S. ElectricUtility Industry at the Turn of the Century,Ó Business History 32 (April 1990):  232-33.
12.Hausman and Neufeld, 
ÒThe US Electric Utility Industry,Ó 238-39, 241;  Hughes, ÒThe SystemBuilders,Ó 157-59.  American Power and Light was, for example, instrumental in organizing
Utah Power and Light; see John S. McCormick, ÒThe Beginning of Modern Electric PowerService in Utah, 1912-1922,Ó Utah Historical Quarterly 56 (winter 1988):  4-22.  On the extent
of electrical power controlled by the holding companies, see Jacobson, ÒWater Works, ElectricUtilities, and Cable Television,Ó 83.  On the dependence of municipal utilities on private
companies for bulk power, see Richard Rudolph and Scott Ridley, Power Struggle:  The Hun-
dred Year War Over Electricity (New York:  Harper & Row, 1986), 38-41.
13.Friedel and Israel, 
EdisonÕs Electric Light, 123, 206-207.
14.Prior to the opening of the Erie Canal in 1825, the costs of shipping one ton of wheat or flour
from Buffalo to New York City show that the price fell from $100 by road to $10-$12 by theErie Canal.  Moreover, a single canal barge could haul a load ten times the size of that drawn by
a four-horse Conestoga wagon on the best toll roads.  Robert William Fogel, 
ÒNotes on theSocial Saving Question,Ó Journal of Economic History 39 (1979):  30, 49-50;  Patrick O
ÕBrien,The New Economic History of the Railways (New York:  St. Martin
Õs Press, 1977), 83;  on the
primacy of the transfer from road to water, see Albert Fishlow, American Railroads and theTransportation of the Antebellum Economy (Harvard Economic Studies CXXVII. Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard University Press, 1965), 44, 55, 77; John B. Rae, 
The Road and Car inAmerican Life (Cambridge, Mass., and London:  MIT Press, 1971), 20;  John F. Stover, 
IronRoad to the West:  American  Railroads in the 1850s
 (New York:  Columbia University Press,
1978), 160-64.  There has been extensive discussion with respect to calculating the rates via

water and rail reflecting the variations by commodity, distance, and destination as well aswidespread rebating.  For a review of the technical literature on this issue, see David L. Lightner,
ÒRailroads and the American Economy:  The Fogel Thesis in Retrospect,
Ó Journal of TransportHistory 4 (1983):  21-26.
15.Harold L. Platt, 
The Electric City:  Energy and the Growth of the Chicago Area, 1880-1930
(Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1991), 46-47; 
ÒHoustonÕs First Battle Over UtilityRates,Ó The Houston Review:  History and Culture of the Gulf Coast
 9 (1987):  59-68.  The
principal output of petroleum refineries from 1859 to 1900 was kerosene, which was used as analternative to gas and electricity for interior illumination.  Gas required connections to a central

source.  Although electricity might be obtained from a self-contained plant, the threshold cost
was relatively high, and there remained the problem of exhausting the heat generated by theplant.  Kerosene, however, was easily transported, provided acceptable, steady light, and did

not require hook-ups to a centralized system.  Still, by 1900, petroleum refiners could see that
electric lighting would soon displace kerosene and focused their attention on developing stovesand furnaces, which had been available but were not widely used.  Oil burning furnaces went

on the market in the 1920s but did not begin to displace coal-burning furnaces until the price ofFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C185coal soared after World War II; see Ruth Schwartz Cowan, More Work for Mother:  The
Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave (New York:  Basic
Books, 1983), 94-95; Mark H. Rose, ÒUrban Environments and Technological Innovation:Energy Choices in Denver and Kansas City, 1900-1940,Ó Technology and Culture 25 (July
1984),  532-34.
16.Richard B. Du Boff, 
Electric Power in American Manufacturing, 1889-1958 (New York:  Arno
Press, 1979), 64, 71-74, 98-100, 134-35.17.In a group-drive system, one energy source supplies power to several machines;  in a unit-drive
system, there is one energy source per machine.  Walter J. Devine, 
ÒFrom Shafts to Wires:Historical Perspective on Electrification,Ó Journal of Economic History 43 (June 1983):  347-
68, 371;  Harry T. Oshima, 
ÒThe Growth of U.S. Factory Productivity:  The Significance of
New Technologies in the Early Decades of the Twentieth Century,Ó Journal of EconomicHistory 44 (March 1984):  164.  This summary of the advantages of unit-drive systems, which
is based on DevineÕs important essay, is found in Paul A. David, ÒThe Dynamo and the Com-puter:  An Historic Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,
Ó American EconomicReview 80 (May 1990):  358.
18.Arthur G. Woolf, 
ÒElectricity, Productivity, and Labor Saving:  American Manufacturing, 1900-
1929,Ó Explorations in Economic History 21 (April 1984):  178, 189.  The average price of
electricity fell by 50 percent between 1910 and 1929; coal prices tripled in the same period, andwages doubled.19.David E. Nye, 
Electrifying America:  Social Meanings of a New Technology
 (Cambridge,
Massachusetts:  The MIT Press, 1990), 186-87.  Nye somewhat oversimplifies Woolf
Õs thesis,since Woolf himself acknowledges (based on DevineÕs research) Òthe tremendous amount offreedom in plant designÓ (p. 177) afforded by electric power, although he predicates willing-
ness to use electric power on its falling prices.  Moreover, Woolf goes on to conclude that 
Òtheprocess of electrification allowed for substantial management and factory design changes thatgreatly enhanced productivityÓ;  see Woolf, 
ÒElectricity and Productivity,Ó 189.
20.This tautology is particularly acute in the history of the internal combustion engine and the
automobile, although it also riddles the history of telephony.  For a discussion, see David A.

Kirsh, ÒThe Electric Car and the Burden of History:  Studies in Automotive Systems Rivalry in
America, 1890-1996Ó (Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, 1996), 5, 22-31.
21.Barnett, 
ÒOrganizational Ecology of the Early American Telephone Industry,Ó 13, 16-17.
22.Kenneth Lipartito, 
The Bell System and Regional Business:  The Telephone in the South, 1877-1920 (Baltimore:  The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989), 93.
23.Stover, 
Iron Road to the West:  American Railroads in the 1850s,
 117.
24.Kenneth Lipartito, 
ÒSystem Building at the Margin:  The Problem of Public Choice in the
Telephone Industry,Ó Journal of Economic History 49 (June 1989):  323; 
The Bell System andRegional Business:  The Telephone in the South, 1877-1920
 (Baltimore:  The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1989), Chapter 1.25.Milton Mueller, 
ÒThe Switchboard Problem:  Scale, Signaling, and Organization in Manual
Telephone Switching, 1877-1897,Ó Technology and Culture 30 (July 1989): 534-60, 
passim.26.Lipartito, 
ÒSystem Building at the Margin,Ó 332.
27.Claude S. Fischer, 
America Calling: A Social History of the Telephone to 1940 (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1992), 136, Chapters 4, 5, and 7 for detailed discussion of
conclusions stated on pp. 261-63.28.Fischer, 
America  Calling, 
47-48, 81-83;  see also 
ÒÔTouch SomeoneÕ: The Telephone IndustryDiscovers Sociability,Ó Technology and Culture 29 (January 1988):  32-61.
29.Milton Mueller, 
ÒThe Telephone War:  Interconnection, Competition and Monopoly in the
Making of Universal Telephone Service, 1894-1920Ó (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Penn-
sylvania, 1989), 132-33;  Lipartito, 
The Bell System and Regional Business, 167.
Mueller bases his argument on interdependent demand theory, particularly as articulated in1989 by W. Brian Arthur, at that time a professor of economics at Stanford University.  Arthur
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186APPENDIX Cpostulated a theory of Òincreasing returns,Ó by which he meant that the utility of a given
technology increases as more people select that technology.  However, Arthur also stresses that
the initial selection may be a matter of historical accident, rather than the result of economic
efficiencies or technological superiority.  Over time, as increasing returns tend to create posi-
tive feedback that magnifies otherwise random variation, the process of adopting technologywill tend to converge on a standard.  Arthur describes the process of technological adoption as

Òa random walk with absorbing barriers,Ó wherein the absorbing barrier is the point at which a
given technology has a large enough market advantage to compel most users to conform to it, aphenomenon he calls Òlock-in.Ó  The firm that controls the critical technology will, therefore,
have obtained a monopoly position.  The synopsis of Arthur
Õs thesis is based on MuellerÕsdiscussion; see Mueller, ÒThe Telephone War,Ó 44-46.  The original paper is W. Brian Arthur,
ÒCompeting Technologies and Lock-in by Historical Events,Ó The Economic Journal 99 (March
1989):  116-31.  The most obvious, current example of the phenomenon Arthur describes is
Beta versus VHS.  Arthur is not the only architect of the theory of increasing returns, but he has
given it a rigorous, econometric expression that nonetheless provides for fuzzy vagaries of
historical circumstances.30.Mueller, 
ÒThe Telephone War,Ó 47-48.
31.Mueller, 
ÒThe Telephone War,Ó 183-97.
32.On the importance of commercial banks relative to other financial services entities, see Larry
Schweikart, ÒU.S. Commercial Banking:  A Historiographical Survey,
Ó Business History Re-view 65 (1991):  606-607.  Schweikart
Õs essay is an excellent review of the literature as ofabout 1990 as well as an introduction to the fundamental issues in the field.33.On the Suffolk system, see Donald J. Mullineaux, 
ÒCompetitive Monies and the Suffolk BankSystem:  A Contractual Perspective,
Ó Southern Economic Journal 53 (1987):  884-98.
34.There is a substantial literature on free banking.  In addition to Schweikart
Õs essay, the follow-ing offer some perspectives on this period:  James A. Kahn, 
ÒAnother Look at Free Banking inthe United States,Ó American Economic Review 75 (1985):  881-85;  Hugh Rockoff, 
ÒInstitu-tional Requirements for Stable Free Banking,Ó Cato Journal 6 (1986):  617-34;  
ÒThe FreeBanking Era:  A Reexamination,
Ó Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 6 (1974):  141-68;
Arthur J. Rolnick and Warren E. Weber, ÒInherent Instability in Banking:  The Free Banking
Experience,Ó Cato Journal 5 (1986): 877-90; ÒNew Evidence on the Free Banking Era,Ó Ameri-can Economic Review 73 (1983): 1080-91; George A. Selgin and Lawrence H. White, 
ÒTheEvolution of a Free Banking System,Ó Economic Inquiry 25 (1987):  439-57.
35.Charles W. Calomiris and Larry Schweikart, 
ÒThe Panic of 1857:  Origins, Transmission, and
Containment,Ó Journal of Economic History 51 (1991):  807-34 provides an overview of the
literature as well as a context-dependent explanation of the panic itself based on the structure ofthe financial markets and contemporary events.  See also:  Richard H. Timberlake, 
ÒThe Cen-tral Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations,Ó Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 16
(1984):  1-15;  Gary Gorton, 
ÒClearinghouses and the Origin of Central Banking in the UnitedStates,Ó Journal of Economic History 45 (1985): 277-83; Gary Gorton and Donald J.
Mullineaux, ÒThe Joint Production of Confidence:  Endogenous Regulation and Nineteenth
Century Commerical-Bank Clearinghouses,Ó Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 19 (1987):457-68.36.See, for example, Bruce D. Smith, 
ÒBank Panics, Suspensions, and Geography:  Some Notes
on the ÔContagion of FearÕ in Banking,
Ó Economics Inquiry 29 (1991):  230-48.
37.On federal flood control policy, see D. Clayton Brown, 
Electricity for Rural America:  The
Fight for the REA (Contributions in Economics and Economic History, No. 29;  Westport,
Connecticut:  Greenwood Press, 1980), 109-13;  Jeanette Ford, 
ÒElectricity for a Region:  The
Southwest Power Administration,Ó Chronicles of Oklahoma 60 (Winter 1982-1983):  455;
Charles Coate, ÒThe New School of Thought:  Reclamation and the Fair Deal, 1945-1953,
ÓJournal of the West 22 (April 1983):  58-59.  On competition between rural cooperatives and
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C187local power companies, see David Mitchell, ÒThe Origins of the Robertson Electric Coopera-tive,Ó East Texas Historical Journal 25 (2, 1987):  71-79.
38.Explaining the Great Depression, which is notable primarily for its duration, has taken on a
contentious life of its own.  Current explanations emphasize its complexity and combination ofmacroeconomic, internal, and monetary dimensions.  What is clear, however, is that it was not
caused by commercial bankers invading the precincts of investment bankers.  For overviews,

see Barry Eichengreen, ÒThe Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited,Ó EconomicHistory Review 45 (1992):  213-39;  Schweikart, 
ÒU.S. Commercial Banking,Ó 633-35;  Eugene
Nelson White, ÒBefore the Glass-Steagall Act:  An Analysis of the Investment Banking Activi-
ties of National Banks,Ó Explorations in Economic History 23 (1986):  52.
39.George J. Benston, 
The Separation of Commercial and Investment Banking:  The Glass-Steagall
Act Revisited and Reconsidered (New York:  Oxford University Press, 1990), 136-38; White,
ÒBefore the Glass-Steagall Act,Ó 34-37;  
ÒThe Political Economy of Banking Regulation, 1864-1933,Ó Journal of Economic History 42 (1982):  39;  Robert Eli Litan, 
ÒAn Economic Inquiryinto the Expansion of Bank PowersÓ (Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University, 1987), 45-47;  Vincent
P. Carosso, Investment Banking in America (Harvard Studies in Business History 25;  Cam-
bridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1970), 249-51; George David Smith and RichardSylla, ÒThe Transformation of Financial Capitalism:  An Essay on the History of American
Capital Markets,Ó Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 2 (no. 2, 1993), 27.
40.Gregg A. Jarrell, 
ÒThe Demand for State Regulation of the Electric Utility Industry,Ó Journal ofLaw and Economics 21 (October 1978):  292-93.
41.William Monroe Emmons III, 
ÒPrivate and Public Responses to Market Failure in the U.S.Electric Power Industry, 1888-1942Ó (Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1989), 172-73.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188APPENDIX CCOMPUTER AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES:IMPACTS ON THE ORGANIZATION OF ENTERPRISEAND THE ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCEOF CIVIL SOCIETYJohn Leslie King and Kenneth L. KraemerUniversity of California, IrvineIntroductionThis paper is the first step toward a comprehensive review of critical issuesin the social and economic impacts of computers and communications technolo-
gies.  It is broad in its coverage, corresponding to the charge we were given.
1  The
paper considers social and economic impacts of at several levels: groups, organi-
zations, trans-organization, and society.  It also discusses the policy-relevant

implications of the research and issues for future research.  It is grounded in

empirical research as well as established and emerging theory.  However, it

proceeds from the assumption that the changes being wrought by computers and
communications technology are of such magnitude that fundamental theoretical
aspects of social understanding might be challenged.  Thus, we are not bound by
the isomorphic constraints of existing disciplinary tradition in our analysis.  The

ultimate purpose of the paper is to challenge the community of scholars engaged
in research on the profound socio-economic and socio-technical changes under
way.The audience for the paper includes scholars in the social sciences, broadlydefined, including economics, sociology, political science, psychology, commu-
nications, and management.  It concerns, as well, scholars from the science and

engineering disciplines who are concerned with the effects of their creations and
with a desire to learn more about how the processes of technological design,
development, implementation, and maintenance can be improved in the general
interests of human welfare.  Finally, it includes scholars from the humanities and
  1The charge for this paper was given by Hal Varian in a message of May 5, 1997:  ÒI suggest thatyou try to broaden your overview to include a survey of the potentially policy-relevant economic andsocial science contributions to computers and communications issues.  Relevant issues include the

role of government, privacy, free speech, intellectual property issues, employment, training/educa-tion, commerce, communities, and organizations.  I realize that you cannot address all of these issues
in depth, but it would be useful to look at as many as possible.ÓFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C189the arts who are interested in the changes, actual and potential, that computersand communications technology imply for human experience and self-reflection.The paper is preliminary, as any paper of this breadth must be.  It is a collage,
assembled by the authors based on their own research and that of others.  Despite

the limitations of this preliminary paper, it supports several strong conclusions
with implications for future research.  The paper hopefully provides a back-

ground for, and a stimulus to, discussion at the workshop.Organization of This PaperThis paper discusses three areas:¥The organization of enterprise,¥Establishment and maintenance of civil society, and¥Recommendations for research.The rationale for this organization is dependent on several underlying as-sumptions that must be understood if the discussion is to make sense.  The first

assumption is that all social phenomena must ultimately be understood in ways
that account for individual action.  Although our analysis takes place above the

individual level, beginning at the lowest point with characteristics of goal-ori-
ented work groups, we recognize that the foundations of our discussion must be
traced to explanations of individual intention and action, no matter how exten-
sively mediated or channeled by higher-level social forces or conditions of the
natural world.  Moreover, we assume that the closer our analysis is to the indi-

vidual level, the greater will be the power of individualistic explanations in
accounting for what we observe.  At the higher end of our analysis, at the broad

levels of culture and society, the power of individualistic explanations is ex-
pected to weaken considerably.These assumptions justify our selection of the categories of enterprise andcivil society as the two levels of discussion for our purposes.  We acknowledge

that other conceptual schema can work to organize this discussion.  However, we

feel that this scheme has the advantages of capturing all the major social science
perspectives needed for the task, while remaining parsimonious and indicative of
the distinction between ÒmicroÓ and 
ÒmacroÓ approaches to social phenomena
common throughout the social sciences.Enterprise in our use refers to those human activities that are undertaken forthe direct production of goods and services, whether under a market-based gover-
nance structure or a policy-based regime.  Enterprise includes everything from

local businesses to multinational firms in the private sector, and everything from
special districts for services such as flood control to multinational military forces
in the public sector.  The defining features of enterprise include the pursuit of

production objectives within specific production constraints, an inherent logic ofFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190APPENDIX Cproduction (however poorly understood by the participants in the enterprise), andtangible measures of performance in the accomplishment of the objectives.  We

adopt a perspective that is influenced primarily by microeconomics, social psy-
chology, and organizational politics, each of which has close ties to individualist
views of social behavior.  The operating assumption is that the people involved in

enterprise will, to the extent that they are able, act in ways that conform to
economic rationality, are socially tractable at the group level, and are politically
stable and salient.  The successful pursuit of these goals will produce equilibrium

conditions that are not easily disturbed.  This implies that existing equilibria,

produced largely before the advent of recent computers and communications
technologies, will not be easily disturbed.  The onus, from this perspective, is on
showing that impacts from those technologies are real, significant, and lasting.Civil society refers to the larger social order that makes economic rationality,social tractability, and political stability possible at the local level of groups,
organizations, and production sectors.  This position proceeds from the premise

that democratic government is a satisfactory, though not necessarily optimal,
form of social governance for achieving those ends, while other forms of social
governance, such as autocracy, oligarchy, and plutocracy, are not.  Our focus is

mainly on social institutions that shape the organization of enterprise, and is
predicated on the assumption that civil society enables particular organization of
enterprise, and not the other way around.  Our assessment of computers and

communications technologies in the realm of civil society draws on intellectual
perspectives from political theory, the sociology of institutions, and cultural an-
thropology, and to a lesser degree, institutional economics.We have attempted to anchor our discussion in empirical research findingswhenever possible, although in this draft we have not specifically cited the research
we have used.  However, a hallmark of research on the social impacts of computers

and communications is that coverage of this vast field has been sporadic and
episodic.  In addition, the high probability that use of these technologies is changing

fundamental aspects of enterprise and civil society makes it exceedingly difficult to
anchor some of our conclusions and recommendations in established empirical
evidence.  As we suggest in the conclusion to this paper, a major challenge for the

research community is to define, design, and implement research into the social
impacts of computing and communications that serve as sound guidance for tech-
nology design and development, organization of enterprise, and the establishment
and maintenance of civil society in the information age.Clarification of Some TermsComputers, in this review, refer to substantially more than the basic machinesassociated with computing.  Computer technology is a 
ÒpackageÓ that encompasses
a complex, interdependent system comprising people (computer specialists, users,
managers), hardware (computer mainframes, peripherals, telecommunicationsFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C191gear), software (operating systems, utilities, and application programs), techniques(management science models, procedures, organizational arrangements), and data.
Computing and communications technologies are increasingly intertwined in the
everyday functioning of socio-technical systems at all levels of organizations and
society.  Other information technologies, especially mass communication technolo-

gies such as film, audio recordings, radio, television, and print, have implications
for organizations and society, but we do not include them in this analysis.  We focus

on computers and those key information technologies that tend to be closely linked
with computers, mainly data communications.The Organization of EnterpriseWe begin with the assumption that the underlying drivers that shape indi-vidual actions leading to the organization of enterprise are individual desires for
economic rationality, social tractability, and political stability.  These objectives

are meaningless unless understood within a context of civil society that embodies
abiding social values, and thus must be seen as derivative of rather than genera-
tive of those values.  It might therefore seem that the organization of enterprise is

determined by civil society, but this is not the case.  Certain forms of social order

make particular kinds of enterprise difficult or even impossible, but within the
space of what is possible under a given social order, the organization of enterprise
can be seen as a matter of choices made by individuals and groups.  It is further

assumed that the individuals and groups making such choices are at least to some
degree blind to the outcomes that particular choices entail, and thus, the discov-
ery of satisfactory organization schemes will be at least to some degree discov-
ered through trial and error as opposed to created entirely by design.This section deals with the organization of enterprise by dividing the subjectinto key issues that relate to computers and communications technologies.  These

are the concept of organization, the organization of production and distribution,
organizational structure, enterprise boundaries, mediation patterns, organizational
politics and process, and work life.The Concept of ÒOrganizationÓPerhaps the most important potential impact of computers and communica-tions on organizations is a shift in the very concept of ÒorganizationÓ as an
economic and social entity.  Once considered to be semipermanent and routinized

by definition, ideal organizations increasingly have come to be seen as flexible,
change-oriented, and able to shift their boundaries, alliances, and partnerships
rapidly to meet changing conditions. Computers and communication technolo-
gies increasingly permit anytime, anywhere communication, synchronous and
asynchronous collaboration, and tight linkages in operational processes within
and between organizations (e.g., manufacturers and their suppliers and distribu-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192APPENDIX Ctors, and manufacturers and the direct buying public). The concept of theÒadhocracyÓÑa fluid organization in which members come and go as interestschangeÑhas emerged as competition for the concept of bureaucracy.  After
many decades of increasing vertical integration of production and growth as a
totem of success, many organizations have divested themselves of every function
that was not a core competence, and that could possibly be ÒoutsourcedÓ or
bought on the market.  Small really did become beautiful, at least in principle.

Young entrepreneurs who started little companies in their garages built novel
ideas into huge companies and fortunes, capturing the imagination of the world.
And the mighty such as AT&T, IBM, and GM appeared shaken as the world they
had built started to collapse around them.Yet, as recent history has shown, organizations such as AT&T, IBM, andGM have by no means been pushed aside by the changes of the information age.
They have adopted and adapted the technologies and harnessed them in ways that
have allowed radical ÒdownsizingÓ of work forces while retaining and in some
cases enhancing top management control over firmsÕ performance and profitabil-
ity.  And the start-up companies created in garages have found it necessary to

adopt time-honored aspects of organizational hierarchy in order to function effec-
tively.  This lesson from recent history reveals an important but frequently over-

looked aspect of the information revolution:  that its revolutionary character is

being channeled through pathways established by powerful social and institu-
tional forces that are not necessarily swept aside by the effects of technology, no
matter how powerful those effects are.Much of the rhetoric about profound change in organizations has been specu-lative and undisciplined, based more on idealized views of what organizations
ought to be rather than on the practical realities that shape organizational form
and function.  One can construct scenarios of organizational demassing and de-

centralization, but one also can just as easily construct sound arguments that
computer and communication technologies give new life to the traditional bu-
reaucracy.  Functions normally carried out by middle managers
Ñinformationgathering, decision making within directives, communications with lower-level
staff, and monitoring and upward-reporting of activities carried on belowÑcanbe replaced to some extent with technology.  The resulting 
ÒflatteningÓ of the
organization through the elimination of middle managers has been said to bring
greater ÒempowermentÓ of remaining employees.  But technological change can
just as easily allow significant increases in organizational centralization, tighter
monitoring of employee activity, more effective enforcement of compliance with
the desires of top management, and the redesign of tasks in ways that make it
difficult for employees to act outside of prescribed patterns.There are reasons to be confident about profound changes under way in thecharacter and concept of organizations as a result of new computer and commu-
nications technologies.  At the same time, it is important not to let ideological

enthusiasm substitute for careful reasoning and empirical research.  The remain-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C193der of this section on the organization of enterprise explores the ways in whichimpacts might arise, and forms the base for discussion of needed research.The Organization of Production and DistributionEconomic activity has long been divided into production of goods and ser-vices and their distribution to the final consumers. Neither production nor distri-
bution makes sense without the other, and the concept of the value chain has
emerged to unite them in an end-to-end scheme.  Of particular importance is the

concept of coordination.  Coordination is both necessary and costly, and in the

past several decades much attention has been focused on transaction costsÑeasily observable costs of coordinationÑto explain how and why production anddistribution are organized the way they are.  In particular, the focus has been on

the choice between organizing by hierarchy, meaning the imposition of a policy
regime to ensure coordination of various components of production and distribu-
tion, vs. organization through markets, meaning interaction among parties gov-
erned by the balancing of supply and demand through the marketplace.It is misleading to place hierarchy in opposition to market mechanisms,because this implies that the two are in some consistent way substitutable for one
another.  In practice, they tend to be complementary.  At the most rudimentary

level, markets can be seen as an organic innovation to facilitate economic ex-
change between individuals with minimum social overhead and no social direc-
tion other than to permit participants to pursue their own welfare.  In this charac-

terization, hierarchies evolve mainly for coping with imperfections in markets
such as occur in the case of public goods that, for various reasons, are socially
desirable but unlikely to be provided by individual investors in a market setting
(e.g., national defense).  Although not directly substitutable for each other, here is

an important sense in which societies choose to organize production and distribu-
tion predominantly around either hierarchies or markets.An extreme comparison is the command economies vs. market economies,characterized by the two sides of the Cold War. A more useful example for this
discussion is that between vertical integration of production and distribution of
products and services, conceivably under a single company throughout the value
chain, versus a disaggregated value chain in which products and services are
passed along from one organization to another through sale in markets, being
ÒassembledÓ as they go, before reaching the final consumer.  Where workable,
markets are usually considered to be more efficient than hierarchies, and in a
condition of open choice among options, hierarchies emerge mainly as a conse-
quence of market failures.  The political position that derives from this is that the

market should govern as much of production and distribution as possible, while
hierarchies serve as a kind of back-up in the event of market failure.  Given that

we have already segregated civil society from this discussion, it is not necessary
to argue this point in detail at the level of organization of enterprise.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194APPENDIX CIt has been argued that computers and communications technologies canprecipitate a shift from hierarchical organization of production and distribution to
more market-like forms.  The logic of this argument is that an infrastructure of

computing and communication technology providing 24-hour access at low cost
to almost any kind of price and product information desired by buyers would
reduce the informational barriers to efficient market operation, and presumably
facilitate a shift from hierarchy to market organization.   If this infrastructure also

provided the means for effecting real-time transactions such as sales based on
such information, whole classes of intermediaries such as sales clerks, stock
brokers, travel agents, and so on, whose function is to provide an essential infor-
mation link between buyers and sellers, might be eliminated.  Removal of inter-

mediaries would not only prune the existing hierarchies that now govern buying
and selling, but would also reduce the costs in the production and distribution
value chain, further encouraging the shift toward markets.Organization StructureOrganization structure refers to the social organization of authority and re-sponsibility assignments within groups with production objectives, predicated on
needs of specialization and division of labor.  A long-standing concern in organi-

zational structure is over the centralization versus decentralization of decision
authority within organizations.  Research indicates that use of computers and

communications technologies per se has neither a centralizing nor a decentraliz-
ing influence. The prevailing organizational context in which the technologies
are used is a much stronger influence on whether organizations centralize or
decentralize than is the technology, which can support either type of arrange-
ment.  In general, use of these technologies tends to reinforce existing organiza-

tional tendencies, and in some cases can be a powerful tool in facilitating organi-
zational changes. An organization that wishes to decentralize can implement
information systems that provide to lower level managers the information neces-
sary for decentralized decision making.  Organizations wishing to centralize can

use the technologies to facilitate surveillance by top management over lower-
level managers. Computers and communications technologies have been used to
downsize middle management when there is congruence between the centraliza-
tion of authority in the organization and centralization of control over use of
computing resources. In organizations where both are decentralized, middle man-
agers use the technology to enhance their value to senior management and to
maintain their relative influence and size.Enterprise BoundariesComputers and communications technologies have enabled the emergenceof the trans-organizational enterprise.  As producing organizations downsize and
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C195outsource in order to focus on their core competencies and shed organizationalweight and overhead, they become less capable of providing full-range products
and services for the markets they supply.  This is particularly true in the case of

highly complicated, limited production products (e.g., large information systems
and commercial aircraft) but also extends to more traditional manufacturing sec-
tors.  The 
ÒmanufacturerÓ in many cases is not deeply involved in the actual
fabrication of parts, or even in assembly. These arrangements are quite different
from those represented by the large, integrated manufacturers who bought large
numbers of supplies and parts from small suppliers.  These arrangements often

entail interlocking minority ownership arrangements, long-term supply/buy com-
mitments, sharing of product and market information, cooperative design and
manufacturing, and risk sharing.  They depend on rapid and effective communi-

cation and information links among partners, supplied through information tech-
nology.The trans-organizational enterprise can alter alliances and allegiances andcreate community at various social levels.  For example, Detroit was the center of

the global automobile industry while the U.S. automobile industry dominated the
world.  As Japanese competition emerged, the result was not a shift in centers

(e.g., Detroit to Yokohama), but rather, industry realignment around a global
market for Òworld cars,Ó with manufacturing and assembly taking place in many
countries.  This shift has had many ramifications, including imbalances in mer-

chandise trade, use of transborder transfer pricing to manipulate national taxation
systems, and the shifting patterns of employment as jobs are sent Òoffshore.ÓWhile not directly causative of these changes, computers and communications
technologies have made them possible.  The technologies also have brought

about a blurring of the traditional links between employment and place.  Large

U.S. firms have set up major information processing centers in India and the
Philippines, where skilled programming talent can be found at low prices.  These

foreign workers ÒcommuteÓ to work as 
ÒvirtualÓ guest workers over the satellite
and fiber-optic links that tie them to their employers.  In a sense, the technologies

have eliminated national borders, and in the process have made many national
labor policies moot.Mediation PatternsMany aspects of enterprise rely on mediation to function correctly within thelarger production system.  For example, many supply and distribution chains use

the mediation of brokers, expediters, agents, and so on.  Mediators often survive

through successful exploitation of information asymmetries, such as the knowl-
edge necessary to match a cargo carrierÕs excess capacity to the needs of a one-time shipper.  In principle, computers and communications technologies can

facilitate disintermediation by linking the parties along the value chain and reduc-
ing information asymmetries.  For example, these technologies have facilitated
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196APPENDIX Cthe evolution of enhanced Òmail orderÓ retailing, in which goods can be ordered
quickly by using telephones or computer networks and then dispatched by suppli-
ers through integrated transport companies that rely extensively on computers
and communications technologies to control their operations.  Nonphysical goods,

such as software, can be shipped electronically, eliminating the entire transport
channel.  Payments and reconciliation can be done in new ways.  The result is

disintermediation throughout the distribution channel, with cost reduction, lower
end-consumer prices, and higher profit margins.Another, more subtle example can be seen in heavily computerized Òware-houseÓ department stores that have taken market share from traditional depart-
ment stores by capitalizing on the cost-saving advantages of advanced supply
chain management.  In the simplest form of this model, the end retailer and the

manufacturer disintermediate the distributors that once sat between them, driving
associated costs from the system.  In the more extensive model the retailer

disintermediates itself from the traditional job of retailingÑbuying wholesaleand resellingÑby never taking possession of the merchandise.  In this model, the
manufacturer receives point-of-sale (POS) information on sales of its products at
a given location directly from the retailer, updates its planning for manufacturing
and distribution, sends a restocking order to distribution, dispatches the goods to
the retailer location, and stocks the shelves.  The manufacturer still owns the

merchandise, which the end-consumer then picks up and carries through the
point-of-sale terminal, beginning the cycle again. The retailer is no longer a
retailer in the traditional sense of the term, but rather an Òaccess providerÓ through
which end customers are delivered to the manufacturerÕs point of presence, andwho charges the manufacturer an Òaccess fee.Ó  The traditional distributors and
their costs are disintermediated in this model, and transaction costs associated
with the retailerÕs purchase of goods from the manufacturer are eliminated.Mediation, Hierarchy, and MarketsThese changes raise interesting questions about the possible shifts from hier-archies to markets in production and distribution.  The examples above appear to

reduce the operation of markets and result in vertical integration or at least
vertical channel partnerships, wherein suppliers and retailers develop close and
perhaps collusive relationships.  Market dominance could only reemerge if exclu-

sive vertical partnerships proved to be unsustainable.  The crux of the arguments
favoring markets over hierarchies revolves around the powerful attractor of re-
duced transaction costs and the possibility of greater innovation in transactions
than is possible under the constraints of hierarchy.  It has been argued that

economic organizations predicated on ongoing auction, negotiation, and coali-
tion-building behaviors, without the overhead and conservatism of hierarchy,
could unleash an unprecedented wave of economic growth and innovation.Still, the question of whether hierarchy can or should be replaced by marketsFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C197is open.  Many interorganizational information networks have been used to forge
stable and long-lasting relationships among selected economic partnersÑquitethe opposite of the impersonal Òspot marketÓÑand the ecology of these networkscan be quite complicated.  For example, travel agents theoretically are able to

move freely among various computerized airline reservation systems, and air-
lines can easily disintermediate agents by building direct connections to passen-
gers.  In fact, agents tend to lock into one system as their primary reservation aid,

and build their business around that system.  The companies that own the reserva-

tion systems were originally owned by the airlines, and they kept tight hold on
travel agents through incentives and constraints, such as forgiving costs of termi-
nal rentals and discouraging agents from using more than one system.  This

behavior was so common that federal regulation was enacted to make reservation
systems ÒneutralÓ in order to reduce anticompetitive practices.  In this case, the
hierarchy of the government stepped in to ensure the vitality of the market, which
was threatened by the use of computers and communications technologies.There are important questions about who benefits from movement towardmarkets in place of hierarchies. Those who occupy key positions in existing
hierarchies are likely to fight loss of power, and the elimination of old hierarchies
will probably give way to new hierarchies as the new market structures become
understood and exploitable for the long-term advantage of particular parties.
Already the consumer credit network industry that has made possible ÒprofileÓadvertising has come under severe criticism from privacy advocates and con-
sumer groups for invasion of privacy and appropriation of consumersÕ Òinforma-tion property.Ó  It is not clear that the powerfully seductive vision of the move
from hierarchies to networks in economic organization is comprehensive in its
consideration of what must change.Organizational Politics and ProcessThe fundamental question of organizational politics is who gains and wholoses from change. Some have predicted that computers and communications
technologies will shift power to technocrats; others have suggested that use of
these technologies will strengthen pluralistic features of organizations by provid-
ing different interest groups with the tools to respond to their opposition.  Most

research suggests that such power shifts are rare, and that organizational elites
typically use their control over resources to shape the acquisition and application
of computers and communications technologies in ways that perpetuate their
power.  However, there are exceptions.  The availability of data in electronic

form can empower new participants in decision-making processes, while the
spread of networked PCs, e-mail, and other technologies provides opportunities
for new actors to gain influence. The unresolved issue is whether, and to what
degree, these technologies alter systematically the balance of political power
within organizations.Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198APPENDIX CDecision MakingThe use of computers and communications technologies enhances the abilityto organize, maintain, and retrieve information needed for decision making and
allows modeling in which large amounts of information can be mined to provide
insights that help decision makers evaluate different scenarios.  Applied to group

decision making, these technologies seem to enable efficient handling of compli-
cated decision problems that are not easily managed without technological sup-
port.  More broadly, the use of these technologies in decision making appears to

have the effect of enforcing a stronger discipline on the process of deliberation,
with more careful attention to underlying assumptions and sensitivities.Work LifeComputers and communications technologies allow individuals to commu-nicate with one another in ways complementary to traditional face-to-face, tele-
phonic, and written modes.  They enable collaborative work involving distributed

communities of actors who seldom, if ever, meet physically.  They permit indi-

viduals, groups, and organizations ready access to rich arrays of information,
often in machine-readable form, that permits data exchange for local or remote
processing without costly conversion.  These technologies utilize communication

infrastructures that are both global and always Òup,Ó thus enabling 24-hour activ-
ity and asynchronous as well as synchronous interactions among individuals,
groups, and organizations.Computers and communications technologies can change the nature of workby altering the quality of the work environment, the nature of job skills, and the
quality of social interaction within the organization. One effect involves the
levels of job stress and work pressure experienced by information workers. Some
studies have found that automated systems decrease time pressure, while others
suggest that the technologies have speeded up work and increased the level of
stress and time pressure on workers. Other studies have found the technologies
have had a positive effect on workersÕ job satisfaction, sense of accomplishment,
and interest in their work, a greater sense of control over their work, and a sense
of enhanced status among coworkers and clients.  With few exceptions, the

technologies have not resulted in ÒdeskillingÓ of work, but instead have expanded
the number of different tasks that are expected of workers and the array of skills
needed to perform those tasks.  The exceptions appear in certain types of factory
floor and clerical work, in which the use of the technologies has resulted in some
deskilling if not elimination of such jobs.Social interaction  in organizations has been affected by the use of computers
and communications technologies. Peer-to-peer relations across department lines
have been enhanced through sharing of information and coordination of activi-
ties.  Interaction between superiors and subordinates has been made more tense
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C199because of social control issues raised by the use of computerized monitoringsystems, but on the other hand, the use of e-mail has lowered barriers to commu-
nications across different status levels, resulting in more uninhibited communica-
tions between supervisor and subordinates.The impacts of computing on work life have been basically positive withrespect to individualsÕ job satisfaction, sense of accomplishment, interest in their
work, control over their work, and social interaction with peers and superiors.
However, computers and communications have also speeded up work, increased
job pressure and time pressure, deskilled low end clerical-type jobs, and elimi-
nated certain clerical and factory-floor jobs.Employment and UnemploymentThere has long been concern over the impacts of computers and communica-tions on employment. The ability of computers and communications to perform
routine tasks such as bookkeeping more rapidly than humans led to concern that
people would be replaced by computers and communications. The response to
this argument has been that even if computers and communications led to the
elimination of some workers, other jobs would be created, particularly for com-
puter professionals, and that growth in output would increase overall employ-
ment.The net effect of computers and communications on employment is still amatter of considerable debate. Employment in particular jobs, such as telephone
operators and bank tellers, has undoubtedly decreased with the increased use of
computerized switching systems and automatic teller machines. Such clear-cut
cases are uncommon, however. The statistical measures used to determine em-
ployment conditions are not precise enough to isolate the effects of one factor
such as the use of computers and communications. After decades of computeriza-
tion of all sectors of the economy, the United States has generally achieved full
employment periods of economic expansion, while experiencing cyclical unem-ployment during periods of recession. The ratio of public-sector to private-sector
employment has not changed much either. It is more likely that computers and
communications have led to changes in the types of workers needed and in wage
rates for different occupations rather than to changes in total employment.  For

example, research shows that computer users receive higher pay than noncom-
puter users in the same jobs.  It does appear that use of computers and communi-

cations has resulted in a shift of jobs from the United States to other countries,
particularly to Asia but also to generally lower wage locations.Establishment and Maintenance of Civil SocietyCivil society is the social order in which the Òrules of the gameÓ are articu-
lated and enforced for individuals, groups, organizations, and sectors.  Our pri-
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200APPENDIX Cmary focus in this discussion is on the institutions involved in the construction ofdemocratic government, and on the relationships between the people and govern-
ment.  We also address the process by which individuals are elected and ap-

pointed to serve in institutionally defined positions of influence and authority in
the democratic governance structure.Democratic GovernanceComputers and communications technologies have taken on a highly visiblerole as tools of government and as symbols in the ongoing debate about how
government ought to function.  There has been considerable speculation over

whether use of these technologies can and will alter the functioning of democratic
government.  There are a variety of forms of democratic government.  We choose

to focus our discussion on the constitutional form of democratic government
found in the federated structure of the United States.  The United States is the

oldest and greatest user of computers and communications technologies among
large democratic countries; effects on its democratic institutions should by now
be apparent.Our discussion covers three areas:  effects on the fundamental structure of
democratic institutions predicated on separation of powers and the concept of
federalism; effects on the relationship between government and the people; ef-
fects on the processes of deliberation and constitutional operation.  It also touches

on risks inherent in high levels of dependence on technology.Effects on Democratic InstitutionsThe U.S. form of democratic government is predicated on two key assump-tions.  The first is the separation of power horizontally across the key functions of

governmentÑthe legislative, executive, and judicialÑin order to ensure thateach branch holds the others in check.  In principle, differential use of computers

and communications technologies by one of the branches could undermine the
checks, thereby providing substantive, procedural, functional, or symbolic ad-
vantage compared to the other branches.  The second assumption is that power

should be separated vertically in order to keep as much of the authority of govern-
ment as close to the citizen as possible. In principle, the construction of national
information systems for criminal justice, taxation, welfare, and so on might en-
hance the power of the central government in comparison to the regional and
local governments.The introduction of computers and communications technologies in the U.S.federal government was accompanied from the start by speculation that power
would accrue to the branch with the most technology.  Given the preponderance

of technology in the executive branch, one would expect it to gain advantage over
the legislative and judicial branches.  In fact, no such power shift has occurred.
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C201The separation of powers doctrine ensures that each branch has separate func-tions, that each is constitutionally and politically independent of the other, and
that each has inviolate recourse through which to check the others.  Computers

and communications technologies do not and cannot fundamentally change these
constitutional relationships.  Three examples serve to illustrate:
¥Example 1. Assume that, as a result of its greater computing, information,
and analytic capabilities, the executive branch gains power over the smaller, less
experienced, and diffuse bureaucracies supporting the legislative branch.  The

legislative branch can limit and control executive branch computerization by
stopping the purchase of new computer systems through legislation, by strangling
the procurement process through audits and inquiries, and by raising politically
damaging questions of faulty procurement, cost overruns, mismanagement, and
other evils resulting from executive computerization.   The legislative branch can

also request data from executive agencies, which are usually willing to comply in
exchange for favorable treatment of their appropriations. Finally, the legislative
branch can buy its own computers, develop its own information systems, and
operate its own analytic models with its own staff. Through these mechanisms,
the legislative branch can readily establish parity with and independence from the
executive branch.¥Example 2.  Assume that the executive branch tries to influence judicial
review or overload the judicial branch with data from its vast stores of computer
databases.  The judiciary is the least computerized of the three branches of gov-

ernment and so is considered most vulnerable to the information that the execu-
tive branch can amass in support of its legal and policy preferences.  The judi-

ciary, in response, can use its tremendous power over legal proceedings to hold
the executive branch to answer for its actions.  The judiciary can grant or deny

standing of parties, can determine the materiality of information, and can in effect
declare all or part of the executive branchÕs information to be Ònon-informationÓand therefore inadmissible in any of its proceedings.  The judiciary, alone among

the branches, has the power to decide what information ÒisÓ within its own house.
The judiciary can also force the executive branch to provide the informationit wants, when it wants it, and in the form it wants it, regardless of whether the
information yet exists or what it costs the executive to get it.  Finally, where

violations of federal law may be involved the judiciary can override executive
branch attempts to withhold information under claims of Òexecutive privilege.ÓIn summary, the judiciaryÕs powers overwhelm any advantage the executivebranch may gain from computers and communications technologies.¥Example 3. Assume that the legislative branch seeks to gain advantage
over the executive through the use of computers for oversight.  Even if an 
ÒidealÓcomputerized system for legislative oversight were in place, the executive could
stall in the provision of information, could provide misinformation and disin-
formation, and could refuse outright to provide information requested by theFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202APPENDIX Clegislative branch.  In such a confrontation, only the judiciary would have the
power to mediate the disagreement.  The most powerful response of the executive

branch is the ability of the executive to take his or her viewpoint directly to the
citizens, thereby marshaling popular support and potentially nullifying the effects
of oversight by the legislature.  The use of computers and communications tech-

nologies is unlikely to produce power shifts from the executive to the legislative
branch in this area either.The branches are able to check one another in virtually any case wherecomputers and communications technologies play a role, simply because the
powers of democratic institutions transcend whatever advantage the technologies
can confer.Another possibility is that acquisition of vast computer databases could giveone level of government exceptional power over other levels.  The most common

speculation has been that the central government gains power at the expense of
the regional and local governments.  There is no evidence that this has happened,

and moreover, it is unlikely that such a shift could happen.  For one thing, the

central government does not need computers and communications technologies
to gain a power advantage because it already has the supremacy of federal law on
its side.  The states have wide powers of autonomous action (i.e., the residue of

powers not conferred by the Constitution upon the federal government) but not
independence.   Also, intergovernmental relationships seldom involve the federal

government ÒorderingÓ state and local governments about.  Instead, most federal
actions affecting states involve the federal government paying for national pro-
grams, such as unemployment and social welfare, that are implemented by state
or local governments, or holding out carrots and sticks to induce state and local
governments to adopt particular policies or programs.It is conceivable that the careful use of computers could permit the federalgovernment to be more heavy-handed in its superior role by enabling federal
agencies to better monitor state compliance with federal expectations.  However,

the current political trend is in the opposite direction.  The dominant trend of

federalism is toward devolvement of funding, administration, and oversight re-
sponsibility to the state and local level.  As in the case of separation of powers

across the branches of government, the distribution of power across the levels of
the federated government system is itself a central part of democratic governance
and the institutions that ensure such governance.  Use of computers and commu-
nications technologies is highly unlikely to affect this as time goes on.Effects on Relationships Between Government and the PeopleIn the foregoing discussion we address the impacts of computers and com-munications technologies on democratic institutions.  At a more fundamental

level, there is concern that these technologies can affect the relationship betweenFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C203government at all levels and the citizens of the country.  A central principle of the
U.S. form of democratic government is the desire to protect citizens from govern-
ment tyranny.  At issue is whether the use of computers and communications

technologies could give government the power to overwhelm constitutional safe-
guards against abuse of individuals or groups.  Creating a well-balanced distribu-

tion of power between individual citizens and the government created by and for
those citizens is a central problem in the maintenance of civil society.  The issue
is not whether individuals are imperiled by a faceless government armed with
computers, but rather whether duly elected representatives, working through ap-
propriate constitutional mechanisms, will engender computer-dependent abuse of
individual rights.Most of the concern over this issue is expressed in the debate about comput-ers, databanks, and personal privacy.  There has been considerable speculation

and discussion of scenarios about the potential problems for privacy due to the
computerization of government record-keeping activities, but there has been little
empirical evaluation of the privacy-related consequences of the use of computers
and communications technologies.  The debate has at times been largely ideo-

logical.  With enough data and the right computer systems, authorities will be

able to monitor the behavior of large numbers of individuals in a systematic and
ongoing fashion. The issue is no longer what authorities can do, but what they
choose to do in surveillance of the population.Privacy is a politically sensitive topic, but as a concept in society and law itis surprisingly not well developed.  Existing uses of computerized databanks

have not yet abridged personal privacy sufficiently to require constitutional ac-
tion or even substantial Supreme Court action on the matter.  Nevertheless, the

privacy issue is being played out in the realms of rhetoric, legislation, and execu-
tive action.  The controversy is likely to persist due to the creation and intercon-

nection of large systems containing personal information and the relatively weak
enforcement of existing privacy legislation.Effects on the Political ProcessComputers and communications technologies do not appear to be seriousagents of change in democratic government, at least as seen thus far.  However,

there is a chance that these technologies will have a very substantial influence on
the political processes that lead to the election of representatives and the mobili-
zation of national political movements.  Much has been written about the effects

of communications media, particularly the mass media of radio and television, on
the processes by which public opinion is formed and guided, and on the political
contests that determine who will govern.  The addition of advanced forms of

public opinion sensing and computerized direct-mail systems has created a pack-
age of tools that are transforming the nature of the political process.  There is

concern that the extensive manipulation of public moods through the use ofFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204APPENDIX Ctechnology will decrease the electorateÕs overall awareness of the issues, andincrease the tendency toward the election of individuals on the grounds of media
image and single-issue direct-mail advertising. The ultimate concern is the deliv-
erance of the role of political opinion making, and thereby the mobilization of
political bias, into the hands of technicians who stand between actual political
leaders and the electorate.  This can result in reduced influence of the electorate

over political leaders, and potentially, the means for wholesale distortion of the
issues by political leaders with skilled Òimage-makingÓ technocrats.
The impact of computers and communications on political fund raising andcampaigning could prove to have significant effects on the political process, not
because of any particular weakness of the Constitution itself or as a result of
changes in the structure or function of the governmental system, but because
changes would be part of larger effects of automation on the mobilization of bias
among interest groups in the population.  The concept of constitutional democ-

racy depends on an informed electorate, capable of discriminating among candi-
dates based on their overall strengths. Critics contend that extensive use of televi-
sion in campaigns has decreased the quality of debate and reduced attention to the
issues.  Highly targeted, single-issue fund raising and campaigning conducted

through computer-assisted direct mail or targeted telephone solicitation could
contribute to such a trend.  The Constitution itself addresses only the major

offices and issues of enfranchisement, and not the protocols of party behavior or
campaigning.  It is possible that computing-based changes in the conduct of

political contests will eventually have an effect on the ways the Constitution is
interpreted and implemented.An orthogonal view of technology and its impact on social life implies moresubtle and possibly more important concerns for democratic government.  This

view engages concern over the application of computers and communications
technologies to mass surveillance, national information systems, and political
campaigningÑin particular, to the question of what is really important in thedetermination of who should govern.  This concern is manifest in Aldous Huxley
ÕsBrave New World, in which technological advancements were deliberately, andto a large measure democratically, applied toward elimination of need and stabi-
lization of the social order.  The new world was the epitome of successful tech-

nocracy, to the point that circumstances that gave rise to jealousy were preempted
through ubiquitous use of technology.  Technology was used not to give expres-

sion to malicious and destructive tendencies, but rather to support well-inten-
tioned efforts to eliminate the causes of strife.  In the process, the removal of

strife eliminated existential choice, and thereby, freedom.  Technology maxi-

mized efficiency in exchange for unavoidable limitations on individual privacy,
choice, and freedom.This story is useful for considering the ultimate impacts of computers andcommunications technologies on democratic government.  The world depicted by

Huxley evolved over a protracted period of time, and each step along the wayFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C205posed a choice:  to live with the contradictions of the present, or to remove themwith technical solutions.  To the extent that democratic government is threatened

by the application of information technology, the threat does not come from
weaknesses in the Constitution or the government it shapes.  Rather, the threat

comes when the governed fail to protect and defend their rights to personal
privacy.  Whether the growing use of information technologies in mass social

surveillance or in partisan political contests is leading to this end remains to be
seen.  However, this analysis gives sufficient evidence to warrant renewed con-

cern and to prompt increased monitoring of computing activities conducted by
government or used in political processes.Technology, Dependency, and RiskA civil engineer working on the large California Water Project, which bringswater from the Sacramento/San Joaquin river delta to Southern California, once
remarked, ÒIf we donÕt build this canal, we wonÕt need it.Ó  The creation of vital
infrastructure ensures dependence on that infrastructure.  As surely as the world

is now dependent on its transport, telephone, and other infrastructures, it will be
dependent on the emerging information infrastructure.  In a sense, this is an

inevitable price of technological progressÑdependency occurs only when thething depended on is very valuable to the dependent.  At issue here is the charac-

ter of dependence that is likely to evolve, and the institutional responses to that
dependency.Dependency on technology can bring risks.  Failures in the technological
infrastructure can cause the collapse of economic and social functionality.  Re-

gional blackouts of electricity service in the Northeast during the 1970s and
1980s resulted in significant economic losses.  Blackouts of national long-dis-

tance telephone service, credit data systems, electronic funds transfer systems,
and other such vital communications and information processing services would
undoubtedly cause widespread economic disruption.  Dependency can also result

in unanticipated, downstream consequences in the form of negative externalities
such as pollution.  Reliance on nuclear weapons as a key component of strategy

during the Cold War resulted in an at-any-cost development and production
program that left large areas of the United States terribly polluted, perhaps so
badly that they must eventually be entombed and sacrificed as a cost of the war.
Although it is difficult to imagine dependence on information technology pro-
ducing an equivalent environmental catastrophe, toxic materials used in the manu-
facture of semiconductors and other hardware components have polluted manu-
facturing sites throughout the country that must now be cleaned up.Perhaps most important, high levels of technological dependency create morethan the risk of economic difficulty from failure.  When technologies are instru-

mental in the construction and maintenance of institutions, and workable substi-
tutes are not available in the event of failure, institutional collapse is possible.  A
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206APPENDIX Cuseful example of this is the uni-modal transportation infrastructure of the LosAngeles region.  The entire region is dependent on a single transportation infra-

structure: vehicles on roadways.  The failure of any major component of that

infrastructureÑfuel availability, roadways, traffic controlsÑfor any lengthy pe-riod of time would bring the entire region of 12 million people to a halt.  The Los

Angeles region is at risk not only because the existing infrastructure constitutes a
single point of failure capable of threatening the region, but also because com-
muting long distances to work using that infrastructure is a widespread and
accepted cultural norm.  The failure of transportation would strike at the heart of
a nondiscretionary social institution.  The collapse of two bridges on the Santa

Monica Freeway during the 1993 Northridge earthquake was minor given the
hundreds of miles of freeway in the region, yet the cost to the cityÕs economy wasat least a $1 million per day during the reconstruction, even after every available
alternative transport mode and scheme was implemented.In summary, technological dependency is not necessarily something to beavoided; in fact, it is probably impossible to avoid altogether.  What must be

considered is the exposure brought from dependency on technologies with a
recognizable probability of failure, no workable substitutes at hand, and high
institutional and social costs as a result of failure.Conclusions and ImplicationsResearch IssuesComputerization Is a Complex Social Phenomenon.  The process of automa-tion involves more than the acquisition and implementation of discrete compo-
nents of technology.  Automation is a social phenomenon involving a 
Òpackage.ÓThe adoption and diffusion of information technology are influenced by both
demand-pull and supply-push factors.  Demand forces dominate the evolution of
large, complex, custom applications, while supply forces appear to exert a major
influence on the evolution of smaller packaged applications.The Impacts of Computers Are Seldom as Predicted.  Common predictionsabout the effects of using information technology frequently fail to materialize as
expected.  The failure of a prediction is not a signal that the outcome is negative.

Rather, it is a sign that the impacts are richer and more complex than anticipated.
Computerization has not resulted in widespread job displacement of middle man-
agers because it has actually increased their job scope and roles in many cases.
And, while management information system skill bureaucracies do not fit the
ideal-type service bureaucracy, they frequently produce leading-edge applica-
tions of the technology.  The important lesson from the research, then, is that

failures of expectation and prediction are commonplace in the world of automa-
tion.  The technology and its applications are best characterized as evolutionary
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C207in impact rather than revolutionary.  Indeed, many organizational managers de-
sire stability and work against surprises.  Therefore, new information technology

is generally introduced slowly so that it can be adapted to meet the organizationÕsneeds, and so that the staff can adapt to the technologyÕs introduction.Technology Is Political.  Rational perspectives on change seldom acknowledgethe explicitly political character of technology.  They emphasize organizational

efficiency, concentrate on the positive potential of technology, and assume orga-
nization-wide agreement on the purposes of computing use.  In contrast, political

perspectives see efficiency as a relative concept, embrace the notion that technol-
ogy can have differential effects on various groups, and reflect the belief that
organizational life is rife with social conflict rather than consensus.  From a politi-

cal perspective, organizations are seen as adopting computing for a variety of
reasons, including the desire to enhance their status or credibility, or simply in
response to the actions of other organizations.  Moreover, applications of the tech-

nology can cause intra-organizational conflicts.  Decisions about technology are

inherently political, and the politics behind them may be technocratic, pluralistic, or
reinforcing, with different consequences for different groups in each case.Political perspectives are essential for understanding technologyÕs role inorganizations.  Technocratic politics helps explain the relationships between the

technologists and end-users; pluralistic politics helps explain the relationships
among various user interests vying for access to computing resources; and rein-
forcement politics helps understand the effects of computing on power and au-
thority in organizations.  Reinforcement politics has proven to be important in

explaining decisions about computerization in organizations, wherein the tech-
nology is used primarily to serve the interests of the dominant organizational
elites.  Reinforcement occurs sometimes through the direct influence of the elites,

but more often it occurs through the actions of lower-level managerial and tech-
nical staff in anticipation of the interests and preferences of the elites.  The

political mechanisms used to determine the course of organizational automation
will vary, depending on the broader political structure of the organizations them-
selves, and these mechanisms tend to remain stable over time.Management Matters in Complex Ways.  Prescriptive literature is full of ad-monitions about the importance of management in effective use of information
technology.  However, empirical research into the role of management and the

efficacy of management policies is lacking.  Research of the Irvine School has

demonstrated the crucial role of management action in determining the course of
automation, even in cases where major environmental changes were present.
Moreover, there are distinct patterns of management action that yield different
outcomes.  Effective management of computers and communications technolo-

gies is much more difficult than suggested, however.  Specific policies are contin-

gent in their effects on the state of computing management as well as the character-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208APPENDIX Cistics of the organization.  Policies recommended in the practitioner literature haveproven to be associated with serious problems in the computing environment, and
it is unclear whether the policies are not working, whether they have not yet had
time to work, or whether they work only under special conditions.MethodologyResearch Requires the Use of Multiple Perspectives.  Review of the research
shows that systematic research into social impacts requires understanding and
use of multiple disciplines for viewing the interaction of technology, organiza-
tions, and society.  The work reviewed has used perspectives from the social

sciences (political science, economics, sociology, psychology, communications,
and management) and from the social analysis of computing in the information
and computer sciences.  Perhaps more important than the multidisciplinary char-
acter of this research, however, is the value of drawing on multiple intellectual
perspectives when exploring fundamental causes of social change.All meaningful explanations of the social aspects of the use of informationtechnology proceed from an ideological base.  All scholars have interests and

values that influence the theories and explanations they construct.  These inter-

ests are important not only in prescriptive work; they also figure markedly in the
descriptive and explanatory work in the field.  By recognizing the fact that expla-

nations are at least in part ideological, and that ideology is an essential and
required component of social analytic work, we are able to ÒtriangulateÓ on a setof facts from several explanatory positions.  This approach permits explaining

social phenomena more comprehensively and precisely by gathering insight from
various points of view, and using contrasting elements from various perspectives
to test the intellectual coherence of alternative perspectives.  The multiple-per-

spectives approach leads to increased self-consciousness during observation and
explanation, and increased precision, because explicit perspectives can be exam-
ined in light of the facts and other perspectives for explaining the facts.The dominant analytical perspectives in the computer and communicationsfield have traditionally been tied to the supply-push world of technical develop-
ment, coupled with a rational-economic interpretation of managerial behavior.
These explanatory perspectives have considerable power and have yielded useful
results.  However, they have distinct limits.  Technological determinism and nar-

row managerial rationalism do not explain the variance observed in the patterns and
processes of adoption and routinization of information technology in various tasks,
and they fall far short of explaining the considerable differences in successful use of
the technology across organizations.  Indeed, such perspectives are at a loss to

explain the fact that ÒsuccessÓ in the use of information technology is singularly
elusive.  As economist Eliot Soloway has stated so succinctly, the effects of the

information revolution have shown up everywhere but in the profit figures.There certainly are technical and economic-rational elements to be consid-Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C209ered in understanding use of information technology in organizations.  Missing,
however, are the more finely grained explanations of volition in shaping the
behaviors of those that adopt and use the technology, or that react to the effects of
its use.  While it is clear that information technology has brought major opportu-

nities for change to organizations, it is the individuals and features of the organi-
zations within which they work that determine whether given technologies are
adopted and how they will be absorbed into the complex of factors operating in
modern organizations.  Organizations are political, social, and managerial con-

structions that involve interactions among competing and cooperating groups,
each of which seeks to pursue some mix of its own and common interests, within
the framework of broader organizational and social constructions of what is
appropriate and expected.  Since the true consequences of using information

technology are unforeseeable, the actions of  individuals in organizations are

always based to some extent on faith, social pressure, perceived political advan-
tage, and other factors, in addition to Òcost-benefitÓ calculi covering applications
to given activities.Research Requires a Critical Perspective.  Research indicates that there is
often a gulf between expectations and subsequent experience with the use of
information technology.  It is important, therefore, that research proceed from a

critical stance.  It should be concerned with challenging existing ideas, examining

expectations about technology and organizations, and counteracting unsubstanti-
ated biases in both.  It should focus particularly on the important role played by

ideology and expectations in the use of information technology.  The expecta-

tions of managers and others in organizations influence the choices they make in
adopting and using technology.  Managers who believe in technological solutions

are likely to introduce information technology on faith, while discounting other
considerations.  And experiences with technology shape future expectations about

the efficacy of technology in meeting organizational needs.  The ongoing rela-

tionship between expectations and outcomes is a crucial part of understanding the
dynamics of use of information technology in organizations.In taking a critical stance, it is useful to start from common expectations andaccepted explanations, and then attempt to corroborate them with empirical evi-
dence.  When the corroboration is incomplete, explanations can be modified,

expanded, or displaced in order to develop a more accurate fit of theory with the
facts.  The combination of the critical stance and the multiple-perspectives ap-

proach reveals biases inherent in popular claims and provides leverage to think
critically about alternative explanations.Social Analysis Requires Innovation in Research Design.  The Irvine School
has produced methodological as well as substantive contributions.  Most are

innovations in research design that are especially suited to social analysis.  The

basic research strategy of the group is that the scale of research has to match theFostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210APPENDIX Cscope of the problem one seeks to address.  Large, complex, and multifaceted
problems require similar approaches.  Given customary constraints (shortage of

knowledge, resources, and talented people), one is challenged to focus both en-
ergy and effort.Five recommendations can guide research.  The first is to focus on leading
adopters of the technology when studying the effectiveness of policies for man-
aging computing.  This focus enables determination of what works and what does

not in the process of innovating, and can lead to advice that will bring others up
to the level of the leading performers.  The second, when studying policies, is to

sample sites at the extremes of policy application (e.g., high and low centraliza-
tion, insignificant and extensive user training).  This approach maximizes the

variance on the policies and provides a better indication of the basic direction in
the relationships.  The third is to use census surveys to investigate the extent of a

technologyÕs diffusion, the extent of its use, and the nature of its organizationalimpact.  In addition to elimination of sampling bias, a census provides a good

indication of the distribution of patterns of diffusion throughout a population of
organizations.  The fourth is to concentrate on long-term study of organizational

and social impacts.  Such impacts cannot be studied over the short term because

changes occur slowly, the effects of the use of technology are indirect more often
than direct, and the organization and the technology are interactive.  The fifth is

to use a mix of methodsÑquantitative and qualitative secondary data analysis,survey research, longitudinal research, international comparative researchÑanda mix of measures in the research in an effort to achieve better measurement and
to triangulate the results of various studies.