DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/6327Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine'sToxicology and Environmental Health Databases44 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06299-2 | DOI 10.17226/6327Catharyn T. Liverman, Carolyn E. Fulco, and Howard M. Kipen, Editors; Committeeon Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology andEnvironmental Health Databases, Institute of MedicineInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Internet Access to theNational Library of Medicine™sToxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCatharyn T. Liverman, Carolyn E. Fulco, andHoward M. Kipen, EditorsCommittee on Internet Access to theNational Library of Medicine™sToxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesDivision of Health Promotion and Disease PreventionINSTITUTE OF MEDICINENATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.  1998Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS Ł 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Ł Washington, DC  20418NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the GoverningBoard of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the
Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were
chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.The Institute of Medicine was chartered in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto enlist distinguished members of the appropriate professions in the examination of
policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  In this, the Institute acts under
both the Academy™s 1863 congressional charter responsibility to be an advisor to the
federal government and its own initiative in identifying issues of medical care, research,
and education. Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.Support for this project was provided by the National Library of Medicine, NationalInstitutes of Health, under Contract No. N01-OD-4-2139. The views presented are those
of the Institute of Medicine Committee on Internet Access to the National Library of
Medicine™s Toxicology and Environmental Health Databases and are not necessarily
those of the funding organization.International Standard Book No. 0-309-06299-3
Additional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academy Press,Box 285, 2101 Constitution Avenue, Washington, DC 20055. Call (800) 624-6242 or
(202) 334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area, or visit the NAP™s on-linebookstore at http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 1998 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of America.
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost allcultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history.  The image adopted as a
logotype by the Institute of Medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient Greece,
now held by the  Staatliche Museen in Berlin.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON INTERNET ACCESS TO THENATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE™S TOXICOLOGY ANDENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH DATABASESHOWARD KIPEN (Chair), Associate Professor and Director, Division of Oc-cupational Health, Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Insti-tute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New JerseyŒRobert WoodJohnson Medical School, PiscatawayJAMES CIMINO, Associate Professor of Medical Informatics in Medicine,Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NewYorkROBERT COPELAND, JR., Associate Professor, Department ofPharmacology, Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.FRED HENRETIG, Professor of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine, Uni-versity of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Director, Section of ClinicalToxicology, Children™s Hospital of PhiladelphiaEILEEN KRAEMER, Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science,University of Georgia, AthensLINDA MILGROM, Network Librarian, National Network of Libraries ofMedicine, Pacific Northwest Region, University of Washington, SeattleMELANIE MINTZER, Assistant Professor, Department of Family Medicine,University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel HillCLIFFORD MITCHELL, Assistant Professor, Division of Occupational andEnvironmental Health, School of Hygiene and Public Health, Johns Hop-kins University, Baltimore, MarylandLILLIAN MOOD, Director of Risk Communication and Community Liaison,Environmental Quality Control, South Carolina Department of Health andEnvironmental Control, ColumbiaKATHLEEN REED, Program Manager and Senior Technical Specialist, OakRidge Associated Universities, Washington, D.C.BARBARA SATTLER, Director, Environmental Health Education Center,University of Maryland at Baltimore School of MedicineStaffCATHARYN T. LIVERMAN, Study DirectorCAROLYN E. FULCO, Senior Program OfficerSANDRA AU, Project Assistant/Research AssistantKATHLEEN STRATTON, Interim Director, Division of Health Promotionand Disease PreventionInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AcknowledgmentsThe IOM staff and the committee wish to thank National Library ofMedicine staff members Jeanne Goshorn, Michael Moore, and Melvin Spannfor providing the committee with insight and updates on the TOXNET Web
site. We appreciate the input provided by the individuals named in Appendix A
who took the time to search TOXNET and to share their thoughts and search
experiences with the committee.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proceduresapproved by the NRC™s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this inde-pendent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist theinstitution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure
that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and re-sponsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish
to thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of this
report:Bruce G. Buchanan, University of Pittsburgh;Keith Burkhart, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center;
Terry Ann Jankowski, University of Washington;
Michael J. Kosnett, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center;Trace Warner, Washington State Department of Health; andM. Donald Whorton, M. Donald Whorton, M.D., Inc., Alameda, Calif.While the individuals listed above have provided constructive commentsand suggestions, it must be emphasized that responsibility for the final contentof this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY11INTRODUCTION5Study BackgroundInput to the CommitteeOverview of the Report2ASSESSMENT OF THE CURRENT TOXNET WEB SITE11Selecting a DatabaseInputting the Search Strategy
Displaying the Search Results
Modifying the Search
Printing or Downloading the Search Results
Other Issues3IMPROVING THE TOXNET WEB SITE17Integrating TOXNET into the Overall NLM Web SiteDatabases
Search Interface
Educational Components
Added Enhancements4RAISING AWARENESS: TRAINING AND OUTREACH25TrainingOutreach
ConclusionBIBLIOGRAPHYAPPENDIXES
AAcknowledgmentsBSearch QuestionsInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryThe growth of the Internet, its widespread use, and its availability as aplatform for database searching has made it possible and practical for the Na-tional Library of Medicine (NLM) to provide Internet access for many of its 40-plus online databases. In 1997, the NLM decided to provide Internet access to
its extensive portfolio of toxicology and environmental health databases avail-able on the Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET). During the developmentphase of the TOXNET Web site, the NLM requested that the Institute of Medi-cine (IOM) conduct a study that would assess the usefulness and effectivenessof this new Web site (http://www.toxnet.nlm. nih.gov).The IOM Committee on Internet Access to the NLM™s Toxicology andEnvironmental Health Databases was formed in early 1998 and was chargedwith seeking input from health professionals on their assessment of the Web
site and with providing recommendations on the refinements necessary to fa-cilitate TOXNET database searches. The committee met twice in the course ofthe study and solicited input from a number of health professionals and other
interested individuals on their experiences with searching the new interface. To
more fully capture the search process and identify the barriers that individuals
experienced, videotaping was used to record a small number of individual
search sessions. In this way, the search process could be more carefully exam-ined.The committee™s assessment of the current search interface found that im-provements were needed to assist the user in all steps of the search process. Ofparticular importance are:  improved assistance in selecting which of the TOXNET databases tosearch;Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  clarification of the options for viewing the search results, including theuse of the customized display option that narrows the display to specific contentareas (e.g., animal toxicity studies, emergency medical treatment, human
health effects); and  improved mechanisms for providing ﬁhelpﬂ information (e.g., increaseduse of links to the help screens, development of a tutorial, and eventual use ofcontext-sensitive help).The committee found that the current search interface is too complex forthe novice but does not offer the specificity and complexity needed by expertsearchers. This disparity indicates the need for more than one search interface,
and the committee recommends the development of three levels:  Quick SearchŠThis option would consist of a single input box for enter-ing all search terms. Examples include the initial screens for Alta Vista andPubMed. Search results would be less refined but would allow for searching
TOXNET information in a manner familiar to Web users.  Step-by-Step SearchŠThis interface would have detailed instructions towalk the searcher through each step of the search process and would be gearedto the novice or infrequent searcher who wants to have substantive retrieval but
is not familiar with the databases.  Advanced SearchŠThis interface would offer the complexity needed toequal the specificity and the power of the command line interface and couldinclude a number of features such as simple and nested Boolean searching,
truncation, field searching, phrase searching, and proximity searching.Additionally, several other long-term enhancements should be consideredto improve the quality and efficiency of the search process. These improve-ments include:  development of cross-database searching capabilities,  an online thesaurus and chemical dictionary,  detailed search analysis screens, and  extensive hypertext links within and among TOXNET records and be-tween TOXNET records and MEDLINE and TOXLINE records.To fully utilize the information contained in the TOXNET databases, it iscritically important to integrate TOXNET with other NLM databases, particu-larly MEDLINE and TOXLINE. Because MEDLINE is a standard source ofbiomedical information for health professionals, any links (or other methods of)
connecting a bibliographic citation to the relevant information in the TOXNET
databases would greatly enhance the use of the TOXNET information and
would provide an added service to MEDLINE searchers. It is hoped that theInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NLM will utilize both existing technologies and those in development to inte-grate the TOXNET databases into the broader context of other NLM databases.This can be accomplished in the short term by adding links from PubMed and
Internet Grateful Med to the TOXNET Web site. A more long-term goal would
be to integrate links to TOXNET information directly into the bibliographic
records of MEDLINE and TOXLINE. This system of links could be similar to
those now available in PubMed between MEDLINE and the National Center
for Biotechnology Information™s ENTREZ databases.Although a goal of the TOXNET Web site should be to minimize thetraining required to effectively search the databases, a certain amount of train-ing will still be necessary, at least initially. Of particular importance are train-the-trainer sessions because participants can then further expand the capability
by training others. The Toxicology Information Outreach Project, NLM™s Re-gional Medical Libraries and the National Network of Libraries of Medicine,and Partners in Information Access for Public Health Professionals can all be
utilized to enhance training efforts. In addition, the committee recommends
that a Web-based tutorial be developed.To maximize outreach efforts and raise awareness of the TOXNET Website, it is important to take advantage of the many existing organizations,agencies, Web sites, and publications that reach the varied audiences for toxi-cology and environmental health information. Because environmental healthconcerns are frequently focused on local and regional issues, it is particularly
important to reach regional, state, and local environmental health organiza-tions. Outreach can take multiple forms including articles for newsletters, newscolumns, and journals; hypertext links from organization Web sites toTOXNET; brochures, news releases, and handouts; and presentations, semi-nars, and exhibits at conferences or meetings.Reaching the numerous individuals and groups involved in environmentalhealth issues poses a challenge when resources are limited. However, the Inter-net can go a long way in serving as a cost-effective mechanism for marketingthe TOXNET Web site. Key hypertext links within the overall NLM Web site
are crucial, including links to TOXNET from the homepages of NLM, Internet
Grateful Med, and PubMed. Additionally, it is important to have links from
other environmental health Web sites to TOXNET. Although adding a link to
TOXNET is done at the discretion of the host site, the minimal time and cost
involved in adding a link makes it quite feasible. The challenge is to contact the
relevant organizations and acquaint them with the wealth of information avail-able on the TOXNET Web site.The committee believes that the TOXNET databases offer information ofinterest to a broad range of individuals and organizations, and it applauds theSpecialized Information Services Division and NLM for expanding access to
TOXNET through the development of an Internet Web site. The committee™s
recommendations for improving the Web site and raising awareness of this
information resource are summarized in Table ES-1. The release of the
TOXNET Web site offers an opportune occasion for raising awareness aboutInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the TOXNET databases. The committee hopes that NLM will take advantage ofthis opportunity to broaden its outreach and training efforts. At the same time,it is hoped that the search interface will continue to evolve and that NLM willcontinue to integrate the TOXNET information into its overall Web site and its
plans for the future.  TABLE ES-1  Summary of Opportunities for the TOXNET Web SiteShort-Term Opportunities  Improved assistance in selecting which of the TOXNET databases tosearch  Clarification of display, print, and e-mail options  Improved mechanisms for providing help information  Integration of TOXNET into the overall NLM Web site through links fromPubMed and Internet Grateful MedLong-Term Opportunities  Three levels of search interfacesŠQuick Search, Step-by-Step Search, andAdvanced Search  Further development of online help and tutorials  Cross-database searching  Addition of a thesaurus and chemical dictionary  Detailed search analysis  Extensive hypertext links within and among TOXNET records and be-tween TOXNET records and MEDLINE and TOXLINE recordsTraining and Outreach Opportunities  Utilize existing programs (e.g., Toxicology Information Outreach Project)  Maximize outreach activities to raise awareness of the TOXNET Web site  Utilize the Internet for outreach activities to reach national, regional, state,and local organizations and agenciesInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51IntroductionThe growth of the Internet, its widespread use, and its availability as aplatform for database searching has made it possible and practical for the Na-tional Library of Medicine (NLM) to provide Internet access for many of its 40-plus online databases. Use of the World Wide Web to search the MEDLINE
bibliographic database, through NLM™s PubMed and Internet Grateful Med
interfaces, has seen outstanding success as an access point for health profes-sionals and for the general public.One component of health information that continues to be at the forefrontof health concerns for a wide range of scientists and health professionals, aswell as the general public, is toxicology and environmental health information.
To improve access to this kind of information, in early 1998, the NLM began
developing an Internet Web site to provide access to the extensive portfolio of
toxicology and environmental health databases located on NLM™s Toxicology
Data Network (TOXNET; Table 1.1). This Web site (www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov)
is the topic of this report.STUDY BACKGROUNDNLM™s work in toxicology and environmental health information datesfrom the mid-1960s with the establishment of the Toxicology Information Pro-gram, now the Toxicology and Environmental Health Information Program orTEHIP. In 1969, the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) began providingadvice and oversight to the expanding toxicological information resources atNLM through the Toxicology Information Program Committee (TIPCOM). For
over 25 years, the toxicologists, pharmacologists, chemists, and computerscientists onInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6TABLE 1.1  Overview of the TOXNET DatabasesDatabaseSponsoringAgenciesFactual orBibliographicSubject ContentCCRISNCIFactualResults of carcinogenicity,mutagenicity, tumor production,tumor inhibition studiesDARTNLM,NIEHS,
FDA, EPABibliographicLiterature on teratology and manyaspects of reproductive toxicologyEMICNLM,EPA,
NIEHSBibliographicLiterature since 1991 published onsubstances tested for genotoxicactivityEMICBACKNLM,EPA,
NIEHSBibliographicPre-1950 through 1991 literature onsubstances tested for genotoxicactivityETICBACKNLMBibliographicTeratology literature from 1950Œ1989, continued by DARTGENE-TOXEPAFactualResults from expert review of sci-entific literature on chemicalstested for mutagenicityHSDBNLM(previously
ATSDR)FactualPeer-reviewed summaries of thetoxicology of potentially hazard-ous substancesIRISEPAFactualEPA health risk and regulatoryinformation, includes carcino-genic and noncarcinogenic riskassessment dataRTECSNIOSHFactualToxic effects including skin andeye irritation, carcinogenicity,mutagenicity, and reproductive
consequencesTRIEPAFactualAnnual estimated releases of toxicchemicals to the environmentNOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; CCRIS = Chemi-cal Carcinogenesis Research Information System; DART = Developmental and Repro-ductive Toxicology; EMIC = Environmental Mutagen Information Center; EMICBACK= EMIC Back File; EPA = Environmental Protection Agency; ETICBACK = Environ-mental Teratology Information Center Backfile; FDA = Food and Drug Administration;GENE-TOX = Genetic Toxicology Data Bank; HSDB = Hazardous Substances Data
Bank; IRIS = Integrated Risk Information System; NCI = National Cancer Institute;
NIEHS = National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; NIOSH = National Insti-tute for Occupational Safety and Health; RTECS = Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemi-cal Substances; TRI = Toxic Chemical Release Inventory.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TIPCOM provided timely and relevant advice as NLM's toxicology and envi-ronmental health program grew. In 1995, NLM™s focus turned toward examin-ing the medical relevance of these databases and the needs of clinicians andother health professionals for this kind of information. NLM requested a study
by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) on those issues, and the resulting report
(IOM, 1997) addressed future directions for the NLM™s Toxicology and Envi-ronmental Health Information Program to increase its utility and accessibility.Major issues addressed by that report were increasing access to and effective
use of the TOXNET databases by health professionals.In late 1997, NLM decided to make the TOXNET databases available viaan Internet World Wide Web site. During the development phase, NLM re-quested that IOM conduct a study that would assess the usefulness and effec-tiveness of the new Web site. The IOM Committee on Internet Access to theNLM™s Toxicology and Environmental Health Databases was formed in early1998. The committee was charged with seeking input from health professionalson their assessment of the Web site and with providing recommendations onthe refinements necessary to facilitate searches of the TOXNET Web site byhealth professionals, scientists, educators, and the general public. The commit-tee consisted of eleven members with expertise in medical informatics, envi-ronmental health, family medicine, poison control, medical librarianship,health communication and education, toxicology, and pharmacology. The
committee met twice in the course of the study, solicited input from a number
of health professionals and other interested individuals, and invited individuals
with different skill levels in database searching to conduct searches on
TOXNET using the Web interface.INPUT TO THE COMMITTEEThe committee sought the input of a number of individuals interested inthe content of the TOXNET databases. Recognizing that input should be solic-ited from individuals covering a broad range of expertise, the committee de-cided to utilize the following list of potential users of toxicology and environ-mental health information (IOM, 1997):Ł  primary care professionals (e.g., physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners,and physician assistants) and pharmacists;Ł  specialists in occupational and environmental health (physicians, nurses,nurse practitioners, physician assistants, industrial hygienists, and safety offi-cers);Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8Ł  emergency medicine and poison control center personnel (e.g., emer-gency room health professionals, emergency medical technicians, clinical andmedical toxicologists, and specialists in poison information);Ł  health science librarians and faculty at health professional schools(including medical, nursing, public health, pharmacy, and dental schools);Ł  environmental health researchers and scientists (including health physi-cists, epidemiologists, toxicologists, and forensic practitioners);Ł  patients, the general public, and community organizations (includinglocal emergency planning committees, public librarians, educators, and advo-cacy and activist organizations); andŁ  health professionals in local public health departments or in state andfederal agencies (e.g., policy advisors, health educators, and public clinic personnel).The committee received input through videotaped search sessions, emailresponses, and by working through searches with colleagues and students. Thisinput was structured to provide the committee with feedback and was not de-signed or conducted as a scientific study. The committee appreciates the inputof the individuals (Appendix A) who searched the TOXNET databases through
the new Web interface and provided comments on the problems they encoun-tered in the search process as well as their thoughts on improving the searchinterface.Videotaping was used to record a small number of individual search ses-sions to more fully capture the search process and identify the barriers that in-dividuals experienced. In this way, the search process could be more carefullyexamined. Participants were invited by committee members and staff to partici-pate in a 30- to 45-minute search session. In each session, the participants werefirst asked to fill out a short questionnaire to provide the committee with infor-mation on their occupation, use of toxicology and environmental health infor-mation, and extent of their prior Internet and TOXNET experience (AppendixB). The participants were then asked to search the TOXNET Web site to an-swer two predetermined questions:Ł  What is the potential for vinyl chloride to cause liver cancer in humans?Ł  What are the potential health effects of working as a dry cleaner?In addition to searching for information to answer the two questions posedby the committee, most participants searched the TOXNET site for informationon topics of their own interest. Their queries were frequently related to subjectsthat they were currently studying or to subjects they knew well and wanted toexamine the nature and extent of information in TOXNET. Topics includedpfiesteria, tobacco smoke, aspartame, estradiol, malathion, and calcium channelblockers.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The computer screen was videotaped during the searches through a VGAvideo converter (no audio was recorded), and participants were asked to talkthrough the search process with the IOM staff member present. After the
searches were complete, participants were asked to answer questions about each
phase of the search process, to describe barriers to searching, and to suggest
opportunities to refine the Web site. Similar videotaping processes have been
used in other studies as a means to analyze and record human/computer inter-actions (Kushniruk et al., 1996; Wang and Tenopir, 1998).Individuals who agreed to provide input via e-mail were given the sameseries of questions and the Web site address and were asked to search theTOXNET databases and provide information on their search experiences.In all 31 individuals provided email or videotaped input to the committee,15 individuals participated in the videotaped search sessions, and 16 peopleprovided e-mail responses. The participant group consisted of 5 occupational
and environmental health professionals, 1 family medicine physician, 3 emer-gency medicine and poison control personnel, 7 librarians and informationspecialists, 5 environmental health scientists, 3 federal or state public health
professionals, 4 health policy professionals, and 3 students. Participants in-cluded individuals who provided input through the workshop or responded tothe questionnaire in the previous IOM study (1997) and other individuals who
were familiar with the current study. When asked about their Internet expertise,
19 noted they were advanced Internet users, 10 rated themselves as having in-termediate expertise, and two considered themselves as novices (having basic orminimal Internet expertise and experience). Sixteen of the individuals had
previously searched at least one of the TOXNET databases. The search experi-ences and comments of the participants and the committee are described inChapter 2.Committee members also received input on the interface by asking studentsand colleagues to search the databases via the Web interface. Working througha search with a colleague or student and discussing the search experience was
helpful to committee members as they performed searches themselves and as-sessed the search interface. The committee then discussed the input receivedalong with their own search experiences.OVERVIEW OF THE REPORTThis report presents the committee™s assessment of the TOXNET Web siteand provides the committee™s recommendations. Chapter 2 summarizes theinput received by the committee and the committee™s assessment of the current
Web site. In Chapter 3, the committee presents its recommendations for short-
and long-term improvements to the TOXNET Web site, and Chapter 4 dis-cusses recommendations for raising awareness of this valuable informationresource. The committee hopes that its recommendations for refining theInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10TOXNET Web site will enhance its usefulness to health professionals, scien-tists, and interested members of the general public.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112Assessment of the Current TOXNET Web SiteThe 1997 IOM report on the utility of NLM™s toxicology and environ-mental health databases identified access and navigation as key barriers. At thattime, the databases were primarily available on a cost-per-search basis (costs
depended on the amount of online time and the type of activity) that required
registration for an NLM password and provisions for billing. Additionally, the
primary method for searching was through a command line interface, which
required knowledge of a complex search language and syntax (e.g., field
names, print commands). To those who frequently use that interface to search
the databases (this option is still available), the command line interface can be
a powerful tool for search retrieval, but to infrequent or novice searchers, it is
largely impenetrable. While pre-Internet Grateful Med offered an additional
search option for most of the TOXNET databasesŠone with a more user-friendly interfaceŠit required purchase and loading of the software.The move to a free, Web-based interface represents a major leap forward inproviding access to the TOXNET databases. The committee believes that thisset of databases can provide valuable environmental health information to a
wide range of users. The committee applauds NLM and particularly the staff of
the Specialized Information Services Division (SIS) for their commitment to
increasing accessibility to the TOXNET databases.The committee understood, as they began their deliberations, that the Website was a work in progress, would continue to undergo changes during thecourse of the study, and would continue to evolve once launched on the Internet
for public access. For the majority of the time that the committee was testing
the Web site and seeking input, the site only provided access to five of the fac-tual databases on TOXNET (HSDB, CCRIS, IRIS, RTECS, and GENE-TOX).Search screens have been added more recently for the bibliographic data-basesŠDART, EMIC, EMICBACK, and ETICŠas well as for the TRI data-Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12bases. As a result, the committee™s assessment is primarily focused on the fac-tual database search screen. However, a number of the recommendations maybe generalized to the entire TOXNET Web site.This chapter summarizes the search experiences of the committee and ofthe  individuals who provided input to the committee (Chapter 1). Most indi-viduals searching the TOXNET Web site experienced similar problems. Thoseproblems are highlighted in this chapter™s assessment of the current search in-terface and a number of refinements are noted.SELECTING A DATABASEOne of the issues associated with the TOXNET system, no matter what theinterface, has been the fact that it contains numerous specialized databases(e.g., DART and ETICBACK that focus on the teratology literature), some ofwhich are familiar only to a focused user community. Therefore, the novice or
infrequent user may have difficulty in determining which database to select to
begin searching.In most cases, searchers chose the default database, HSDB, as their initialselection. The committee agrees that HSDB should be the default database be-cause it is has a wider range of information than the other factual TOXNETdatabases. Additional mechanisms are needed for informing the searcher aboutthe content of each of the databases. While, the current help screens do an ex-cellent job of explaining each database and providing the searcher with infor-mation on its purpose and structure, few searchers in the committee™s experi-ence took the time to read the help information (see later discussion). Optionsfor improving assistance in database selection include:Ł  an opening screen with information on each database and guidance inselecting a database;Ł  a hypertext link to information about each database, integrating the helpinformation into the search screen; orŁ step-by-step screens that walk the user through the database selectionprocess (see Chapter 3).INPUTTING THE SEARCH STRATEGYThe current search form for the factual databases provides one box to enterchemical/other names (e.g., chemical name fragment or Registry Number) andone box to enter subject terms. The form then provides a list of LOOK FOR
options for combining the subject terms and another list of options for display-ing results.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.There were mixed reactions to this search screen setup. Some searchersfound it too complex, preferring one box to enter all search terms (e.g., Yahooor PubMed). Other searchers wanted to be able to perform complex Boolean
searching and would have preferred multiple boxes for entering chemical
names and search terms (e.g., Internet Grateful Med). Thus, the committee
concluded that the current search screen is too complex for simple searches but
does not offer the specificity and complexity needed for advanced searching.
This disparity indicates the need for several levels of search interfaces, from
beginner to advanced, to meet each individual™s search needs (see Chapter 3).After entering chemical and/or related subject information, the next deci-sion point in entering the search strategy is to choose how to combine thesearch terms. The current search interface has the following list of LOOK FOR
options:All subject terms within record (AND)Any subject terms within record (OR)
Subject terms as phrase (NEAR)
Subject terms in same occurrence (SAME).Searchers were unsure about what those choices meant. The options are notlisted from broadest retrieval (OR) to narrowest retrieval (NEAR). Even indi-viduals familiar with Boolean searching were not clear about the NEAR andSAME options and related concepts. Searchers would have preferred to enterphrases encased by quotations rather than use the term NEAR, which searcheswithin six words. Additionally, because of the lack of understanding of the ba-sic structure of the TOXNET database records (discussed below), searcherswere not sure to what extent choosing the SAME option (same occurrence)
would narrow their search. As in selecting a database, the help screens did offer
examples and additional information. Those clearer explanations should be
incorporated into the search screen either as hypertext links or as additional
text on the search screen itself. The committee makes recommendations in
Chapter 3 for varied levels of search screens that would assist in addressing andclarifying these issues.DISPLAYING THE SEARCH RESULTSOne of the most difficult problems for searchers was in understanding thesearch resultsŠboth how to display the information on the screen and how tointerpret the displayed information. Most users (e.g., health professionals and
students) are more familiar with searching bibliographic databases, particularly
MEDLINE, where searches on a chemical retrieve numerous citations. They
were not familiar with the term ﬁrecordﬂ or with the structure of the TOXNET
factual database records. Each record generally contains all the information in
the database on the chemical organized into numerous fields. Searchers found itInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14helpful to have the search terms highlighted in the retrieved text. However,reading the search results on the screen required a great deal of horizontal
scrolling on some computer monitors.Other problems encountered relate to the five display or view options:chemical listing, exact term match (the default option), full record(s), custom-ized display, or selectable list (all results). Searchers did not understand thedifferences among these options. The following three examples illustrate com-mon problems.For searchers who entered the term ﬁvinyl chlorideﬂ in the chemical namefield and kept the default display choice of ﬁExact term matches,ﬂ the retrievaldisplayed the message ﬁYour search found 1 recordﬂ with two lines of text
(name and registry number) and the message ﬁEnd of Resultsﬂ (Box 2.1). This
was disconcerting to many searchers who expected numerous ﬁhitsﬂ or records.
Additionally, many were unclear about why they only received two lines of text.
Novice searchers felt that the two lines of text retrieved were the extent of the
information on vinyl chloride in that database (largely because of the message,
ﬁend of resultsﬂ). They then proceeded to choose another database in the hopes
of retrieving additional information.A second problem presented itself to searchers who chose the display op-tion, ﬁFull recordﬂ and retrieved the first page of the record. They realized therewere multiple pages that followed but would have preferred to know the extent
of the record (how many pages or bytes) without paging through the entire rec-ord to determine its length. Further, most searchers were unfamiliar with thestructure of the record. They were not sure, for example, where human toxicity
information would be found or if the database contained that information.
Searchers who confronted this problem would have preferred to have an outlineBOX 2.1Your search found 1 record in Database: HSDBQuery: ((NAME) VINYL CHLORIDE)Page 11 - HSDBNAME OF SUBSTANCE VINYL CHLORIDE
CAS REGISTRY NUMBER 75-01-4End of ResultsInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the record or a hierarchical display of the major fields with hypertext links tosections of the search results.The third, display-related issue came up with searchers who were sent tothe middle of the record. These searchers frequently searched on both thechemical name and a subject term (e.g., vinyl chloride and liver cancer) and
chose the display option ﬁExact term match.ﬂ In HSDB, the retrieved informa-tion on that search begins in the vinyl chloride record in the field on storageconditions, followed by a field for emergency medical treatment information,
and then information on clinical effects. The searchers found this information
useful in answering the search question, but they were not sure about the con-text of the information or what other information was available in the record.Searchers were pleased to find or be told about the ﬁcustomized displayﬂoption; they felt that this option solved many of the problems described abovebecause it provided an overview of the record content and presented them with
useful options to narrow their search (e.g., human health effects, animal toxic-ity studies, emergency medical treatment). Changing the default display optionto ﬁcustomized displayﬂ or presenting an outline or hierarchy of the database
record would be useful in familiarizing searchers with the content and structure
of the database. ﬁCustomized displayﬂ is a valuable option that should be made
more visible to the searcher as most searchers did not understand all that this
option has to offer.MODIFYING THE SEARCHOnce the initial search was performed and the searcher had assessed theresults, there was frequently a need to modify the search. It was clear to search-ers that they could either return to the search screen by way of the BACK but-ton on the Web browser or by selecting the MODIFY SEARCH button in theleft frame.Several searchers wanted to work with only the subset of records they hadpreviously retrieved to further narrow the search results. Currently, the searchcriteria can be modified, however, each search is run anew on the entire data-base. This problem is in part a function of the Internet and the difficulties in-volved in storing sets for each search that can then be combined or manipulated(Chu, 1998). Further refinements are needed to allow searchers to have in-creased specificity in modifying their search (e.g., PubMed™s Advanced Search)and to work with stored sets of search results.PRINTING OR DOWNLOADING THE SEARCH RESULTSThe final step of the search process involved saving the search results inhard copy or online. Printing the search results presented problems becauseInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16each page had to be viewed and printed individually. Searchers would havepreferred the option to print specific fields or to print the entire search result.
This is a problem of which the NLM staff is aware. However, it is difficult to
address because it is largely a function of the database file structure. Having the
capacity to print all or a specified part of the record would be optimal.Searchers utilized the e-mail option once they found that it was available.However, because it is currently listed under the redisplay options, it was notreadily apparent. It would be preferable to have more obvious buttons or links
at the top and bottom of the screen for displaying, retrieving via email, or
printing the search results. Additionally, a download option (save to disk) was
requested by many searchers.OTHER ISSUESOne of the advantages of the Web is that it facilitates feedback. Currentlythe TOXNET Web site offers searchers the opportunity to send an e-mail toTOXNET User Support to discuss problems, request assistance, or provide
comments or suggestions. This feedback is important and can be supplemented
on occasion by seeking searcher input on specific features of the TOXNET Web
site.The use of frames, a topic of ongoing discussion (Siegel, 1997), was an is-sue with a number of the searchers. The committee felt that frames did not addto the functionality of the TOXNET Web site. The left frame, containing op-tions for modifying the search, new search, online help, and searches on otherdatabases, currently remains relatively static once the search has begun. De-pending on the computer monitor, the size of the right frame was limited andrequired constant horizontal scrolling to read the search results on screen.If a design decision to retain the frames is made, then they should be usedto enhance the site. Examples of possible frame uses include providing context-sensitive help (Chapter 3), listing the major sections of the database record
(e.g., toxicity and biomedical effects, pharmacology), and providing links to
jump to specific parts of the record. However, in the committee™s view, the site
would be better served by removing the frames and adding buttons and links as
needed.Other factors addressed by the searchers included positive experiences withthe response time of the search and a few problems with connections to theWeb site. The move of the TOXNET system in May, 1998 to a new hardwareplatform appears to the committee to have gone quite smoothly, and the new
hardware system seems to have speeded up the search processing.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.173Improving the TOXNET Web SiteIn addition to the short-term improvements to the TOXNET Web site dis-cussed in Chapter 2, the committee focused on long-term goals for TOXNET.This chapter discusses the committee™s recommendations for integrating
TOXNET into the overall plan for NLM™s databases on the Internet and then
looks more specifically at the four major components of the TOXNET Web site:
databases, search interface, educational components (i.e., help screens, online
tutorials), and added enhancements to assist the user (e.g., thesaurus, links
between databases). Beyond improving the Web site, the committee believes it
is crucial for NLM to increase awareness of the TOXNET resources on the In-ternet, and this issue is discussed in Chapter 4.INTEGRATING TOXNET INTO THE OVERALL NLM WEB SITETo fully utilize the information contained in the TOXNET databases, it iscritically important to integrate TOXNET with other NLM databases, particu-larly MEDLINE and TOXLINE. Since MEDLINE is a standard source of bio-medical information for health professionals, any links (or other methods) con-necting a bibliographic citation to the relevant information in the TOXNETdatabases would greatly enhance the use of the TOXNET information andwould provide an added service to the MEDLINE searcher.The incredible pace of change in technology makes it potentially impru-dent to speculate about distant goals for the NLM Web site. However, thecommittee believes it is necessary to include the TOXNET databases in any
long-term planning. One potential goal may be to provide a single entry pointInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18for searching all of the NLM databases. Searchers would not be required toknow the specifics of each database to determine which one would best answer
their information queries; they would only need to become proficient in using
one interface. The committee did not explore this option in depth but discussedit as a distant goal that may be reached after a number of transitional steps arecompleted.In the near future, the committee urges NLM to utilize both existing tech-nologies and those in development to integrate the TOXNET databases into thebroader context of other NLM databases. This can be accomplished in the short
term by adding links from PubMed and Internet Grateful Med to the TOXNET
Web site. A more long-term goal would be to integrate links to TOXNET in-formation directly into the bibliographic records of MEDLINE and TOXLINE.For example, MEDLINE abstracts on the health effects of vinyl chloride would
have links to the factual information on the chemical in the TOXNET data-bases. Such a system of links could be similar to the extensive linkages betweenMEDLINE and the National Center for Biotechnology Information™s ENTREZ*databases now available in PubMed. Additionally, future potential linkagescould include links among the factual data in TOXNET, the bibliographic in-formation in TOXLINE and MEDLINE, and chemical structure images, as wellas the chemical identification files which include full records on the chemical
synonyms (e.g., the ChemID database).DATABASESTOXNET is not a uniform set of databases because it has evolved, overtime, from multiple sources and for a variety of purposes. This complexity is achallenge to the designers of the TOXNET Web site. They need to create aninterface that masks differences and gives searchers both consistency and con-tinuity in searching while allowing accessibility to the unique information ineach database.There are factors inherent in the structure of the TOXNET databases thatcurrently limit the options for the Internet interface. One example is the displayoption. It would be preferable for the displayed results to state exactly howmany pages are in the entire record and which page the display is currently on(e.g., ﬁpage 2 out of 6ﬂ). However, this change will require alterations to the
database file structure and is considered a long-term goal.                                                       *The National Center for Biotechnology Information™s integrated database system,ENTREZ, allows retrieval of molecular biology data and bibliographic citations throughthe linkages of databases including PubMed, DNA sequences, protein sequences,
genome and choromosome mapping data, and three-dimensional protein structures.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee is concerned in the long term with the subject coverage ofthe TOXNET system. Although the committee is aware that some of theTOXNET databases are also available through commercial vendors, thecommittee urges the relevant federal agencies to continue the availability oftheir databases through TOXNET. The free access available through the
TOXNET Web site will provide numerous audiences (e.g., students, community
organizations) with access to this information that may not otherwise be avail-able. If databases, such as NIOSHTIC, become closed files and do not add newinformation, coverage of topics such as industrial hygiene and exposure as-sessment need to be expanded in HSDB and potentially in TOXLINE as well.SEARCH INTERFACEChapter 2 noted a number of specific improvements to the current searchinterface. However, it is difficult to have a one-size-fits-all approach to databasesearching, and as expressed in the following quote, different types of searchinterfaces are needed to assist individuals with varying levels of expertise.The Great Law of Usability: A user with appropriate knowledge or expertisein the area of application but having no experience with the system should beable to use it effectively without assistance or instruction.The Lesser Law of Usability: The system should not substantially impede orinterfere with efficient and sophisticated use by experienced users
(Constantine and Lockwood, 1997).NLM™s staff has recognized this need and has indicated that plans for ad-ditional search interfaces are under consideration. The committee has discussedthe varying audiences that could potentially use the TOXNET databases and
recommends the development of three levels of search interfaces. The audi-ences served may vary in both the depth of knowledge of the subject and depthof expertise in database searching. The committee acknowledges that each Web
search engine (e.g., PubMed, Yahoo, Alta Vista) utilizes a different combina-tion of search features and urges NLM to examine the trade-offs of each fea-ture. As noted earlier, an implicit criteria for selecting search features should bethe aligning of the TOXNET interface with other NLM Internet search inter-faces so that the searcher can easily search all NLM databases on the Internet.Quick SearchThe most basic interface would be a Simple Search or Quick Search option,which would consist of one input box for entering all search terms. Examplesinclude the initial screens for Alta Vista and PubMed. This option could serve
the needs of a number of different types of searchers, including new searchersInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20who want to initially explore the TOXNET databases and students or otherswho have a simple query. The Quick Search option should support simple
Boolean searching. The subsequent screens that display the search results
should provide simplified instructions and links to the other levels of search
interfaces for more in-depth searches. This option would work best as a one-
search that searches all of the TOXNET databases at one time. The committee
envisioned the Quick Search as being directly displayed on the TOXNET
homepage. The other two interfaces described below would be briefly described
on the homepage with links to the search screens for each interface.Step-by-Step SearchA second type of search interface would be the Step-by-Step Search, whichwould have detailed instructions to ﬁwalkﬂ the searcher through each step of thesearch process. This search level would be geared to the novice or infrequent
searcher who wants to have substantive retrieval but is not familiar with the
databases. The first step of selecting the databases would clearly explain the
strengths and limitations of each database, the types of information available,
and the types of queries best answered by each database. At the next step of
entering the search terms, the screens would explain all of the options for Boo-lean searching and narrowing the search strategy (such as through the use ofthe customized display option). Explanations would be provided for each of the
different display, printing, and downloading options. Explanatory pages could
be customized to each of the TOXNET databases to allow for the most precise
searching possible. As the technological capabilities to handle natural language
searching evolve, it will be important to add this component to the interface.Advanced SearchThe third level interface would be for the advanced search and would offerthe complexity needed to equal the specificity and the power of the commandline interface. In presentations to the committee regarding the Web site, NLM™s
staff indicated that future plans include an advanced search screen. This inter-face may be structured like the Internet Grateful Med interface, with multipleinput boxes for complex searching, or like the PubMed Advanced Search op-tion, with simple but powerful capabilities. Examples of search features to in-corporate into this interface include:Ł  simple and nested Boolean searching;Ł  chemical name fragment searching;Ł  field searching;Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ł  fuzzy searching to compensate for typing and spelling errors;Ł  range and ordering options for numeric and date fields;Ł  truncation, including wild card, left, and right truncation to allow forvariations of a term, prefixes, suffixes, and characters within a word;Ł  phrase searching;Ł  proximity searching; andŁ  numeric operators.EDUCATIONAL COMPONENTSThe use of the Internet opens up multiple opportunities for providing theeducational information that searchers need. In the case of the TOXNET data-bases, two types of educational components are needed: those that provide fur-ther details on searching the TOXNET databases to allow searchers to improvetheir search skills and those that provide further information on the subject of
toxicology and environmental health to allow searchers to better understand the
information they are retrieving.Online HelpAlthough there is a wealth of useful and relevant material in the currentOnline Help screens of the TOXNET Web site, it does not appear that they willbe fully utilized in their current format. One barrier for using the help informa-tion on this Web site may be the term ﬁOnline Help.ﬂ Searchers frequently didnot click the Online Help button because they thought it would have informa-tion that would be useful only for trouble-shooting problems rather than forproactively assisting the searcher in planning and executing a search.The most useful format for help information would be context-sensitivehelp that would provide detailed assistance on the specific problem encoun-tered. This approach may be considered a long-term goal because it will requiredetailed programming. A short-term approach to solving this problem would be
to integrate links to the help information directly into the search screens. For
example, the phrase ﬁDisplay Results Asﬂ or ﬁLook Forﬂ could become a link to
the help information on the display options or Boolean operators already avail-able. Creative use of links to the help information is vital to assist searchers innavigating through the TOXNET search process.TutorialsThe Specialized Information Services Division has invested in the devel-opment of Toxicology Tutor (http://sis.nlm.nih.gov/toxtutr1). This web-basedtutorial offers an introductory college-level approach to the basic principles ofInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22toxicology. The committee believes that this tutorial serves an important pur-pose and urges that it be maintained and updated.Additionally, the committee believes that an investment should be made ina tutorial that will introduce the TOXNET databases and explain the stepsneeded to search the Web site. Although one of the goals of developing multi-ple levels of search interfaces, as described previously, is to assist the searcherat the time of the search process, a tutorial is frequently the best approach for
providing additional search assistance and serving outreach purposes (Chapter
4). Thetutorial can serve as a ready-made demonstration tool for instructors, li-brarians, community leaders, and others who want to increase awareness of theTOXNET databases and the information that is available. Examples used in a
search tutorial should feature realistic scenarios and demonstrate searching
both by chemical name and by health effect.LinksThe committee believes that hypertext links on the TOXNET Web site toWeb sites outside NLM should be used primarily to provide the searcher withaccess to other environmental health databases that are comparable to the
TOXNET databases (e.g., the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Regis-try™s HAZDAT [Hazardous Substance Release/Health Effects], the Environ-mental Protection Agency™s Envirofacts, and the Environmental DefenseFund™s Chemical Scorecard). Additionally, links to Web sites that provide edu-cational information on environmental health issues should be considered andevaluated. Chapter 4 discusses links from other Web sites to TOXNET.ADDED ENHANCEMENTSOnce a number of the short-term improvements to the TOXNET Web siteare implemented, several enhancements should be considered to improve thequality and efficiency of the search process. As Internet capabilities and tech-nologies improve, the committee hopes that the TOXNET databases will beincluded in all enhancements.Cross-Database Searching in TOXNETAs described previously as a distant goal for all the NLM databases, itwould be preferable for the user not to face the dilemma of choosing a database,Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.but, rather, have the capability to search all of the databases at once. This samegoal of cross-database searching may be achieved first across the TOXNET
system. Since the TOXNET databases contain the common field of the chemi-cal Registry Number, it has been possible in the menu-searching mode tosearch several databases at once. It is important for cross-database searching to
incorporate features to allow the searcher to eliminate duplicate records and to
select only the records that are unique (e.g., choose those records in DART that
are not in MEDLINE). Cross-database searching is under consideration by the
NLM staff as a future step for the TOXNET Web site, and the committee urges
efforts towards this goal.Thesaurus and Chemical DictionaryInherent difficulties in searches involving chemical names include thecomplexity of chemical terms and the numerous synonyms involved. Thecommittee encourages all attempts to utilize Internet technology to minimize
these complexities. NLM™s ChemID database links the Registry Number to the
multiple synonyms for that chemical and will be a useful feature when incorpo-rated into the TOXNET Web site. To enhance TOXNET searching to meet theneeds of health professionals and others, it will be important to include as many
common term and brand name synonyms as possible.The committee urges the exploration of ways to utilize the UMLS (UnifiedMedical Language System) Metathesaurus for searching the TOXNET data-bases. This may involve expansion of the Metathesaurus to further includechemical and environmental health vocabularies. Since the TOXNET records
do not contain MeSH (NLM Medical Subject Headings) terms, it is particularly
important for the TOXNET searcher to be able to locate synonymous terms,
identify hierarchical relationships among chemical terms, and see relationships
among subject terms. Incorporation of the Metathesaurus in TOXNET, as cur-rently available in Internet Grateful Med and PubMed, would be an eventualgoal.Search AnalysisA further enhancement to the TOXNET Web site would be a feature,similar to the PubMed and Internet Grateful Med Details Screens, that providesan analysis of the search conducted. Information is included on the number of
hits or citations found for each query term, and details are given on how the
system translated the search terms. An analysis may offer suggestions for ex-panding or narrowing the search results and may feature an option for weight-ing the various search terms and synonyms (i.e., allowing the searcher to spec-ify that one term is more important than another) such as that available in AltaVista™s Refine option.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24Hypertext Links Among RecordsThe use of hypertext links among MEDLINE, TOXLINE, TOXNET, andother records can provide the searcher with additional information and paths topursue to locate related information without constructing a new search strategy.
This use of linkages was discussed above as a way to integrate TOXNET into
the overall NLM Web site. Linkages to consider include:Ł  links from the citations referenced in the TOXNET database records tothe bibliographic records in MEDLINE or TOXLINE;Ł  links from MEDLINE or TOXLINE abstracts on specific chemicals tothe TOXNET records on those chemicals;Ł  links among records for related chemicals; andŁ  links from MEDLINE, TOXLINE, or TOXNET records to relatedchemical dictionary records.The committee believes that the use of the Internet as a platform for theTOXNET databases opens up numerous possibilities for enhancing their ac-cessibility and utility. It is hoped that resources will be made available to theSpecialized Information Services Division so that these opportunities can be
explored and implemented. Further, as technology evolves, it is hoped that
TOXNET will be integrated into plans for the overall NLM Web site and in-cluded in the use of new Internet technologies at the Library.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254Raising Awareness: Training and OutreachThe TOXNET Web site offers information that is useful to a broad range ofhealth professionals, researchers, community organizations, and other indi-viduals and groups. Moving TOXNET from a fee-based, command-line systemto free access and searching via the Internet greatly enhances accessibility of
the information and offers the opportunity for expanding the audience. The
committee hopes that NLM will take the opportunity presented by the new
TOXNET Web site to raise awareness about this valuable information resource.The goals for training overlap with the goals of an extended outreach pro-gramŠto spread awareness of the TOXNET Web site and increase use of theinformation. To effectively increase training and outreach efforts for TOXNET,additional staff are needed by the Specialized Information Services Division.TRAININGAlthough a goal of the TOXNET Web site should be to minimize thetraining required to search the databases, a certain amount of training will stillbe necessary, at least initially. Of particular importance are train-the-trainer
sessions because participants can then expand the capability to train others. The
Toxicology Information Outreach Project, NLM™s Regional Medical Libraries
and the National Network of Libraries of Medicine, and Partners in Informa-tion Access for Public Health Professionals can all be utilized to enhancetraining efforts. In addition, the committee recommends a Web-based tutorial bedeveloped.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26Toxicology Information Outreach ProjectThe Division of Specialized Information Services began the ToxicologyInformation Outreach Project with Historically Black Colleges and Universities(HBCUs) in 1991. This project initially provided hardware, software, training,
and access to the TOXNET databases at nine HBCUs. Since then, the project
has expanded its training focus and, in joint training sessions with the Agency
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), has provided training on
toxicology and environmental health information resources for over 44 HBCUs.
It is hoped that future plans for this outreach project will include sessions that
inform instructors and students about the new TOXNET Web site and provide
train-the-trainer sessions.Regional Medical Libraries and theNational Network of Libraries of MedicineNLM works with and through an extensive regional and local medical li-brary network. The eight Regional Medical Libraries (RMLs) and the over4,500 medical libraries in the National Network of Libraries of Medicine
(NNLM) provide an outstanding resource for outreach and training opportuni-ties. Utilization of this network can be enhanced by training sessions for RMLand NNLM librarians and by focused funding to RMLs that would provide re-sources for exhibiting the TOXNET Web site at regional and local environ-mental health meetings.Partners in Information Access for Public Health ProfessionalsA cooperative project has been developed among NLM, the Association ofState and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO), the Centers for Disease Con-trol and Prevention (CDC), the National Association of County and City HealthOfficials (NACCHO), and the National Network of Libraries of Medicine
(NNLM) (Partners in Information Access, 1998). The goal of this project, Part-ners in Information Access for Public Health Professionals, is to provide publichealth professionals with access to the information resources they need. Spe-cific activities to date have included regional training programs on publichealth information resources, development of distance learning materials, and
development of a Web site and links among the sponsoring organizations. This
partnership offers the opportunity to reach a group of health professionals whoInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.work directly on environmental health issues. The committee believes thattraining on TOXNET is a natural fit with the mission of this partnership and
hopes a number of activities and links will be developed and implemented.TutorialsAs mentioned in Chapter 3, it is important to have a ready-made tutorial,available via the Internet, that can be utilized by teachers, librarians, individu-als making presentations to community groups, and others. This tutorial couldoffer several scenarios focused on real-world environmental health issues and
could demonstrate the types of information available in the TOXNET data-bases. Such a tutorial would make it easy for community groups, health profes-sionals, and others to put together a presentation and would be a valuable toolin outreach and training efforts.OUTREACHTo maximize outreach efforts and raise awareness of the TOXNET Website, it is important to take advantage of the many existing organizations,agencies, Web sites, and publications that reach the varied audiences for toxi-cology and environmental health information. Because environmental healthconcerns are frequently focused on local and regional issues, it is particularly
important to reach regional, state, and local environmental health organiza-tions. Outreach can take multiple forms including articles for newsletters, newscolumns, and journals (including Internet journals); hypertext links from theorganization™s Web site to TOXNET; brochures, news releases, and handouts;
and presentations, seminars, and exhibits at conferences or meetings.Reaching the numerous individuals and groups involved in environmentalhealth issues poses a challenge when resources are limited. However, the Inter-net can go a long way in serving as a cost-effective mechanism for marketingthe TOXNET Web site. As mentioned in Chapter 3, key hypertext linkages
within the overall NLM Web site are crucial, including links to TOXNET from
the homepages of NLM, Internet Grateful Med, and PubMed. Additionally, it is
important to have links from other environmental health Web sites to
TOXNET. Although adding a link to TOXNET is done at the discretion of the
host site, the minimal time and cost involved in adding a link makes it quite
feasible. The challenge is to contact the relevant organizations and acquaint
them with the wealth of information available on the TOXNET Web site. In
addition to the following bulleted potential linkages, NLM should consider
asking all Web sites that link to PubMed or Internet Grateful Med to add a link
to the TOXNET Web site.The committee did not make an exhaustive list of all of the organizationsthat should be contacted for outreach efforts, but it did start a list that can beInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28expanded. Outreach efforts can be targeted to reach each group as most appro-priate, either via the Internet, printed materials, presentations, or exhibits. Or-ganizations to involve in outreach efforts for TOXNET include:Ł  academic and public libraries (NLM has recently announced a pilot proj-ect with 37 public libraries across the United States to increase awareness ofInternet health resources [http://www.nlm.nih.gov/news/press_releases/access.html]);Ł  high schools and universities;Ł  federal agencies involved directly in environmental and occupationalhealth issues and specific programs within those agencies, such as the Envi-ronmental Protection Agency (EPA), Agency for Toxic Substances and DiseaseRegistry (ATSDR), National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH), National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Occu-pational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and EPA™s EnvironmentalJustice Advisory Council and Advisory Subcommittees;Ł state and local environmental and public health agencies, the Environ-mental Council of States;Ł  nonprofit organizations and networks (e.g., Environmental DefenseFund, National Wildlife Federation, League of Women Voters, Nature Conser-vancy, Right-to-Know Network, Sierra Club);Ł  industry and related organizations (e.g., Chemical Manufacturers Asso-ciation, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America); andŁ  professional associations (e.g., American Academy of Clinical Toxicol-ogy, American Academy of Pediatrics, American Association of OccupationalHealth Nurses, American Association of Poison Control Centers, American Bar
Association, American College of Emergency Physicians, American College of
Medical Toxicology, American College of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, American Industrial Hygiene Association, American Public Health
Association, Association of Occupational and Environmental Clinics, Associa-tion of Teachers of Preventive Medicine, National Science Teachers Associa-tion, Society of Environmental Journalists).CONCLUSIONThe committee believes that the TOXNET databases offer a wealth of in-formation to a broad range of individuals and organizations, and it applauds theSpecialized Information Services Division and NLM for expanding access to
TOXNET through the development of an Internet Web site. There are a num-ber of short- and long-term changes to the TOXNET Web site that, if imple-mented, will increase the ease of searching the databases and will increase thesearcher™s efficiency in retrieving the information he or she requires.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Establishment of the TOXNET Web site offers an opportunity to raiseawareness about the TOXNET databases. The committee hopes that NLM willtake advantage of this opportunity to broaden its outreach and training efforts.At the same time, it is hoped that the search interface will continue to evolve
and that NLM will continue to integrate the TOXNET information into its
overall Web site and its plans for the future.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BibliographyAlberico R, Micco M. 1990. Expert Systems for Reference and Information Retrieval.Westport, CT: Meckler.Baecker RM, Grudin J, Buxton WAS, Greenberg S. 1995. Readings in HumanŒComputer Interaction: Toward the Year 2000. San Francisco: Morgan KaufmannPublishers.Chu H. 1998. Internet search services vs. online database services. Proceedings of theNineteenth National Online Meeting. Medford, NJ: Information Today. Pp. 69Œ75.Constantine L, Lockwood L. 1997. Inspecting Web Designs for Usability. Presentationfor Web Design and Development ™97. Washington, DC. October 1Œ3, 1997.Hartson HR. 1997. Trends in human-computer interaction research and development. In:National Research Council. More than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Inter-faces to the Nation™s Information Infrastructure. Washington, DC: National Acad-emy Press. Pp. 221Œ240.Hix D, Hartson HR. 1993. Developing User Interfaces: Ensuring Usability ThroughProduct and Process. New York: John Wiley.IOM (Institute of Medicine). 1997. Toxicology and Environmental Health InformationResources: The Role of the National Library of Medicine. Washington, DC: Na-tional Academy Press.Kushniruk AW, Patel VL, Cimino JJ, Barrows RA. 1996. Cognitive evaluation of theuser interface and vocabulary of an outpatient information system. In: Cimino JJ,ed. Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Association Annual FallSymposium. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus. Pp. 22Œ26.National Library of Medicine. 1998. From 7 million to 70 million searches. GratefullyYours MarchŒApril 1998.National Research Council. More than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces tothe Nation™s Information Infrastructure. Washington, DC: National AcademyPress.Partners in Information Access. 1998. Partners in Information Access for Public HealthProfessionals. [World Wide Web document]. URL http://www.nnlm.nlm.nih.gov/partners/ (accessed July 1998).Siegel D. 1997. Creating Killer Web Sites, 2nd edition. Indianapolis, IN: Hayden Books.Wang P, Tenopir C. 1998. An exploratory study of users™ interaction with World WideWeb resources: Information skills, cognitive styles, affective states, and searchingbehaviors. Proceedings of the Nineteenth National Online Meeting. Medford, NJ:Information Today. Pp. 445Œ454.Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX AAcknowledgmentsThe committee expresses its appreciation to the following individuals whoprovided input to the committee.Raymond AgiusUniversity of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, ScotlandSanjay BaligaInstitute of Medicine
Washington, DCGeorges C. BenjaminMaryland Department of Healthand Mental HygieneBaltimore, MDMaryanne BlakeUniversity of Washington
Seattle, WAKeith BurkhartCentral Pennsylvania PoisonCenterHershey, PADale CamperNational Institute for OccupationalSafety and HealthCincinnati, OHMiriam DavisSilver Spring, MDSusan FourtNational Research Council
Washington, DCGiuliano FrancoUniversity of Modena
Modena, ItalyGregory FulcoWashington, DCHerbert GarrisonEast Carolina University
Greenville, NCInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kate Louise GottfriedU.S. Department of Health andHuman ServicesWashington, DCBuck GrissomAgency for Toxic Substances andDisease RegistryAtlanta, GALyla HernandezInstitute of MedicineWashington, DCMonty HerrLawrence Livermore NationalLaboratoryLivermore, CADenise LaflammeWashington State Department ofHealthOlympia, WABarbara LandrethNational Institute for OccupationalSafety and HealthMorgantown, WVNina MathesonJohns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MDJanet NormandyU.S. Department of Energy
Bethesda, MDAngela NunleyHoward University College ofMedicineWashington, DCPeter OrrisCook County Hospital
Chicago, ILMichael PahnWashington, DCKim RichardsonHoward University
Washington, DCDiane RodillHealth Resources and ServicesAdministrationWashington, DCRose Ann SolowayAmerican Association of PoisonControl CentersWashington, DCChristina SullivanWashington University
St. Louis, MOAnthony SurudaUniversity of Utah
Salt Lake City, UTCarrie Ingalls SzlykNational Committee for QualityAssuranceWashington, DCJames M. VailAmerican Petroleum Institute
Washington, DCPeter WaldARCO Medical Department
Los Angeles, CAKen WallaceUniversity of Minnesota
Duluth, MNInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX BSearch QuestionsPRE-SEARCH QUESTIONS1.  Please check the ONE category below that best describes you:___Primary health care professional___Health professional specializing in occupational/environmental health___Emergency medicine or poison control specialist___Health sciences librarian___Environmental health researcher or scientist___Patient or community organization member___Local, state, or federal public health professional___Other (please specify)2.  Your age _______3.  How would you describe your level of experience with the Internet?___ None/basic___Intermediate___ Advanced4.  Please indicate your online searching experience.___No online searching___General World Wide Web search engines (e.g., Yahoo, Alta Vista)___MEDLINE primarily but occasionally other online databases___MEDLINE only___Numerous online databasesInternet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5.If you use databases to locate toxicological and environmental healthinformation, which ones do you use? Please check all that apply.___I haven™t used databases to find toxicological/environmental health information___MEDLINE through Internet Grateful Med___MEDLINE through PubMed___MEDLINE through other sources___TOXLINE___NIOSHTIC___Poisindex/TOMESTOXNET databases:___CCRIS___HSDB___GENETOX___IRIS___RTECS___Other (please specify)____________________6.  Please check the main ways you use toxicological/environmental healthinformation. Please check all that apply.___Patient care___Teaching/education___Clinical research___Policy decisions___Basic research___Risk analysis___Worker safety___Retrieve information for others (e.g., library searching)___Concerns about my family™s health___Concerns about my health___Conditions in my workplace___Community/advocacy___School work___Conditions in my area/neighborhood___Other (please specify)_____________________________________Internet Access to the National Library of Medicine's Toxicology and Environmental Health DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Search ScenariosPlease conduct searches of the new interface to answer questions 1 and 2below. Also conduct a third search using a toxicology/environmental questionof your own choosing. As you search, please explain to the IOM staff member
what you are doing and note any problems you are experiencing or ideas you
have on improving the search interface. Thanks!1.  What is the potential for vinyl chloride to cause liver cancer in humans?2.  What are the potential health effects of working as a dry cleaner?3.  Your choice: Please write down your search question.POST-SEARCH QUESTIONS1.  The problems I experienced were (please be as specific as possible):General ProblemSpecific Details__  Selecting a database__  Composing a searchstatement or searchstrategy__  Displaying the searchresults on the screen__  Modifying/rewording thesearch strategy__  Printing search results__  Evaluating the searchresults__  Other