DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/6451Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and WaterwaysManagement66 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06380-7 | DOI 10.17226/6451Committee on Maritime Advanced Information Systems, National Research CouncilApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS TOPORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENTCommittee on Maritime Advanced Information SystemsMarine BoardCommission on Engineering and Technical SystemsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.1999
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. ¥ Washington, DC 20418NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy ofSciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the
committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencies and with regard forappropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approvedby a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sciences, theNational Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distin-guished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance ofscience and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal
government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the NationalAcademy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in itsadministration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciencesthe responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. William A. Wulf is president of theNational Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to securethe services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matterspertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National
Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and,upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Kenneth I.Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furtheringknowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policiesdetermined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services tothe government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is admin-istered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr.
William A. Wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.This study was supported by Contract DTMA91-94-G-00003 between the National Academy ofSciences and the Maritime Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation.  Any opinions,

findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s)and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for theproject.International Standard Book Number 0-309-06380-9Limited copies are available from Marine Board, Commission on Engineering and Technical Sys-tems, National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418.Additional copies are available from National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.,Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washingtonmetropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.eduCopyright 1999 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiCOMMITTEE ON MARITIME ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMSH. THOMAS KORNEGAY (chair), Port of Houston Authority, Houston, TexasWILLIAM A. WALLACE (vice chair), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New YorkANNE D. AYLWARD, Volpe Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts
WILLIAM O. GRAY, Gray Maritime Company, Darien, Connecticut
JERROL LARRIEU, Port of New Orleans, Louisiana
ROBERT G. MOORE, Coastwatch, Inc., Vashon, Washington
JOHN S. NIEDERHAUSER, Puget Sound Pilots, Seattle, Washington
F.D.R. POSTHUMUS, Sea-Land Service, Inc., Elizabeth, New Jersey
STEVE VALERIUS, Hollywood Marine, Inc., Houston, Texas
E. CAMERON WILLIAMS, Massachusetts Maritime Academy, BuzzardÕs BayRUSSELL WOODILL, Council of American Master Mariners, Inc., Charleston, South CarolinaLiaisons of Sponsoring AgenciesWILLIAM A. BERGEN, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, D.C.MILLINGTON LOCKWOOD, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
MICHAEL ONDER, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C.
JOHN PISANI, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C.
J. MICHAEL SOLLOSI, U.S. Coast Guard, Washington, D.C.Marine Board LiaisonBERNHARD J. ABRAHAMSSON, independent consultant, Superior, WisconsinMarine Board StaffPETER A. JOHNSON, director, Marine BoardCARLA MOORE, administrative assistant (until July 1996)
DELPHINE GLAZE, administrative assistant (July 1996 to May 1997)
THERESA M. FISHER, administrative assistant (from May 1997)
GARY BAHAM, consultant
LAURA OST, consultantApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MARINE BOARDJAMES M. COLEMAN (
chair), NAE
, Louisiana State University, Baton RougeJERRY A. ASPLAND (vice chair), The California Maritime Academy, VallejoBERNHARD J. ABRAHAMSSON, consultant, Superior, Wisconsin
LARRY P. ATKINSON, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia
PETER F. BONTADELLI, California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento
LILLIAN C. BORRONE, NAE, Port Authority of New York and New JerseyBILIANA CICIN-SAIN, University of Delaware, Newark
SYLVIA A. EARLE, Deep Ocean Exploration and Research, Oakland, California

BILLY L. EDGE, Texas A&M University, College Station
JOHN W. FARRINGTON, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, Massachusetts
MARTHA GRABOWSKI, LeMoyne College and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York
R. KEITH MICHEL, Herbert Engineering, San Francisco, California
JEROME H. MILGRAM, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
JAMES D. MURFF, Exxon Production Research Company, Houston, Texas
STEVEN T. SCALZO, Foss Maritime Company, Seattle, Washington
MALCOLM L. SPAULDING, University of Rhode Island, Narragansett
ROD VULOVIC, Sea-Land Service, Inc., Charlotte, North Carolina
E. G. ÒSKIPÓ WARD, Texas A&M University, College Station
StaffPETER A. JOHNSON, directorDANA CAINES, financial associate
SUSAN GARBINI, senior staff officer
THERESA M. FISHER, administrative assistant
DONNA HENRY, project assistantivApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vRecent advances in information technology could greatlyimprove the safety and efficiency of the U.S. maritime in-
dustry and the daily operations of ports and waterways.
Advanced maritime information systems, singly or in com-
bination, could ameliorate many problems faced by mari-
ners if economic and other barriers to their implementation
could be overcome.  Improvements are already evident in

other nations that have invested heavily in ports, advanced
maritime information systems, and supporting infrastruc-
tures, leaving the United States at a growing disadvantage.The Committee on Maritime Advanced Information Sys-tems was established under the auspices of the Marine Board of
the National Research Council to identify systems and their
infrastructures that could promote safe and effective vessel tran-
sits through U.S. ports.  In 1996, the committee released an

interim report on a variety of issues related to the U.S. Coast
GuardÕs Vessel Traffic Services Program that set the stage forstudies of additional safety and waterways management sys-
tems, as well as issues related to the efficiency of maritime
commerce and the movement of cargo through U.S. ports.In this final report, the committee has attempted to ac-complish the following tasks:¥identify ways that advanced maritime information sys-tems could ameliorate current shortfalls and maintain
or improve environmental protection and waterway
safety¥describe how those systems could minimize the costsand problems of adapting to changes in transportation
and contribute to maintaining the nationÕs competitiveposition¥provide a vision of the future showing how advancedinformation management systems could enhance vessel
safety and waterway efficiencyPrefaceAfter collecting a substantial amount of background in-formation from the literature and stakeholders,1 the com-
mittee, with sponsor concurrence, decided to focus on infor-
mation systems that promote navigation safety and improve
vessel traffic management.  Improvements in the systems

offer the greatest benefits for improving U.S. port opera-
tions.  The committee recognized that information systems

that promote transportation efficiency are also important, but
many effective systems are already in use or are under de-
velopment, primarily in the private sector, to meet rigorous
commercial demands for efficiency and customer service.
The committee assessed these systems only insofar as they
contribute to maritime safety. The committee also under-
stands the critical role of information systems and informa-
tion mapping in the context of intermodal transportation even
though limitations of time and resources prevented the com-
mittee from focusing on this area.Eleven of the original 15 committee members carried outthis second phase of the study.  Members were selected for

their scientific, technical, economic, policy, and practical
expertise.  Committee members include users of maritime

information systems, developers of technologies and sys-
tems, specialists in information architecture, individuals with
expertise in key sectors of the maritime industry, and other
stakeholders in port operations.  Biographies of committee

members are provided in Appendix A.  The committee
Õswork was facilitated by liaisons from the sponsoring agen-
cies and the Marine Board.The committee met eight times during the two-year pe-riod of this study.  Individual committee members or sub-

groups visited 10 U.S. ports and several foreign ports where
advanced information technology is used to enhance the
movement and safety of vessel traffic and cargo handling
operations.  Since the publication of its interim report, the

committee has held three meetings and two meetings of a
subgroup, one in Charleston, South Carolina, and one in Se-
attle, Washington, to investigate existing information sys-
tems and identify critical needs for improvements or
changes.  The information collected by the subgroup and
1 In this context, a stakeholder is a person or group with a vested interest
in a project, proposal, or venture.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viPREFACEother background material are presented in the appendices tothe report.The committee received substantial assistance from a num-
ber of federal, state, and local agencies, as well as from private
companies.  The committee would particularly like to thank

the following federal liaisons for providing essential data and
advice:  Michael Sollosi, U.S. Coast Guard;  Frederick Ganjon

and Millington Lockwood, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration; John Pisani, Maritime Administration; and

Michael Onder, U.S. Department of Transportation.  In addi-

tion, the following experts made valuable presentations to the
committee:  Gordon Fink, ITS America; John Allen, Sealand
Corp.; William Habeck, Tie Logistics, Inc.; Roger Nortillo,
Maher Terminals; Brian FitzGibbon, Atlantic Tonnage Cen-
ter; Timothy Huckbody, Maersk, Inc.; Capt. Richard Softe,
Puget Sound Marine Exchange; Mark Walker, Microsoft, Inc.;
CDR David McKenzie, U.S. Coast Guard, Puget Sound; Rob-
ert Pavia, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Seattle; Stan Norman, Washington Office of Marine Safety;
Joseph Nortz, Washington State Ferries; Douglas Ward,
American President Lines; and Janice Granberg, Port of Se-
attle.  These individuals and many others contributed to the

completeness and quality of this report.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individu-als chosen for their diverse perspective and technical exper-
tise, in accordance with procedures approved by the NRCÕsReport Review Committee.  The purpose of this independent

review is to provide candid and critical comments that will
assist the institution in making the published report as sound
as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge.  The review comments and draft manu-

script remain confidential to protect the integrity of the de-
liberative process.  We wish to thank the following individu-

als for their participation in the review of this report:
Bernhard J. Abrahamsson, consultant; Larry P. Atkinson,
Old Dominion University; John P. Basilotto, Texas Trans-
portation Institute; Peter F. Bontadelli, California Depart-
ment of Fish and Game; Martha Grabowski, LeMoyne Col-
lege and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; Donald G. Iselin,
U.S. Navy, retired; Warren G. Leback, consultant; and James
G. Wenzel, Marine Development Associates, Inc.While the individuals listed above have provided construc-tive comments and suggestions, it must be emphasized that
responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely
with the authoring committee and the institution.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiACRONYMS....................................................................................................................ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY................................................................................................1

1NEED FOR IMPROVED NAVIGATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS................4
Barriers to Expanding Information Systems, 5
Historical Perspective on U.S. Ports, 6
Trends in Maritime Transportation, 10
Summary, 11
References, 112FEDERAL, STATE, AND PRIVATE ROLES...........................................................13
Relationship Between Safety and Efficiency, 13
Growing Importance of Nonfederal Stakeholders, 14
Evolution of Public-Private Role Sharing, 16
Need for Strong Federal Leadership, 16
Summary, 17
References, 173ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS...................19
Waterways Management, 19
Nautical Charting, 20
PORTS and ÒPORTS Lite,Ó 20
Automatic Identification Systems, 22
New Perspective on Vessel Traffic Services Systems, 23
Summary, 29
References, 294VISION OF THE FUTURE AND HOW TO ACHIEVE IT.......................................30
The Vision, 30
Realizing the Vision, 31
References, 335CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................34
Providing an Information Infrastructure, 34
Tracking Hazardous Cargo, 34
Improving Vessel Traffic Management, 35
Universal Carriage Requirements, 35ContentsApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiCONTENTSAPPENDICESABIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS.......................................................39
BEXCERPT FROM THE NATIONAL DIALOG ON VESSEL TRAFFIC
SERVICES, APRIL 1997............................................................................................41
CMARITIME ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PUGET SOUND
REGION......................................................................................................................45
DMARITIME INFORMATION SYSTEMS, PORT OF CHARLESTON,
SOUTH CAROLINA..................................................................................................49
EARRIVAL-TO-DEPARTURE INFORMATION EXCHANGE...............................54
FIGURES AND BOXESFigures1-1History and forecast of waterborne foreign trade through U.S. ports, 7
3-1Status of PORTS implementation (October 1998), 21
3-2PWASS project concept
ÑVTS system based on automatic identification system (AIS), 253-3U.S. Coast Guard risk-based port selection process, 27

3-4Vessel traffic management hierarchy, 27
Boxes1-1Nautical Charts Provide the Sole Means of 
ÒSeeingÓ Underwater and Dead Ahead, 8
1-2Definition of VTS, 9
2-1Tracking Hazardous Materials, 14
2-2Listening to Stakeholders, 15
3-1How AIS Works, 22
3-2Information Systems and Partners in San Francisco Bay, 24
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcronymsAISautomatic identification system
APAAmerican Pilots Association
COPTcaptain of the port

DGPSdifferential global positioning system
DWTdeadweight tons
ECDISelectronic chart display and information system

FCCFederal Communications Commission

GMDSSglobal maritime distress and safety system
GPSglobal positioning system
IALAInternational Association of Lighthouse Au-thoritiesICWMInteragency Committee on Waterways Manage-
mentIMOInternational Maritime Organization

ISMInternational Safety Management

ITOSinternational tug of opportunity system
LA/LBLos Angeles/Long Beach
MARADMaritime Administration

NDSnational distress system
NIMANational Imagery and Mapping Agency

NOAANational Oceanographic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministrationPAWSSports and waterways safety system
PORTSphysical oceanographic real-time system
RNAregulated navigation area

TEUtwenty-foot equivalent unit

USACEU.S. Army Corps of Engineers
USCGU.S. Coast Guard
VTCvessel traffic center
VTISvessel traffic information services

VTSvessel traffic services
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11The future safety of maritime transportation in the UnitedStatesÑa major factor in the nationÕs international trade and
economic well-beingÑwill depend heavily on the quality of
port and waterways information systems.  Many formal stud-

ies, as well as informal discussions among port users, have
detailed the shortcomings of existing maritime information
systems and called for quick remedies.  The demands for

improvements are becoming increasingly urgent as only scat-
tered, minimally funded system upgrades are made and
oceanborne trade continues to grow.Some of the most urgent needs of  mariners are for accu-
rate, real-time information about harbor and waterway con-
ditions (e.g., water depth, weather, currents, and tides);
voiceless communications systems that provide navigation
and traffic data, as needed, without causing undue distrac-
tions; a consistent operating environment nationwide in
terms of rules and equipment standards; effective vessel traf-
fic management schemes that can deal with congestion and
emergencies; and systems that promote quick responses to
cargo spills and other hazards.  The requisite technologies

are available to meet all of these needs and have already
been implemented in some foreign ports.Many U.S. ports and waterways lack adequate informa-tion services, although certain elements of advanced systems
are now available in some locations.  Barriers to improve-

ments in information systems include the division of respon-
sibilities for waterways management among multiple agen-
cies at all levels of government, a lack of coordination among
the federal agencies responsible for waterways management,
inadequate budgets for some critical maritime programs, the
high costs of some specialized technologies, stakeholder
opposition to user fees, limited access to certain key data,
the incompatibility of many independently developed sys-
tems, and the absence of standards for some attractive tech-
nologies.In this report, the second phase of a three-year study bythe Committee on Maritime Advanced Information Systems
of the National Research Council, a strategy is presented for
overcoming the major barriers and deficiencies and providingExecutive Summarya minimum level of maritime safety information nationwide.
In this phase of the study, the committee concentrated on
maritime information systems that promote safety, which is
the area of greatest need.  The committee did not examine in

detail the relationship between navigation safety and mari-
time transportation efficiency or evaluate information

systems that promote efficiency; the committee believes,
however, that these issues deserve further attention.PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ROLES FOR MARITIMEINFORMATION SYSTEMS THAT PROMOTE
SAFETYFederal leadership, backed by input and support from theprivate sector, will be required to enhance maritime safety
information systems.  Despite the growing number and di-

versity of port stakeholders participating in local, regional,
and national planning and other activities that affect mari-
time commerce, the role of the federal government is criti-
cal.  Stakeholder involvement is now considered essential to

the design, implementation, and operation of appropriate in-
formation systems, partly because of the unique needs of
each port, but mostly because recent federal budget cutbacks
have resulted in the delay or cancellation of the deployment,
upgrading, and operations of some maritime safety informa-
tion systems.  Nonfederal support is being sought through

public-private partnerships for some federally developed
systems, such as the National Oceanographic and Atmo-
spheric AdministrationÕs (NOAA) Physical Oceanographic
Real-Time System (PORTS).1Although growing stakeholder involvement is a positivetrend, it is important to remember that the federal govern-
ment has an acknowledged historical mission to ensure navi-
gation safety.  The willingness of local stakeholders to pay
1 PORTS gathers wind, current, wave, and other data from sensors in-
stalled on buoys and transmits the information in real time to central sta-
tions and individual users.  Full systems are installed in five U.S. ports.
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
for PORTS, for example, may not be the best measure ofwhether the national interest in maritime safety is being
served.  Only the federal government can ensure a consistent

operating environment nationwide, enforce U.S. laws, and
represent the United States at international standards-setting
conventions.Effective federal leadership will require improved coordi-nation among agencies.  In the past, federal allocations for

waterways have not been fully coordinated among agencies,
and projects have not been subjected to interagency
prioritization.  This fragmented approach may have exacer-

bated the gaps in the information infrastructure.  For example,

many stakeholders have suggested that the recent federal em-
phasis on vessel traffic services (VTS), which is the responsi-
bility of the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG),2 has overshadowed
the long-standing need for a more basic toolÑaccurate nauti-cal chartsÑwhich is the responsibility of NOAA.  The key
concern is that the underlying data represented on these charts
(paper or electronic) be accurate, timely, and reliable.NOAA has developed a plan to accelerate surveying andcharting but predicts that, at current funding levels, it will take
25 to 30 years to eliminate the existing backlog of outdated
hydrographic surveys.  Moreover, NOAA can digitize only a

small amount of data in a way that meets international stan-
dards for the most advanced electronic charts.  Other agencies

responsible for providing waterways information include the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which maintains federal navi-
gation channels, and the National Imagery and Mapping
Agency, which publishes Notices to Mariners and is respon-
sible for several other maritime information systems.In 1995, recognizing the need for better communicationsamong agency programs responsible for waterways and their
use, the key federal departments and agencies formed the  In-

teragency Committee on Waterways Management.  This com-

mittee offers a mechanism for coordinating federal funding
priorities with regard to nautical charting; electronic charts
and other systems for delivering data to users; PORTS and
other systems for collecting and disseminating real-time data
on weather, currents, and tides; conventional aids to naviga-
tion (e.g., buoys, lights, and markers); electronic navigation
systems, such as the differential global positioning system3;and electronic information-exchange systems.  The inter-

agency committee, which is chaired by a USCG division chief
and includes representatives of five federal departments and
agencies, was formed to Òidentify, evaluate, develop, and pro-mote the implementation of federal policies and programs to

ensure effective management of federal waterways.Ó  One of
its objectives is to coordinate overlapping functions.KEY OPPORTUNITIES FOR MARITIMEINFORMATION SYSTEMS TO PROMOTE
SAFETYIn the committeeÕs judgment, three types of informationsystems offer the greatest near-term potential to enhance
overall maritime safety:  hazardous cargo tracking systems,

VTS systems, and automatic identification systems (AIS).
A number of steps would have to be taken to maximize the
benefits of these technologies, each of which is at a different
stage of development.The committee also believes the full potential of maritimeinformation systems will only be realized if significant na-
tional attention is paid to upgrading and maintaining the under-

lying infrastructure including: reliable and accurate waterways
data, common standards for technology, adequate training for
personnel, and effective communications networks.  This

infrastructure is primarily a federal responsibility.Hazardous Cargo Tracking SystemsAlthough petroleum and other hazardous commodities arefrequently carried by vessels transiting U.S. waters, the
USCG does not have an electronic information system for
tracking hazardous cargo.  Instead, it relies on paper records

and the assistance of vessel and shipping terminal personnel.
A number of port closings and other shipping delays have
been caused by the difficulties in identifying cargoes from
spills, fires, or other incidents.  The only federal agency that

currently operates an electronic cargo-tracking system, the
U.S. Customs Service, does so for purposes of enhancing
transportation efficiency, not safety, and is not a traditional
maritime agency.  These systems include electronic mani-

fests from most cargo vessels sailing within, or planning to
enter, U.S. waters.The USCG has explored the possibility of accessing theU.S. Customs Service records on hazardous cargo, but a

workable information-exchange system has yet to be ar-
ranged.  The development of such a system, whether based

on this data or some other mechanism, would clearly im-
prove emergency responses to incidents on board vessels and
in port terminals.Vessel Traffic ServicesThe USCG is in the process of implementing a new pro-gram to meet the needs of key U.S. ports and waterways that
do not have adequate VTS systems while also satisfying the
concerns of local port stakeholders.  Formal, objective crite-

ria for selecting ports with the greatest need for VTS, how-
ever, have yet to be developed.  Moreover, the USCG has

not achieved consistency among the eight existing VTS sys-
tems it operates or among the various vessel traffic informa-
tion services (VTIS) operated by a variety of other
organizations (e.g., federal, state, and private entities and2 In general, the USCG is responsible for the enforcement of maritime
law, port safety and security, providing aids to navigation, and search andrescue operations.3 The DGPS enables civilian mariners to fix their vessel positions very
accurately by using data broadcast by the USCG to correct signals from amilitary radio navigation system that uses satellite transmissions.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3combinations thereof).  Mariners need
Ñand wantÑa con-sistent operating environment internationally, which will
require the establishment of uniform guidelines for both VTS
and VTIS systems.  The need for consistency is heightened

by the prevalence of foreign vessels and crews in U.S.
waters.The effectiveness of VTS and VTIS systems would bemaximized if they all provided the capabilities judged to be
most essential to navigation safety and they included com-
patible equipment designed to the highest standards.  The

committee does not believe it is necessary, or even desirable,
for all systems to use the exact same technological tools.Automatic Identification SystemsAIS promises significant safety benefits, simplicity ofoperation, voiceless communications, and compatibility with
a range of traffic management schemes (including VTS).4AIS enables mariners and VTS watchstanders to identify and
distinguish specific vessels that otherwise appear as identi-
cal ÒblipsÓ on a video display or radar overlay.
5  Another
important advantage of AIS is the low cost (relative to many
other technologies) of the equipment carried by participat-
ing vessels.  AIS and similar systems have been used in

Prince William Sound, Alaska, as well as in Canada, Swe-
den, and the United Kingdom.  The USCG has recently ini-

tiated an AIS demonstration in the New Orleans region of
the lower Mississippi River.For AIS to be effective as a safety measure, all vessels (orat least vessels of certain sizes using specific waterways)
would have to carry the same basic information systems and
operate them according to uniform standards.  Many port

stakeholders and the USCG support universal standards and
carriage requirements for AIS.  The requirements could be

generic, but the international character of the shipping in-
dustry and the prevalence of foreign-flag vessels in U.S.

waters argue for systems that meet international standards.RECOMMENDATIONSRecommendation 1.  The Interagency Committee on Wa-terways Management should coordinate the efforts of the
U.S. Coast Guard, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
National Imagery and Mapping Agency to develop an inte-
grated, comprehensive plan for maintaining the navigation
information infrastructure for all significant U.S. ports and
waterways and should solicit consistent, long-term support
(public and private) to implement the plan.Recommendation 2.  The U.S. Coast Guard and U.S. Cus-toms Service should develop a system to disseminate elec-
tronic information on hazardous cargo automatically from
the Customs ServiceÕs cargo-tracking database for the pur-pose of improving emergency responses to spills, fires, and
other incidents.Recommendation 3.  The U.S. Coast Guard should con-
tinue to move forward, in consultation with local port stake-
holders, with its comprehensive national effort to implement
vessel traffic services in key U.S. ports and waterways where
such systems are needed.  Periodic assessments of port safety

should be made to keep plans up to date.  The U.S. Coast

Guard should also provide a uniform national system of traf-
fic management implemented through coordinated federal
vessel traffic services and locally adopted vessel traffic in-
formation services systems.  Specifically, the U.S. Coast

Guard should take the following steps while moving for-
ward with the overall program:¥develop, standardize, and implement objective criteriafor selecting ports to be served by federally funded ves-
sel traffic services while upgrading existing systems
and implementing new systems that are urgently needed¥develop training, certification, watchstanding, and op-erating standards for vessel traffic services applicable
to all services regardless of whether or not they are fed-
erally operated¥as the competent authority, ensure that all shore-basedvessel traffic management activities, regardless of who
operates them, comply with established international
standards¥facilitate communication among ports regarding les-sons learned about the implementation of these systemsRecommendation 4.  The U.S. Coast Guard should workexpeditiously toward the implementation of international
carriage requirements for electronic navigation and
identification/location systems for all major vessels using
U.S. ports and should continue to take expeditious actions to
provide communications frequencies to ensure that auto-
matic identification systems are internationally compatible.4 AIS is one of various technological tools available for, and used in,
VTS installations.  For example, radar and closed-circuit television, which

have traditionally been used by traffic managers for the surveillance ofcongested waterways, do not require that vessels carry special equipment.Newer technologies, such as AIS, can provide more precise vessel identifi-
cation and position information but require that vessels carry transponders.5 AIS consists of a shipboard transponder operating in the VHF mari-
time band that can automatically send vessel information (e.g., identifica-
tion, position, heading, length, beam, type, draft, and hazardous cargo car-ried) to other ships, as well as to shore.  The receiving stations can display
the locations of all transponder-equipped vessels on an electronic chart or
radar screen.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
4The United States has a compelling national interest inmaintaining the safety and efficiency of its ports and water-
ways.  The nationÕs global competitiveness and domestic

prosperity depend in large measure on the degree to which it
can accommodate waterborne trade and ensure safe and effi-
cient marine transportation.  Many maritime safety initia-

tives have been launched in recent years, both in the United
States and abroad, including a phased-in requirement for
double hulls on oil tankers and targeted, comprehensive in-
spections of potential high-risk vessels by the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG).  In addition, significant changes have been

made in the culture of the shipping industry, as evidenced by
the recent adoption of the International Safety Management
(ISM) Code 1 by the International Maritime Organization
(IMO).2  These efforts are expected to improve maritime
safety, and evidence suggests that they already have (NRC,
1994a).  In addition, numerous initiatives to enhance trade

efficiency have been pursued by the federal government
(ITO6 Task Force, 1996) and the shipping industry
(Aylward, 1996).Despite this progress, a number of factors still contributeto persistent safety risks.  For example, human error, a cause

of 80 percent of maritime accidents (USCG, 1995a), remains

a difficult problem to overcome.  Concerns have also been

expressed about the aging of commercial fleets and recur-
ring anecdotal reports of substandard foreign-flag ships and
crews (NRC, 1994a).  Most of the deep-ocean commercial

traffic in U.S. waters consists of foreign-flag ships.3  The
United States exercises control over equipment and standards1Need for Improved Navigation Information Systemson these vessels primarily through the enforcement of inter-
national agreements.Similarly, the efficiency of maritime transportation var-ies greatly in U.S. ports because of the diversity among ports
in terms of governing and funding structures, local shipping
patterns, services provided, and geography and environmen-
tal conditions.  In general, however, the infrastructure of U.S.

ports lags behind the most sophisticated ports in Europe and
Asia (NRC, 1993, 1996).  Although some U.S. shipping ter-

minals have very modern cargo-handling equipment, their
approach channels and berths are often too shallow to ac-
commodate the deepest-draft ships (NRC, 1993; Vulovic,
1995).  The expansion and maintenance of channels is also a

problem; high costs and technical difficulties in handling
contaminated sediments often slow the pace of dredging

(MARAD, 1994; NRC, 1997).Heavy traffic and a multiplicity of vessel types in someports,4 as well as the hazardous nature of much of the cargo,
creates safety concerns.  The costs of shipping accidents and

public concerns about the potential environmental impact of
accidents are also significant.  The aging infrastructure of

U.S. waterways can compromise safety and efficiency in a
number of ways.  For example, because some ports cannot

accommodate the deepest-draft ships, offshore lightering is
commonly used to transfer petroleum from large ships to
smaller vessels that can proceed into shallow harbors or wa-
terways.  Although the safety record of lightering operations

is excellent (NRC, 1998), the number of cargo transfers is
increased, which also adds to the costs of petrochemical1 The ISM Code lays the foundation for a new operational and cultural
framework for ship management, requiring that policies and actions be con-
sistent within an organization and focusing attention on human factors.2 A specialized agency of the United Nations, the IMO is the leading
international forum for cooperation on issues affecting maritime safety.3 In 1992, 24,000 vessels of 1,000 gross tons or more were in operationworldwide. Of these, only 603 were registered in the United States, andapproximately one-third of those were government owned (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1994).4 Except for the oil trade, vessel movements in U.S. waters are poorly
documented (Research and Special Projects Administration, 1995), so it is
not possible to acquire sufficient reliable data to demonstrate recent trendsin vessel traffic.  However, the following 1994 statistics for New York
Harbor reflect the traffic situation at one busy port: 163,664 vessel move-
ments, including 89,075 by ferries; 52,626 by tugs or tows; 6,945 by cargovessels; 12,545 by tankers; 1,708 by public vessels; and 45 by vessels car-rying hazardous materials.  Furthermore, almost all cargo vessels carry small

amounts of packaged hazardous materials (USCG, 1995b).Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEED FOR IMPROVED NAVIGATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS5products.  Lightering also increases the number of trips re-
quired to deliver cargo to terminals, and, thus, increases the
volume of traffic that must be accommodated safely.Congestion has increased in some ports because competi-tion for intermodal trade and shifts in trading patterns have led
to the concentration of cargo at fewer ports (NRC, 1993).  Con-

gestion is also exacerbated by ongoing and projected changes in
ship size and other characteristics (discussed later in this chap-
ter).  If U.S. ports fail to accommodate these changes, then cargo

may be shifted to nearby foreign ports.  Unfortunately, U.S.

terminal upgrades are often delayed because of declining sup-
port from state and local governments and a variety of other
reasons (MARAD, 1994).  Thus, although it is difficult to deter-

mine actual performance levels because of inadequate data, es-
pecially data related to safety,5 continued attention to the safety
and efficiency of U.S. ports and waterways is essential to the
nationÕs economic well-being.For all of these reasons, the need to enhance maritimeinformation systems in the United States is growing.  A num-

ber of recent studies have detailed the shortcomings of exist-
ing systems and planned upgrades (GAO, 1996a, 1996b;
INTERTANKO, 1996; National Performance Review, 1996;
NRC, 1994a, 1994b, 1996).  The national stakeholder dis-

cussion group convened by the USCG in 1997 and 1998 to
help develop new plans for vessel traffic services (VTS) con-
firmed the need for immediate attention to maritime infor-
mation issues (National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services,
1997; see Appendix B).  It was also apparent that recent

federal efforts to develop and fund maritime safety informa-
tion systems have not met marinersÕ needs.
The demand for better maritime information systems isexpected to grow as a result of trade patterns and trends.
Forecasts predict continued growth in oceanborne trade, in-
cluding oil imports to the United States (API, 1996). The
condition of the U.S. maritime information infrastructure has
implications for the nationÕs economy, both in terms of  pro-
viding an attractive environment to shippers and in terms of
handling a potential overload of information in a cost-
efficient manner.  Information systems also have environ-

mental implications because, if properly designed and used,
they can help mariners prevent and respond to accident-
related spills.  Furthermore, information systems can help

address concerns raised by the prevalence of foreign-flag
vessels in U.S. waters, a pattern that mariners say heightens
the need for standardized navigation safety systems.The remainder of this chapter outlines barriers toexpanding maritime advanced information systems, theshortcomings of U.S. ports, and relevant trends in maritimetransportation.BARRIERS TO EXPANDING INFORMATIONSYSTEMSRapid advances in information technology in recent yearscould greatly improve business operations in the U.S. mari-
time industry and in the daily operations of ports and water-
ways.  Advanced maritime information systems, used singly

or in combination, could ameliorate many of the problems
faced by mariners.  Available systems include radio naviga-

tion aids that permit individual vessels to determine their
positions with a high degree of accuracy, VTS systems that
monitor shipping in specific waterways, and automated
cargo-tracking systems that serve individual terminals.  Na-
tional systems, such as the massive U.S. Customs Service
database, which links dozens of port users with federal agen-
cies, are also in operation.Although the technology is available to meet virtuallyevery need, the implementation of these systems across the
U.S. has been inconsistent, at best.  Barriers to the wide-

spread use of advanced information systems include the di-
vision of responsibilities for the management of U.S. water-
ways among multiple agencies at all levels of government,
inadequate budgets for some critical maritime programs, the
high costs of some specialized technologies, stakeholder

opposition to paying for services that have traditionally been
provided at no cost, limited access to certain key data, the
incompatibility of many independently developed systems,
the absence of standards for some attractive technologies,
and the wide range and diversity of  available systems.  In

general, the critical importance of the infrastructure (e.g.,
accurate real-time data and the training and qualification of
system users) necessary to use these technologies effectively
has not been appreciated.  By contrast, many foreign mari-

time nations have been investing heavily in their ports, ad-
vanced maritime information systems, and supporting infra-
structures (INTERTANKO, 1996; NRC, 1996).Some U.S. maritime information systems are designed,
funded, and operated by federal agencies; some are developed
in house and used by ship operators, shipping terminals, port
authorities, or pilots; and some are marketed by private ven-
dors.  Some systems are paid for by users, whereas others are

government funded or are supported by a combination of fund-
ing sources.  Some information stored in these systems is

widely shared, but much of it is accessible only to a limited
audience.  Many systems have been developed and imple-

mented in isolation and are not interconnected, or even com-
patible with, other databases.  Few systems are accessible to

all potentially interested users, which has left vast resources
untapped and important needs unmet.  The effectiveness of

many systems is often compromised by an outmoded or inad-
equate supporting infrastructure.The lessons that can be learned from the commercial use5 Accident data maintained by the USCG, principally through the Marine
Investigation Module (part of the Marine Information System for Safety
and Law Enforcement), are of limited utility for broad-scale analyses.  The
value of the data is compromised by several factors, including the integrityof the locally generated accident information and inaccuracies (Research
and Special Projects Administration, 1995).  Information about near-misses
is also inadequate.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
of advanced information systems by foreign ports are, inmost cases, not directly applicable to the United States be-
cause foreign systems are typically configured for the cen-
tralized management of both waterway and port operations.
In its interim report, the committee investigated the develop-
ment and implementation of information systems in some
major foreign ports and discussed the differences between
the management of U.S. and foreign ports.  The committee

found that in most major ports in Europe and the Far East a
central authority is responsible for traffic management and
for the collection and dissemination of information regard-
ing operational safety and efficiency.  These central authori-

ties provide mariners with standardized, consistent naviga-
tional information.  In U.S. ports, however, these functions

are usually not the responsibility of a centralized manage-
ment authority but are provided by several federal agencies
and a number of state and local authorities.  Nevertheless,

U.S. ports have the same need for safety and efficiency as
foreign ports.  The challenge in the United States is to ex-

ploit systems that can serve a variety of institutional struc-
tures and the common goals of safety and efficiency with no
central focus for management and funding.HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON U.S. PORTSPorts and waterways are key elements of the U.S. infra-structure that support international and domestic trade, com-
merce, and recreation.  They are also nodes in a global

transportation system that must accommodate diverse vessel
types and varying shipboard operating skills.  Historically, the

responsibility for infrastructure has been split among federal,
state, and local governments and commercial interests.  The

division of responsibility developed pragmatically and has
generally served the nation well.  The federal government, for

example, is chiefly responsible for the development and main-
tenance of, and safe operation in, shipping channels.  This

responsibility includes ensuring that all vessels that use U.S.
waterways adhere to minimum international operating and
safety standards.  Protection of  the environment is also a key

federal responsibility; however, environmental protection is
also a responsibility of state and local agencies whose efforts
must be coordinated with those of the federal government.Federal responsibilities are spread among several agencies.The Maritime Administration (MARAD) promotes the devel-
opment and utilization of ports and facilities and provides
technical information and advice to other agencies and organi-

zations concerned with ports.  The USCG is responsible for

enforcing maritime laws, ensuring port safety and security,
providing aids to navigation, and providing search and rescue
operations; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration (NOAA) is responsible for maintaining accurate nauti-
cal charts (and more importantly the underlying data); and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is responsible for
maintaining federal navigation channels. Local and state
governments and the private sector are responsible for port
management and development, and local measures that pro-mote safety and efficiency vary greatly.This regime alone makes the effective management ofU.S. waterways a unique challenge. With no cohesive vision
for coordinating and prioritizing tasks, the maintenance and
modernization of the infrastructure has fallen woefully be-
hind those of other nations.  The problems are mostly basic,

arising from mismatches between the growing needs of com-
merce and the static dimensions and capabilities of the sup-
porting waterways, shoreside facilities, and intermodal con-
nections.  There are also deficiencies in the timeliness and

accuracy of available navigation data.Economic Importance of PortsPorts and waterways play a critical role in transportation,trade, and employment.  For example, the United States leads

the world in the value of imports and exports (WTO, 1996),
which were valued at almost $1.2 trillion in 1994 (U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1995).  Commodity exports rose from

5 percent of the gross domestic product in 1984 to 7.5 per-
cent in 1994 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1995).  Ports and

waterways handle almost all U.S. overseas trade by weight
and about half by value (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1995).
In 1997, waterborne transportation of all commodities
totaled more than two billion metric tons, about half domestic
and half international trade (USACE, 1997).  Some 145 ports

(including inland ports) handled more than one million met-
ric tons of cargo each in 1996 (DOT, 1998).Changes and increases in the volume and complexity ofvessel traffic in U.S. ports and waterways have highlighted
the need for information systems that can provide port and
vessel operators with tools to manage the system safely and
efficiently.  Total U.S. waterborne trade has increased dra-

matically over the past few decades from more than one bil-
lion metric tons in 1965 to more than two billion metric tons
in 1996.  About one-half of that trade is domestic. The dra-

matic growth of foreign trade in recent years is expected to
continue.  Figure 1-1 shows that the waterborne foreign trade

of about 875 million metric tons in 1990 grew to 1,050 mil-
lion metric tons in 1997 and is projected to reach 1,350 mil-
lion metric tons by 2001 (MARAD, 1998).This sizable growth has been concentrated in a few majorU.S. ports.  More than half is concentrated in 20 ports, and

more than a quarter (575 million metric tons in 1996) is
handled by just five ports.  The 50 leading U.S. ports handle

almost 90 percent of all waterborne commerce.Certain segments of waterborne trade, such as the con-tainerized cargo trade, are also substantially concentrated.
In 1997, 25 ports handled 98 percent of the foreign container
cargo, and the leading 10 ports accounted for 80 percent,
with the Los Angeles-Long Beach port complex handling
nearly one-third of all container traffic.  Container cargo has

also increased dramatically, an increase of more than 10 per-
cent from 1996 to 1997.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEED FOR IMPROVED NAVIGATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS7In addition, in certain ports and waterways, other traffichas grown substantially at the same time that the volume of
trade and traffic by major commercial vessels has been grow-
ing and becoming more concentrated.  This includes tug and

barge traffic in the major Gulf of Mexico ports; ferryboat
traffic in large ports, such as San Francisco, Seattle, and New
York; pleasure craft traffic in all ports near major metropoli-
tan areas; and cruise ship traffic in southern ports with ac-
cess to the Caribbean.Shipments of oil and petroleum products constitute amajor component of U.S. trade.  The nation imports more

than half the oil it consumes, and imports have been growing
steadily (API, 1996).  The contiguous 48 states receive about

1.4 million metric tons of crude oil and petroleum products
per day by water, primarily from foreign sources and Alaska.

Waterborne domestic trade in petroleum products, such as
vehicle and aviation fuels, is also significant. The prevalence
of these commodities along U.S. coasts poses a risk of
accident-related spillsÑa persistent environmental, eco-nomic, and social concern.Shallow-draft tug and barge traffic constitutes a uniquesegment of U.S. maritime commerce.  According to the

American Waterways Operators, barges handle more than
600 million tons of commerce annually.  Apart from its role

in domestic commerce, barge traffic is also a critical link in
international trade.  For example, more than half of all U.S.

grain exports, as well as 300 million tons of coal, 1 billion
barrels of petroleum, and 450 million barrels of liquid chemi-
cal products, are transported annually by shallow-draft
barges.  Barge-tows vary in size from one barge and one

towboat carrying 10,000 barrels of liquid chemicals to one
towboat and 35 barges carrying more than 50,000 tons of
mixed commodities.  As a result, barges are often the most

prevalent vessels in many harbors and inland waterways.U.S. seaborne international trade is now carried largelyby foreign-flag vessels.  In 1997, about 98 percent of U.S.

foreign trade by tankers and 85 percent by cargo liners was
carried by foreign-flag vessels (DOT, 1998).  To accommodate
expanding trade in the past few decades, oceangoing shipshave grown considerably in size, complexity, and speed.
Tankers carrying crude oil imports are commonly 100,000
to 400,000 deadweight tons (DWT).6  Container ships now
carry from 4,000 to 6,000 20-foot-equivalent units (TEU),7and even larger vessels are planned.  Many other specialized

vessels have evolved for specific cargoes or trades, particu-
larly the petrochemical industry.  Some of the petroleum  and

chemical cargoes carried by these vessels (as well as barges
and container vessels) can be complex and highly toxic to
humans and animals, increasing the public health and envi-
ronmental risks from accidents.Shortcomings of U.S. PortsChanges in vessel characteristics, combined with otherrecent trends, have created demands that are beyond the ca-
pabilities of the infrastructures of many existing U.S. ports
and waterways. These trends include changes in the patterns
of vessel traffic and cargoes, a growing dependence on for-
eign sources of oil, changes in the nature and location of the
U.S. industrial base, and the advent of just-in-time inventory
management, which requires reliable scheduling.  Some U.S.

ports have been modernized in recent years, but others have
not.  In general, the emphasis has been on upgrading the

land-side infrastructure and the handling and transshipment
of cargoes.  Less attention has been paid to the supporting

waterways.The lack of improved waterways has created serious prob-lems, especially for the petroleum trade.8  Many U.S.
FIGURE 1-1History and forecast of waterborne foreign trade through U.S. ports.  Source:  Maritime Administration.
6 Deadweight tons is a measure of a vessel
Õs total carrying capacity,including the weight of the cargo, stores, fresh water, fuel, and crew.  The
larger crude oil carriers commonly call at deepwater offshore ports or arelightered offshore.7 TEU (20-foot equivalent units) is the standard unit of measure for the
container-carrying capacity of a vessel (the standard container is 20 feet long).8 For a discussion of tanker-related issues, see INTERTANKO (1996).
1,6001,4001,2001,00080060040020001990199219941996199820002002
Year
Millions of tonsApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
refineries and petrochemical complexes are located inland andcan be reached only by lengthy river passages, dredged chan-
nels, or canals.  Although the idea of opening new deepwater
ports was studied in the late 1960s and early 1970s, only one
deepwater terminal for crude oil was developed, the Louisi-
ana Offshore Oil Port.  Increasingly large tankers are now

being crowded into existing U.S. ports and waterways where
they must share the congested waters with a large volume of
other commercial traffic and a growing number of recreational
boaters.  Nevertheless, if mariners had access to timely, accu-

rate, and reliable information, they could safely and efficiently
navigate congested ports and accommodate shortfalls that
would otherwise impose costs and increase risks to vessels
and to the environment.  Unfortunately, some of the key short-

falls are related to inadequate information systems.
One fundamental problem is the paucity of authoritative,accurate, up-to-date information about harbors and harbor
approaches.  Both vessel safety and transportation efficiency

depend on the availability of hydrographic9  data and traffic
management information (see Box 1-1).  Mariners are forced
to operate with incomplete or outdated hydrographic data,
conflicting information published by various government
agencies, and delays in publishing the most recent information(NRC, 1994a, 1994b).  Outdated nautical charts and poor
data on environmental conditions (i.e., weather, tides, and
currents) create significant risks.  In many cases, tidal, cur-

rent, and water-depth predictions are based on information
dating as far back as the turn of the century (NOS, 1995).
U.S. coastal waters have never been completely surveyed,
and about 60 percent of the nautical charts prepared by
NOAA are based on pre-1940 data collected with obsolete
technologies (NRC, 1994a).10  Coupled with the decentral-
ized responsibility and authority for disseminating informa-
tion at a given port, this situation creates confusion (particu-
larly for masters of foreign-flag vessels) just when, for
safetyÕs sake, they most need accurate information on envi-ronmental and waterway conditions.  NOAA has prepared

plans to accelerate surveying and charting in critical regions

but predicts that, at current funding levels, the existing back-
log of outdated hydrographic surveys will take more than 25
years to eliminate (NOAA, 1996).Outdated surveys and funding limitations have precludedthe use of the most advanced charting systems in U.S. wa-
ters.  Electronic charts
11 of various types are available but
BOX 1-1Nautical Charts Provide the Sole Means of ÒSeeingÓ Underwater and Dead AheadDespite recent technological advances, nautical charts are still the only means for detecting what lies underwater
immediately ahead of a vessel.  Depth-sounding sonar can detect fish, submarines, and obstacles directly beneath a

vessel and can even measure the speed of large tankers.  Side-scan sonar can provide accurate information on water

depths and measurements from the bottom of a vessel to underwater wrecks and obstructions.  But these technologies

work only at short ranges in modes where the known inaccuracies are small and acceptable.  They cannot be used to
ÒseeÓ an object one to two miles ahead or determine how far it lies below the surface to within two or three feet.  Such

fine distinctions in the interpretation of sonar returns would be possible if the sonar beam were a very thin, absolutely

straight line both from the sonar to the obstruction and, after reflection, from the obstruction to the sonar.  Sound

waves do travel in straight lines in water with uniform sound speedÑbut, that requires a very special condition of

density, salinity, and temperature that rarely occurs near the ocean surface, where commercial and recreational vessels

operate.Substantial military and industrial resources have been devoted to research on Òunderwater obstacle finders,Ó and
some devices have been placed into service.  But these devices do not have the desired look-ahead range and/or the

required fine angular resolution (1 part in 4,000).  In one tanker development project, for example, the technology to

look ahead with the required performance was discussed but never produced, possibly because of high cost estimates

of several million dollars per ship (Rafael Gutierrez, Astilleros EspaZoles Technology Center, personal communication,
June 10, 1998).  Mariners today, as in centuries past, must depend on either paper or electronic nautical charts

showing water depths and the positions of reefs, shoals, and wrecks.  If the information is inaccurate, then the vessel

is at risk.
9 Hydrography deals with the measurement of the bottom topography of
waters and their marginal land areas, with specific reference to the elementsthat affect safe navigation, and the publication of information in a formsuitable for use by navigators.10 Mariners often cite new surveys as a critical safety need (NRC, 1996).
11 An electronic chart is a digitized version of a nautical chart, with
graphic representation of water depth, shorelines, topographical features,aids to navigation, and hazards (National Research Council, 1994b, and
references therein).  An electronic chart is no better than a paper chart un-
less it is combined with additional information, including, at a minimum,the vesselÕs position and planned track.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEED FOR IMPROVED NAVIGATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS9are only as accurate as the underlying hydrographic data,and electronic charts in the format specified by the interna-
tional community are prerequisites for the use of electronic
chart display and information systems (ECDIS),12 which
have been characterized as Òthe best navigation advance tocome along since radar was inventedÓ (Ecker, 1993).  The
widespread use of ECDIS in U.S. waters will require the
development of a hydrographic database that meets estab-
lished international standards.  NOAA is developing a stan-
dardized, fully attributed electronic chart for use in ECDIS,
but progress has been slow (NRC, 1994b).Another notable gap in harbor safety information systemsconcerns the tracking of hazardous cargoes.  If a spill or

other accident occurs, then emergency response teams need
to know what material they are dealing with, or else the
cleanup efforts may fail and new hazards may be created.13The USCG does not operate any electronic systems that can
quickly notify its officers or others about hazardous cargoes.
In Puget Sound, for example, notifications are made using
paper records (see Appendix C).  In general, electronic in-

formation about hazardous cargoes is maintained only by
U.S. Customs Service and some individual ports, and access
to this information is typically very limited.  In the busy port

of Charleston, South Carolina, the local customs network
includes information about hazardous cargoes, but the port
police and local firefighters, who would respond to an emer-
gency, cannot access the system directly (see Appendix D).
Instead, they must rely on lists of hazardous cargoes printed
out and provided by terminal personnel upon the arrival of
response teams.Foreign ports are much more advanced in this respect.When the committee visited Rotterdam, The Netherlands, in
1996, plans were being made to link the elaborate VTS to an
electronic notification system for vessels carrying danger-
ous cargoes (NRC, 1996).  The system included the neces-

sary information for mounting an effective response to an
incident.  Some movement toward this kind of  
Òone sourceÓapproach has been made in the United States.  For example,

emergency response teams in the Delaware River region can
obtain hazardous cargo information from a local system that
captures electronic manifests for all imported waterborne
cargoes transiting the river for dissemination to the U.S.
Customs Service and port customers.  The system includes a

pilot system for tracking sensitive cargo, which provides in-
stant information on petroleum and chemical cargoes to the
USCG and other government and spill response agencies.14Vessel traffic management systems also have shortfalls.Although VTS systems operated by the USCG have been
established at a number of ports, the justification for them
has largely been related to safety, and, consequently, they
have not been fully integrated into overall port operations.
In addition, VTS systems have not yet been installed in all of
the ports that need vessel traffic management (NRC, 1996).
In some areas, vessel traffic information services (VTIS) that
are not operated by the USCG have been established.  Mari-

ners are often unaware of the differences in services and
authority conveyed by the two sets of initials (see Box 1-2).Finally, a variety of communications problems continueto plague mariners.  Critical information links, both ship-to-

shore and ship-to-ship, are primarily based on voice radio.
The oral exchange of important safety and commercial in-
formation is subject to error, the risk of which is often exac-
erbated by language difficulties, including colloquialisms
and regional accents.15  Mariners report frequent interfer-
ence on bridge-to-bridge communications channels, particu-
larly in geographically complex, heavily traveled areas, such
as the lower Mississippi River (Duffy, 1995).  Communica-
tions are often impeded by unauthorized or inappropriate use12 ECDIS receives position data from radionavigation instruments and
integrates them with a voyage plan and an ÒofficialÓ hydrographic database
to provide a real-time display of the vesselÕs position with respect to thechart and voyage plan; electronic positioning is required, and a radar over-lay is optional (NRC, 1994b).13 Petroleum cargoes, for example, have different volatility, density, and
toxicity characteristics that affect the materialÕs behavior after a spill orduring cleanup operations.14 This system was conceived by the Maritime Exchange for the Dela-
ware River and Bay and is now supported by a public-private partnership
that provides capital for new technology.  The port authority, pilots, and the
state all support it.15 See comments by the president of the International Maritime Pilots
Association (Walsh, 1997) and Cushing (1994), who addresses communi-cations problems in aviation that are also applicable to maritime com-merce.BOX 1-2Definition of VTSThe present report uses the IMO definition for VTS,which is a 
Òservice implemented by a competentauthority designed to improve safety and efficiency

of vessel traffic and protect the environment.  The

service shall have the capability to interact with the

traffic and respond to traffic situations developing

in the VTS area.
Ó  Under the IMO definition, the
Òcompetent authority
Ó is considered to be the na-
tional or local agency responsible for maritime
safety.The term VTIS has not been defined by the inter-
national community, but in the United States it is

applied to VTS-like systems operated by organiza-

tions other than the USCG.  These organizations

only provide information and do not have the au-

thority to respond to traffic situations.
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
of marine radio frequencies; overloading is common duringadverse weather or in heavy traffic, when communications
are most needed (NRC, 1994a).  A number of solutions, in-

cluding increased use of data-based systems, such as tran-
sponders, have been proposed or initiated.  The USCG is

beginning a pilot project with a transponder-based automated
information system (AIS) as the basis for vessel traffic man-
agement in the Lower Mississippi River.The full benefits of the latest technologies cannot be ex-ploited until the USCGÕs short-range communications sys-tem has been upgraded and modernized.  The backbone of

the current system is the national distress system (NDS),16which provides VHF-FM coverage in coastal areas and navi-
gable waterways used by commercial and recreational ves-
sels.  The current system, which consists of about 300 sites

with remotely controlled VHF-FM analog transceivers, is
outdated, does not provide complete coverage, and does not
satisfy current needs.  Moreover, NDS does not provide ele-

ments needed for the global maritime distress and safety sys-
tem (GMDSS), which was recently established by the IMO.
A cornerstone of the GMDSS is automated listening watches
by shore stations on VHF-FM channel 70 for communicat-
ing in coastal regions.  By February 1999, vessels will be

required to have a channel 70 capability, but the United
States will not have a listening system in place by that time.
GMDSS should be compatible with the operation of AISs.TRENDS IN MARITIME TRANSPORTATIONThe future of maritime transportation is being shaped bysubstantial projected growth in marine commerce.  The ag-

gregate tonnage moving through U.S. ports is projected to
triple over the next 30 years (Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems Joint Program Office, 1996), which will certainly
change historic vessel traffic and patterns of port use and
introduce new vessel-related problems.  The growth in trade

is being supported by major advances in vessel technology.
In addition, U.S. ports are making major new investments in
facilities.  Public ports reported a record level of investment

of $1.5 billion in 1997 and are projected to invest more than
$7.7 billion in the next five years (DOT, 1998).  In combina-

tion, these trends are expected to increase demands on the
already overburdened U.S. maritime infrastructure.  Unless

this infrastructure, including information systems, is im-
proved, patterns of commerce may shift in ways that will be
detrimental to the U.S. economy.The trend toward very large container ships of 6,000 to8,000 TEU capacity will put serious pressures on many U.S.
ports.  The issues range from the high costs and delays asso-

ciated with dredging to the lack of space for additional
longshore facilities to the need for improved rail and road
corridors to and from ports (DOT, 1998).  Adequate space

and intermodal connections are becoming more and more
important as corollaries to just-in-time inventory manage-
ment and the general trend toward reducing the resources
associated with goods in transit.  To accommodate these con-

cerns, goods must be handled promptly on shore, and ships
must move in accordance with advertised schedules under
all weather conditions and harbor traffic conditions.  Infor-

mation technologies are key to maintaining schedules and
managing complex cargo flows.Other technological advances will also change waterwayuse.  For example, the development of high-speed ferries,

coupled with improvements that permit vessels to operate at
higher speeds and lower costs, have reduced costs per pas-
senger mile to levels that are competitive with other forms of
transportation.  Ferries may, therefore, become a preferred

alternative to driving on congested highways, especially in
areas with growing populations.  The Washington State Ferry

System, the largest ferry system in the United States, now
operates 25 vessels that make a total of approximately 500
trips per day (see Appendix C).  The system
Õs managersproject a 72 percent increase in demand on major routes in
the next 20 years.  Passenger services offered by private

firms may also increase if water transportation proves to be
a viable way of relieving highway congestion.  There is a

potential downside, however.  In some crowded ports, such

as New York and San Francisco, high-speed ferry operations
have raised safety concerns.17  Ferry traffic poses safety risks
regardless of its speed because it often crosses shipping
lanes.  The risks from high-speed ferries are even higher.

Thus, sound vessel traffic management will be extremely
important.Another trend that requires continuing attention is theapparent increase in the proportion of tug-barge combina-
tions relative to deepwater vessel traffic in many areas.
When vessel information and traffic services are established
and improved, it is important to ensure the participation of
all tug-barge units and other types of vessels.  Participation

in the Delaware Bay and River VTIS, for example, is volun-
tary and generally limited to large commercial ships and ves-
sels that use the services of a state pilot (NRC, 1996).  From

the standpoint of navigation safety, barges and ships will
require similar equipment and mariner qualifications to take
advantage of advances in technology and participate in16 The NDS was built to provide the USCG with a means of monitoring
the international VHF-FM distress frequency (channel 16), coordinatingsearch and rescue response operations, and communicating with commer-cial and recreational vessels.  The secondary function of NDS is to provide

command, control, and communications for USCG units performing mari-time safety, law enforcement, national security, and environmental protec-tion missions.17 Safety concerns were described in a paper by a USCG officer
(McKernan, 1997) presented at the April 1998 meeting of the Marine Boardof the National Research Council.  The safety of high-speed vessels has also
been a topic of discussion at IMO meetings.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEED FOR IMPROVED NAVIGATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS11advanced VTS systems. If shoal-draft users do not partici-pate, the effectiveness of waterways management systems
may be compromised.  One solution to this problem is to

require that all vessels using certain waterways carry
transponders.  Another, which has been instituted in the port

of Houston-Galveston, is the establishment of shallow-draft
traffic lanes for certain vessels.Other changes are taking place in vessel crews, opera-tional practices, and navigation technology.  The trend is to

reduce the size of vessel crews and rely more on automated
equipment.  Reliable electronic information systems are,

therefore, becoming increasingly important.  With smaller

crews, resources previously available for ancillary shipboard
tasks, such as chart maintenance, will no longer be available.
Shore-based emergency response teams will be needed to
assist with onboard fires and hazardous cargo spills, height-
ening the need for the USCG and others (e.g., local police
and fire departments and spill response teams) to have ac-
cess to electronic cargo information.  At the same time, the

administrative workload will increase, partly as a result of
new standards for training and qualifying mariners.  This

workload will be accompanied by a need for up-to-date in-
formation on a wide variety of topics to keep pace with the
proliferation of cargo- and work-related regulations.  To

complicate matters, crew size is being reduced at the same
time that agreements initiated by the International Labor
Organization and governmental regulations are limiting at-
sea work hours and establishing crew rest criteria.Eventually, bridge watchstanders on deep-draft ships mayface the same burdens already experienced by crews on tug-
barge combinations, where single-person watches have be-
come the rule rather than the exception.  The trend toward

fewer watchstanders handling increased workloads under-
scores the importance of the American Pilots AssociationÕs(APA) efforts to improve information exchange between
masters and pilots. 18
  The availability of accurate, up-to-
date information about waterways conditions is essential,
particularly in ports that do not have suitable anchorages and
in areas where passages must be coordinated with tides to
ensure adequate under-keel clearance.A concern related to the prevalence of foreign-flag deep-draft ships in U.S. waters is the increase in vessel personnel
who may not be fluent in English.  Frequent anecdotal re-

ports have been made of the inability of crew members
aboard many foreign-flag ships to communicate with
onboard pilots and with VTS and other shore stations.  The

growing trend toward drawing crews of all grades from de-
veloping countries will increase the time required for mari-
ners to exchange information.  One partial solution to this

problem would be to make essential transit-related informa-
tion available in written form while the ship is still at sea.Information can also help mariners deal with severe andgrowing problems with channel maintenance. It is becoming
increasingly difficult to fund new dredging projects to ex-
pand and deepen existing waterways, partly because the per-
mitting process involves lengthy environmental reviews and
partly because the costs of dredging, and the disposal of the
resulting spoil, have increased almost exponentially (NRC,
1997).  One way to minimize dredging requirements is to

ensure that accurate, up-to-date bathymetric data are avail-
able to mariners, together with real-time information on wa-
ter depths.  Similar data will be required for vessels to ex-

ploit the navigational and passage management features of
ECDIS, which may be essential for meeting transit sched-
ules consistently in all weather conditions.SUMMARYEnhanced maritime information systems should be inte-gral to the modernization of U.S. ports to accommodate ship-
ping trends, including projected growth in international trade
and the development of larger and faster vessels.  Crucial

shortcomings in maritime information include the lack of
accurate, real-time information about water depths and un-
derwater obstructions in harbors and approaches; outdated
nautical charts; the limited availability of electronic charts;
inadequate systems for tracking hazardous cargoes; the in-
compatible designs of VTS systems; over-reliance on voice
communications; and chronic shortfalls in federal budgets
for information systems that promote navigation safety.REFERENCESAPI (American Petroleum Institute). 1996. Petroleum Facts at a Glance.Washington, D.C.: API.Aylward, A. 1996. Intelligent Transportation Systems and IntermodalFreight Transportation. Report prepared for the ITS Joint Program Of-
fice by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Research and SpecialPrograms Administration, Cambridge, Mass.: Volpe National Trans-portation Systems Center.Cushing, S. 1994. Fatal Words. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.DOT (U.S. Department of Transportation). 1998. Status of the NationÕsSurface Transportation System: Conditions and Performance Report.
Report to Congress. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.Duffy, G.E. 1995. Testimony by George E. Duffy, chairman of theGovernorÕs Task Force on the Maritime Industry for the State of Loui-siana. Pp. 25Ð26 in Hearing before the Subcommittee on Coast Guardand Maritime Transportation of the Committee on Transportation andInfrastructure, U.S. House of Representatives, 104th Congress, First
Session, June 29, 1995. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government PrintingOffice.Ecker, W.J. 1993. U.S. Electronic Chart Display and Information SystemTest and Evaluation Program Review, March 2, 1993. Kings Point,N.Y.: U.S. Merchant Marine Academy.GAO (General Accounting Office). 1996a. Intermodal Freight Transporta-tion: Projects and Planning Issues. GAO/NSIAD-96-159. Washington,D.C.: GAO.GAO. 1996b. Marine Safety: Coast Guard Should Address Alternatives as ItProceeds with VTS 2000. GAO/RCED-96-83. Washington, D.C.: GAO.INTERTANKO. 1996. U.S. Port and Terminal Safety Study: A DiscussionPaper. Oslo, Norway: INTERTANKO.18 The 
Best Practices Summary, adopted by the APA in 1997, recog-
nizes that the proper exchange of information between masters and pilots iscritical to safe navigation.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office. 1996. IntermodalFreight Symposium Participant Workbook. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Transportation.ITO6 Task Force. 1996. Report for the Government Information Technol-ogy Working Group of the National Information Infrastructure TaskForce, Information Technology Initiative Number Six. Washington,
D.C.: Office of the Vice President.MARAD (Maritime Administration). 1994. A Report to Congress on theStatus of the Public Ports of the United States 1992Ð1993. Washington,D.C.: U.S. Department of Transportation. October.MARAD. 1998. A Report to Congress on the Status of the Public Ports ofthe United States 1996Ð1997. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofTransportation. October.McKernan, C.V. 1997. Industry and government study group focuses onoperational safety issues confronting operators of high-speed ferries.Paper presented at spring meeting of the Marine Board, National Re-
search Council, Washington, D.C., April 3, 1998.National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services. 1997. Summary of Guidancefrom the National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services. Available from
the Marine Board, National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Ave.,N.W., Washington, D.C., 20418. Tel. 202-334-3119.National Performance Review. 1996. Access America: Reengineeringthrough Information Technology. Washington, D.C.: National Perfor-mance Review and the Government Information Technology ServicesBoard.NOS (National Ocean Service). 1995. Safe Passage into the 21st Century:Modernizing NOAAÕs Navigational Services. Silver Spring, Md.: Na-tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOS.NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 1996. TheNautical Charting Plan. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Com-merce.NRC (National Research Council). 1993. Landside Access to U.S. Ports.Prepared by the Transportation Research Board, National ResearchCouncil. Washington, D.C.: Maritime Administration, U.S. Departmentof Transportation.NRC. 1994a. Minding the Helm: Marine Navigation and Piloting. Wash-ington, D.C.: National Academy Press.NRC. 1994b. Charting a Course into the Digital Era: Guidance for NOAAÕsNautical Charting Mission. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.NRC. 1996. Vessel Navigation and Traffic Services for Safe and EfficientPorts and Waterways, Interim Report. Washington, D.C.: NationalAcademy Press.NRC. 1997. Contaminated Marine Sediments: Assessment of Management,Technologies, and Remediation. Washington, D.C.: National AcademyPress.NRC. 1998.  Oil Spill Risks from Tank Vessel Lightering. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.Research and Special Projects Administration. 1995. Waterways Manage-ment Research and Planning Baseline Analyses: Project Overview. Pre-pared for the U.S. Coast Guard and U.S. Department of Transportation.Interim Report. Washington, D.C.: Research and Special Projects Ad-
ministration, April.USACE (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers). 1997. Waterborne Commerce ofthe United States, Calendar Year 1996. New Orleans: U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1994. Statistical Abstract of the U.S.: 1995(114th ed.). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the Census.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1995. Statistical Abstract of the U.S.: 1994(115th ed.). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the Census.USCG (U.S. Coast Guard). 1995a. Prevention through People, Quality Ac-tion Team Report, July 15, 1995. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Departmentof Transportation.USCG. 1995b. U.S. Vessel Traffic Services. Washington, D.C.: U.S. CoastGuard.Vulovic, R. 1995. World Trade, Container Ships, and Ports: A Study inCommercial Symbiosis. Paper presented to the Marine Board, National
Research Council, Washington, D.C.,  June 21
Ð23, 1995.Walsh, G. 1997. Piloting and VTS. Professional Mariner 27:53Ð59.WTO (World Trade Organization). 1996. 1995 International Trade: Trendsand Statistics. Geneva, Switzerland: WTO.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL, STATE, AND PRIVATE ROLES13132Federal, State, and Private RolesMaritime commerce supports both international trade andnational security and, therefore, has long been considered
essential to the nationÕs well-being.  Historically, the federal

government has provided and operated aids to navigation,
developed and maintained waterways, and exercised over-
sight over matters of maritime safety.  Today, safetyÑin-

cluding protection of the environmentÑis considered the
principal concern of the federal government.  Efficiency is

most often considered the concern of the commercial sector
and, therefore, less deserving of federal funding (NRC,
1996a).  However, defining the appropriate role for govern-
ment can be difficult because of the often blurry line be-
tween safety and efficiency.Policy decisions about federal support for services arenotalways based on objective analyses of their impact on

the nation as a whole, or even on analyses of the beneficia-
ries of a particular service and, therefore, who should pay for
it.  The rationale for policy decisions tends to be more sub-

jective.  An example is the reduction in funds for charting

the nationÕs waterways at the same time the overall funding
for NOAA, the responsible agency, was increased (NRC,
1994a, 1994b)1 and despite the broad international recogni-
tion that up-to-date charting is critical to improving water-
way safety.  Because of these budget cutbacks, some mari-

time safety information systems have not been deployed,
upgraded, or operated (NRC, 1996a).  The obvious negative

effects on safety have raised questions about the federal
governmentÕs fulfillment of its responsibilities in the national
interest.Nevertheless, cutbacks in the federal budget can also beseen as part of the larger goal of transferring some responsi-
bility to the state and local levels or the private sector (NRC,
1996a).  Although the merits of this goal were not assessed
by the committee, this policy should be scrutinized carefullywith regard to its short-term and long-term consequences.
Recently, insufficient federal funding has led to efforts by
government agencies to secure private support, through
public-private partnerships, for some systems developed by
the federal government.  For example, PORTS (the physical

oceanographic real-time system)2 was developed by NOAA
and installed by the government in several major ports for
demonstration purposes.  But local private interests must

now find ways to fund its continued operation and mainte-
nance.This chapter discusses the best way to achieve an appro-priate balance between public and private responsibilities.
Topics include the relationship between maritime safety and
efficiency, the increased importance of nonfederal stakehold-
ers, the evolution of role sharing, and the need for strong
federal leadership.RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SAFETY ANDEFFICIENCYAt the macrolevel, maritime safety and efficiency are of-ten intertwined, and when the current study began the com-
mittee intended to examine opportunities for improving both
safety and efficiency.  On closer examination, however, dif-

ferences emerged.  The development and implementation of

information systems designed to promote efficiency ap-
peared to be progressing satisfactorily because electronic
cargo-tracking and other information systems, which are
supported by the commercial sector, have been proliferating
throughout the industry.  At the same time, the federal gov-

ernment has been backing away from funding systems that
would clearly improve safety.  The committee, therefore,
1 The budget for nautical charting (taking inflation into account) de-
clined by nearly 50 percent between the mid-1970s and the early 1990s;
during the same period, NOAAÕs fleet of hydrographic survey ships de-clined from 11 to 5 (NOS, 1998).2 PORTS gathers wind, current, wave, and other data from sensors in-stalled on buoys and transmits the information in real time to central sta-tions and individual users.  System locations are noted in Chapter 3.
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
decided to focus its limited time and resources on opportuni-ties for enhancing maritime safety, which emerged as the
more serious public problem.The committeeÕs next challenge was to differentiatesafety issues from efficiency issues, or at least to define their
relationship, for purposes of this analysis.  Is a safer port also

a more efficient port?  During numerous meetings and site

visits, the committee observed that port stakeholders gener-
ally support proposals that would enhance safetyÑbut often
consider them too expensive, especially if they must be sup-
ported by user fees.  Port directors and shippers generally

want to maximize cargo efficiency for economic reasons and,
therefore, prefer that safety regulations not be too onerous,
which sometimes conflicts with the USCGÕs attempts to
carry out its mission.  Private companies, however, also rec-

ognize that ports and companies with reputations for fre-
quent accidents may lose their public stature, as well as busi-
ness.  Thus, there seems to be a useful and creative tension

between the USCGÕs efforts to promote safety and the pri-
vate sectorÕs efforts to promote efficiency, which could lead
to an appropriate balance between them.There also appears to be a dynamic relationship betweensafety and efficiency, although it is difficult to define.  The

committee did not dwell on this issue but believes it deserves
further attention.  However, at least one area of overlap was

noted.  The implications for both safety and efficiency of

tracking hazardous cargo has not been fully recognized by
the federal government.For more than 10 years, the U.S.

Customs Service has maintained an automated system that
allows carriers to transmit electronic manifest data on all
imported cargo while en route to the United States so the
Customs Service can determine, prior to arrival, whether to
examine the cargo or release it.  Almost 75 percent
3 of ships
entering U.S. ports now use this system, which is linked to
more than 1,500 trade participants, including ocean carriers,
data processing centers, port authorities, and inland ports

(Aylward, 1996).  The USCG, however, does not use this

system for tracking hazardous cargo, relying instead on pa-
per records and port-specific notification of emergency re-
sponse teams (see Appendix C and Appendix D).  The com-

mittee has heard anecdotal reports of instances in which
major ports had to be closed for hours at a time while myste-
rious hazardous cargoes were being identified.  The USCG

might be able to use information about hazardous cargoes
from the electronic manifests in the U.S. Customs database
in near-real time if certain adjustments were made in the
system.  Although previous discussions of this possibility

failed to produce a solution (see Box 2-1), the issue is impor-
tant enough to warrant further examination in another venue.
The confidentiality of the data probably could be maintained,but substantial funding might be required to establish aUSCG system that could perform necessary translations and
keep track of the data.GROWING IMPORTANCE OF NONFEDERALSTAKEHOLDERSThe convergence of public and private roles in maritimetransportation is based on common interests, four of which
are pertinent to the present study:¥ensuring the safety of lives and cargo, avoiding
3 This figure was obtained from the U.S. Customs Web site (http://customs.ustreas.gov), August 1998.BOX 2-1Tracking Hazardous MaterialsCarriers, terminal operators, port authorities, and
service centers provide automated manifest data to

the U.S. Customs Service for cargo arriving in, or

departing from, U.S. ports.  In recent years, the

USCG and Customs Service have explored the feasi-
bility of using these data for hazardous material
notifications but have concluded that the data
lacked sufficient detail for this immediate applica-

tion (Kim Santos, Project Leader for Field Opera-

tions, U.S. Customs, personal communication,
July6, 1998).  Some of the Customs Service data

provide records for hazardous material descriptions
and class code entries.  However, reporting the

quantity, weight, and other details of a cargo is not

currently mandatory, so these data have limited

value to the USCG.
Another possible mechanism for hazardous mate-rial notification is the Ship Notice/Manifest transac-

tion created for the procurement process of the Elec-
tronic Commerce Program Office of the U.S. De-

partment of Defense.  From these data, a detailed

list of the contents of a shipment and descriptions

of their physical characteristics can be obtained and

sent to one or more selected receivers.  Hazardous

material code qualifiers allow shippers to use U.S.

Department of Transportation or IMO identifiers as
cargo descriptors.  If the Customs Service were to

integrate this transaction set into its new database,

the Automated Commercial Environment, then a

common mechanism might be established for re-

porting details on cargo shipments that could sat-

isfy the U.S. Customs Service, the U.S. Department

of Defense, and the USCG.
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL, STATE, AND PRIVATE ROLES15environmental damage, reducing the costs of accidents,and promoting law enforcement and national security¥moving vessels and cargo in and out of ports efficiently
under all conditions4¥ensuring the smooth flow of goods from one mode of
transport to another to save time and reduce costs¥fostering economic growth, creating jobs and prosper-
ity in the processHistorically, issues of safe navigation have been the ex-clusive province of seamen, shipowners, and government.
Today, a great many other stakeholders are actively involved.
In response to a series of disastrous events, most notably the
Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989, the general public
is now demanding a voice in ensuring that the movement of
potentially polluting cargoes is as safe as possible.  The pub-

lic demand has been manifested in a number of ways, such
as the expanded role of state governments in navigational
matters.  Four state-level organizations dealing with marine
safety issues are: (1) the States-B.C. Task Force (which co-
ordinates measures for the prevention of marine pollution
and response activities of the four West Coast states [Cali-
fornia, Oregon, Washington, and Alaska] and the Canadian
province of British Columbia); (2) the Office of Oil Spill
Prevention and Response in California; (3) the Spill Preven-
tion Preparedness and Response Division5 of the Washing-
ton State Department of Ecology; and (4) the Alaska Depart-
ment of Environmental Conservation.Public port authorities also maintain high profiles, oftenbecause their charters extend significantly beyond their re-
sponsibilities for piers and wharfs to acting as catalysts for
economic development for entire regions.  The Port of Se-

attle, for example, functions in that role for all of King
County, a geographic area larger than some Eastern states.
Because the port is supported by taxes levied on all county
property owners, concerns about port activities and issues
affecting the port are much more widespread than one might
expect.Vessel operating companies also have a large stake innavigational issues because they bear the costs of terminal
development and operation.  For example, a container line

that makes a multimillion-dollar investment in a state-of-
the-art terminal would rightly demand a voice in decisions
about the navigational systems that support vessel movement
to and from that terminal.  Petroleum carriers have even more

reason to participate both to protect their investment and to
avoid delays in transits to and from refineries that couldaffect public health and welfare.  Deep-sea operators carry-
ing containers and petroleum recognize that safe passage in
and out of harbors is a responsibility shared by vessel crews
and shore-supplied services, such as VTS.Overall, the number and diversity of stakeholdersÑin-cluding both regular users of ports and waterways and the
general public, often represented by government agenciesÑ
participating in local, regional, and national planning and
other activities that affect maritime commerce have grown
considerably.  Examples include the national dialog on VTS

initiated by the USCG and the seven public Òlistening
sessionsÓ held in the spring of 1998 by the USCG and coop-
erating federal agencies (see Box 2-2).  On the one hand,

user involvement is now considered an essential element for
marshaling support and funding to establish and operate
navigation systems, and broad stakeholder participation ex-
pands the base of support.  On the other hand, stakeholder

participation tends to make the process arduous and frustrat-
ing because their input can be emotional or self-serving.  Ar-

guments and evidence provided by stakeholders must be
carefully assessed to avoid giving undue weight to narrow,
parochial positions.  Stakeholder participation should be re-
lated to sources of funding; for example, if tax revenues are
used to fund services, then taxpayers (i.e., the general pub-
lic) have a right to participate in the decision-making pro-
cess.  A recent report on risk management advocates a
4 Although all-weather operations is a goal for certain ports that must
maintain tight schedules, it may not always be economically feasible.5 This division was created in July 1997 when the Washington StateOffice of Marine Safety was merged into the Department of Ecology.BOX 2-2Listening to StakeholdersFederal agencies held a total of seven listening
sessions in the spring of 1998 at various locations

along the U.S. coasts, Great Lakes, and inland wa-

terways to gather input from state and local gov-

ernments, industry, waterways users, service pro-

viders, and other interested parties.  These sessions

were part of an attempt initiated in late 1997 by

the USCG and MARAD, in cooperation with ap-

proximately 10 other units of the federal govern-

ment, to support a safe, environmentally sound,

world-class waterways system that would improve

U.S. global competitiveness and national security.

The results of the regional sessions were presented
at a national meeting in November 1998, when

critical issues deserving the attention of national
policy makers were identified.  The initiative is ex-

pected to improve coordination and cooperation
among all stakeholders.  Federal agencies plan to

continue this exchange of information at periodic
future sessions.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
thoughtful balance between analysis and deliberation in riskyenterprises (NRC, 1996b).Although it is important that all stakeholders participatein the decision-making process, the federal government is
the only entity responsible for safeguarding national inter-
ests, enforcing maritime law, negotiating and carrying out
international agreements, and responding to the wishes of
the entire citizenry (as represented by the U.S. Congress).
At the same time, the uncertainty of budgets and the neces-
sity of meeting budget priorities have made it difficult for
federal agencies to enact and carry out consistent policies.EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC-PRIVATE ROLESHARINGThe federal government has taken a strong leadership rolein the development, funding, and operation of navigation
safety systems, whereas the private sector has led the devel-
opment and operation of cargo management systems. When-
ever these two areas intersect or gaps appear, public-private
partnerships, a concept supported by both users and outside
analyses, have been the solution of choice (GAO, 1996;
NRC, 1996a).  The weaknesses in the present arrangement,

noted earlier, include inadequate budgets for federal agen-
cies to carry out their safety responsibilities and the tendency
to develop stand-alone information systems featuring lim-
ited collaboration and information sharing (e.g., the general
failure by federal agencies to provide existing electronic data
on hazardous cargoes to appropriate public safety offices).Public-private partnerships, a concept that remains in itsinfancy in the maritime arena, have also experienced some
Ògrowing pains,Ó and representatives of private-sector stake-
holders have raised a number of concerns about these ar-
rangements.  The most frequent complaint is that federal

agencies cannot make long-term commitments of resources
to partnerships.  Another common concern is that private-

sector interests may be overridden by federal goals.  Some of

these concerns could be addressed by clarifying how part-
nerships should function and establishing formal definitions
of public and private roles.  Experience with successful part-

nerships will also raise confidence levels.  The classic ex-

ample of a successful public-private partnership continues
to be the VTIS serving the Los Angeles-Long Beach harbor
complex, a cooperative effort of the local marine exchange,
the state of California, and the USCG.  This partnership was

described in the committeeÕs interim report (NRC, 1996a).Finally, problems have also arisen about role sharingamong federal agencies.  Some members of the user com-

munity expressed concerns to the committee about the fed-
eral emphasis on VTSs (a responsibility of the USCG),
which seemed to obscure the need for a more basic toolÑ
accurate nautical charts (a responsibility of NOAA).  These

private-sector stakeholders believe that federal money would
be better spent on improvements other than VTSs.  In the
National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services (1997), the needfor other types of systems was also emphasized.  The fre-

quency with which these concerns have been raised under-
scores the reality that federal allocations have not been well
coordinated among agencies.In an attempt to address this problem, the InteragencyCommittee on Waterways Management (ICWM) was estab-
lished in 1995 to identify, evaluate, develop, and promote
the implementation of federal policies and programs to en-
sure effective waterways management.6  The ICWM seems
to be an appropriate vehicle for dealing with the issues raised
in the present report because its vision calls for Òfederal in-
frastructure,7 systems, and services that will fully support
the current use and anticipated growth in the use of the wa-
terways with a high degree of efficiency and safety.Ó  In

addition, the ICWMÕs objectives include promoting safe, en-
vironmentally sound use of waterways and coordinating
overlapping management functions.  The committee, which

meets three times a year, is chaired by the USCG assistant
commandant for marine safety and environmental protec-
tion.  The members include representatives from the U.S.

departments of Commerce, Defense, Interior, and Transpor-
tation, as well as the Environmental Protection Agency.NEED FOR STRONG FEDERAL LEADERSHIPAs the roles of various stakeholders are being sorted out,it is important that the federal responsibility, which is broader

and more complex than is usually appreciated, be kept in
mind.  The role of the federal government in maritime safety

is broad and well established.  Most ocean and inland ship-

ping is international or interstate, and there is a vested na-
tional interest in ensuring economic, environmental, and na-
tional security.  A strong federal role is also essential for

mariners if they are to benefit from a common operating
environment in national and international waters.  All stake-

holders recognize the dual need for port-specific systems
tailored to local conditions and national standards that would

enable the same equipment to be used in any port or water-
way (National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services, 1997).Areas of government responsibilities are described below:¥Safe vessels.  The federal government ensures that ves-
sels are built and maintained at acceptable levels of
safety by reviewing designs, setting standards, and in-
specting vessels.  Because most oeangoing vessels in
6 The origins of the Interagency Committee on Waterways Management
date to a 1993 interagency conference on coordinating research and devel-
opment of federal waterways navigation, at which it was recommended thatthe idea of a committee be explored as a means of coordinating policyissues and program development.7 Infrastructure includes physical infrastructure, navigation support sys-tems and services, and information delivery systems and services.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL, STATE, AND PRIVATE ROLES17U.S. waters are foreign-flag vessels, government agen-cies (the USCG in particular) rely heavily on interna-
tional rules and standards, which requires close coordi-
nation with other governments, international agencies,
and classification societies.  Information systems are

key to ensuring vessel safety through surveillance and
enforcement.¥Safe crews.  Through the licensing and drug testing of
mariners, vessel inspections, and accident investiga-
tions, the federal government, through the USCG, en-
sures that crews of U.S. vessels are capable of safe op-
erations.  Because of the prevalence of foreign-flag

vessels and foreign crews, however, international regu-
lations and coordination are critical to ensuring that

crews operate safely.  Because of the need for consis-

tent standards, the federal government alone should be
responsible for establishing and monitoring personnel
levels, standards, and qualifications.  The training and

qualification of mariners are as important to safe op-
erations as hardware and information systems are to
maintaining oversight.¥Hydrographic and bathymetric information.  On
February 10, 1807, the U.S. Congress passed an act
authorizing President Thomas Jefferson Òto cause a
survey to be taken of coasts of the United States, in
which shall be designated the islands and shoals and
places of anchorage . . .Ó  Since that time, the federal

government, currently through NOAA, has gathered

coastal data and created, published, and sold nautical
charts.  Predictions of tidal currents and water depth

have also been published, as have compendiums of gen-
eral information about U.S. waterways.  Although au-

thoritative static information is still important, the need
for real-time information about navigation variables

(e.g., water depth and currents) is growing.  Increases

in vessel sizes, without commensurate increases in
channel dimensions, have raised safety concerns about
under-keel clearances since there is a strong commer-
cial interest in loading vessels to the maximum draft
possible.¥Operating rules.  Many operating rules govern the
movement of vessels.  Although some rules are port

specific, based on waterway configurations and other
factors, most rules are codified both nationally and in-
ternationally.  Both mariners and the public should be

confident that these rules are being followed and, if
not, that prompt remedial action will be taken. Enforce-
ment is a fundamental responsibility of government,
principally the USCG, that requires a regulatory frame-
work supported by accurate information about port and
waterway conditions and activities.The proper determination of the federal role in maritimeinformation systems must take into account many factors
besides the beneficiaries of individual decisions.  The com-
plex issues raised by rapidly evolving technologies haveunderscored the need for a central arbiter acting in the na-
tional interest.  For example, a balance must be established

between the needs of local ports and the need to provide a
consistent maritime operating environment among ports and
nations.  Deciding how to meet common needs and how to

develop, implement, and enforce the technical and operating
standards on a global basis is a complicated matter that is
becoming even more complicated in light of the growing
costs and increasing complexity of advanced technologies.SUMMARYBecause federal funding for maritime safety technologiesand operations has been declining, some federal responsi-
bilities are being shifted to other stakeholders and to public-
private partnerships.  The reduction in the federal govern-

mentÕs support forÑand therefore its role inÑmaritime
safety appears to be driven exclusively by budgetary consid-
erations and has been undertaken unilaterally without appro-
priate input from mariners, industry, or the general public.
The current trend toward public-private dialog and partner-
ships is a positive step toward redressing this problem but
could be enhanced by a clear articulation of public and pri-
vate roles, including a description of the comprehensive fed-
eral responsibilities in marine transportation.  The federal

responsibility for maritime safety systems and services ex-
tends beyond the often-subjective issue of who will benefit.
Only the federal government can promote the adoption and
implementation of national and international standards, co-
ordinate efforts with other nations, enforce national mari-
time laws and regulations, and balance local interests with
the national need for a consistent operating environment

from port to port.Although the effects on maritime safety of the changingpublic and private roles are not known precisely, the percep-
tion is widespread that safety is being compromised and that,
because budgeting for all federal maritime agencies is not
centrally coordinated, the limited federal dollars allocated
for maritime safety are not always spent on the highest-
priority needs.The relationship between maritime safety and efficiencyis dynamic and difficult to define.  However, there is clearly

some overlap with respect to hazardous cargoes.  The U.S.

Customs ServiceÕs extensive electronic system for tracking
all cargo in U.S. waters could be tapped to provide real-time
information to emergency response teams.REFERENCESAylward, A. 1996. Intelligent Transportation Systems and IntermodalFreight Transportation. Report prepared for the ITS Joint Program Of-fice by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Research and SpecialPrograms Administration. Cambridge, Mass.: Volpe National Trans-
portation Systems Center.GAO (General Accounting Office). 1996. Marine Safety: Coast GuardApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
Should Address Alternatives as It Proceeds with VTS 2000. GAO/RCED-96-83. Washington, D.C.: GAO.National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services. 1997. Summary of Guidancefrom the National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services. Available from
the Marine Board, National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Ave.,N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418. Tel. 202-334-3119.NOS (National Ocean Service). 1998. Hydrographic Data Acquisition Planfor Nautical Charting. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Com-merce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.NRC (National Research Council). 1994a. Minding the Helm: Marine Navi-gation and Piloting. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.NRC. 1994b. Charting a Course into the Digital Era: Guidance for NOAAÕsNautical Charting Mission. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.NRC. 1996a. Vessel Navigation and Traffic Services for Safe and EfficientPorts and Waterways, Interim Report. Washington, D.C.: NationalAcademy Press.NRC. 1996b. Informing Risk in a Democratic Society. Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS19193Enhancing Navigation Safety Information SystemsThe principal opportunities for improving maritime in-formation systems involve existing or emerging technolo-
gies that promote navigation safety.  A basic understanding

of trends and needs in this area is necessary for clarifying
policy and funding issues, this chapter examines informa-
tion systems that promote overall port and waterways safety,
including the safety of navigation and vessel transits through
harbors.Safety systems for general navigation are the basic toolsused by mariners to fix vessel position, obtain information
about the physical environment and operating conditions,
and communicate with other vessels and shore-based per-
sonnel.  These ÒfoundationÓ systems also include databases

used for safety-related policy making and decision making.
Foundation systems include the global positioning system
(GPS) and differential GPS (DGPS),1 other navigational
aids, hydrographic data, nautical charts, port-specific and
general information about waterways, and data on tides and
currents.  Shore-based components and systems are gener-

ally designed, funded, and operated by federal agencies for
the benefit of all mariners.  However, onboard equipment

must be purchased and operated by the users.  Thus, national

or international standards and requirements may be neces-
sary to ensure that systems function effectively.  The effec-

tive application of technology also requires that users have a
minimum level of training.The next section is a brief discussion of the role of tech-nology in waterways management, which relies heavily on
people and rules.  The remainder of the chapter describes

four key technology suites that could be improved or more
widely deployed:  NOAAÕs plans for updated hydrographic
surveys and nautical charts; the current status of PORTS;prospects for AIS2; and a new perspective on VTS systems.WATERWAYS MANAGEMENTTechnology alone cannot guarantee maritime safety.People, working according to rules governing safe vessel
transits, are necessary to any effective waterways manage-
ment system.  Information is useless unless it gets to the

right people at the right time.  Vessel safety is influenced

by a great many individuals: the master and crew, who are
ultimately responsible for handling the vessel and who
know its capabilities and limitations; system operators, who
provide navigation information to vessels; marine pilots,
who need accurate and timely information on local harbors
or waterways; VTS personnel, who must make decisions
based on the conditions and other traffic in the area; local
service providers, such as tug masters and shipping agents;
and mariners on other vessels in the area.  In many foreign

harbors, the activities of all of these individuals are coordi-
nated by a central authority.  In the United States, this is

seldom the case, although marine exchanges or agents

sometimes coordinate the flow of some information among
the key players.Recognizing the need for vessel masters and pilots to havecontinuous access to accurate, real-time information, both
the USCG (National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services,
1997) and INTERTANKO (1996) have recommended that
waterways management systems be defined for each U.S.
harbor based on continuous input from local harbor safety
committees, whose members would include pilots and other
frequent users of local waters.  The safety committees would

make recommendations to the USCG regarding system1 The GPS, a military radionavigation system that uses transmissions
from satellites, provides accurate and continuous worldwide position fixesin three dimensions.  For civilian users, the GPS provides horizontal accu-
racy to within 100 meters 95 percent of the time.  Differential corrections to

GPS range measurements are provided by the DGPS, which is currentlyaccurate to within 10 to 15 meters.2 Although AIS has only recently become a popular initiative in certain
areas in the United States, it has a long history of  promotion, development,
and testing in the international maritime sector.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
elements, such as navigation regulations, anchorage proce-dures, traffic separation schemes, and improvements in the
types and locations of navigation aids.  Information needs

and flows would be defined according to local needs, but the
delivery methods and equipment would adhere to interna-
tional standards.A regime of appropriate rules, widely followed (and en-forced as necessary), would make the operating environment
orderly and predictable and is, therefore, a significant safety
measure.  Considerable documentation supports this thesis,

including studies that credit a passive system of rules with
significantly reducing traffic accidents in the Port of London
(NRC, 1996).  Strong anecdotal evidence shows that similar

results have been achieved by harbor safety committees in
California (Marsh and Richards, 1996).  Self-policing can be

highly effective, but it requires oversight coupled with the
authority and capability to enforce rules.  For example, a

dramatic improvement was observed in self-policing in Los
Angeles-Long Beach once the captain of the port had access
to a surveillance systemÑa VTIS operated by the marineexchange with oversight by the local harbor safety commit-
tee (NRC, 1996).NAUTICAL CHARTINGSome progress has been made in updating hydrographicsurveys and nautical charts of U.S. waters.  Since 1994,

approximately 5,000 square nautical miles designated as
Òcritical needs areasÓ have been surveyed using modern
methods (i.e., multibeam depth-sounding equipment that
can cover the entire seafloor and DGPS for determining
location); another 38,000 square miles judged to be critical
need areas remain to be surveyed (NOAA, 1997a, 1997b).
About 60 percent of the critical backlog is in Alaska (NOS,
1998).In response to a congressional mandate, NOAA recentlyfinalized a plan for reducing the backlog of requests for hy-
drographic surveys (NOS, 1998).  The plan specifies

outsourcing of at least 50 percent of its hydrographic ser-
vices to private contractors.  In the next 5 to 10 years, NOAA

plans to contract out most of the data acquisition in the Gulf
of Mexico and the Pacific coast of the mainland (NOS,
1998).  The agency will also operate its own three survey

ships, provide quality control, maintain nautical databases,
ensure nationwide coverage, provide leadership in setting
and meeting international standards, and work with the pri-
vate sector and other federal agencies to develop new survey
technologies.  Even so, NOAA estimates that, at fiscal year

1998 annual funding levels, it will take 25 to 30 years to
eliminate the existing survey backlog (NOAA, 1997b).NOAA recognizes that maintaining a level of capabilityand expertise entails more than facilitating contracting ef-
forts.  The government must also retain expertise and com-

petency in order to meet its international and other responsi-
bilities.  The public nature of these responsibilities cannot be
readily transferred to, and are not appropriate for, the privatesector (NOS, 1998).In a complementary effort, the NOAA Office of CoastSurvey has developed a plan for accelerating nautical chart
updates for the busiest commercial ports and trade routes, as
determined by the tonnage of goods that moves through them
(NOAA, 1997a).  Other high-priority areas include some

coastal and cruise ship routes that have never been ad-
equately surveyed.  If resources continue to be severely lim-

ited, charts of lower priority areas will be published less fre-
quently than in the past.  The agency
Õs FY 1998 budget willsupport the production of 360 new chart editions, 30 percent
of the charts for U.S. waters (NOAA, 1997a).  But many of

these ÒupdatedÓ charts will not include new survey informa-
tion because none is available.NOAA is moving toward the production of IMO-compliant,fully digitized vector charts as rapidly as budgets allow
(Lockwood, 1998).  The agency plans to release 190 elec-

tronic navigation charts by the end of 1999 and will increase
the number of electronic navigation charts as resources per-
mit.  NOAA will also continue to maintain raster charts and

the Raster Chart Notice to Mariners Update Service.3PORTS AND ÒPORTS LITEÓBecause PORTS has proven to be effective, users, at leastin some areas, have agreed to help pay for its operation.
PORTS is a sensor-based system, developed by NOAA, that
gives vessels access to real-time data on currents, tides,
winds, waves, temperatures, and salinity.  The system helps
mariners avoid collisions and groundings, assists in plan-
ning safe passage, and enables mariners to ascertain the
drafts their vessels must maintain when transiting ports and
waterways.  Nautical charts show only minimum charted

channel depths, but mariners need real-time water depths
corrected to allow for changes caused by severe weather or
abnormal tides.PORTS is operational in Tampa Bay, New York Harbor,San Francisco Bay, and Galveston Bay.  Six candidate areas

have been identified for future systems (see Figure 3-1).
Smaller systems, known as ÒPORTS Lite,Ó are operational
in Nikisiki and Anchorage, Alaska; Seattle and Tacoma,
Washington; Baltimore, Maryland, and Hampton Roads,
Virginia.  All PORTS systems are operated and maintained

with local funding; NOAA provides only the initial proto-
types and overall quality control.  Although this funding ap-

proach has enabled ports with active local initiatives to en-
joy the benefits of this safety-enhancing system, it does not
ensure safety benefits for all vessels that may need PORTS.3 NOAA plans to continue to rely heavily on raster charts, which were
initially created by passing paper charts through a scanner.  The features in
these raster charts cannot be deleted or manipulated individually.  In con-
trast vector data consist of individual position and attribute information for
each feature on the chart.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS21FIGURE 3-1Status of PORTS implementation (October 1998).  Source: NOAA.
PORTSExisting  Houston/Galveston  New York/New Jersey

  San Francisco
  Tampa
PORTS LiteExisting  Anchorage
  Baltimore
  Hampton Roads
  Nikisiki
  Seattle
  Tacoma
Potential  Corpus Christi
  Jacksonville
  Los Angeles/Long Beach

  Philadelphia
  Providence
  Valdez
Potential  Boston  Fall River
  New HavenApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION SYSTEMSSupport is growing among U.S. port and waterways usersfor AIS (see Appendix B, for example), an emerging tech-
nology that could have significant safety benefits, is simple
to operate, and is compatible with a range of traffic manage-
ment schemes.  One advantage of AIS is that it enables mari-

ners and VTS watchstanders to identify and distinguish spe-
cific vessels that otherwise appear as anonymous identical
ÒblipsÓ on a video display or radar screen (see Box 3-1).
Another advantage is the low cost of the equipment (relative
to many other technologies) carried by participating vessels.
Developmental AIS or AIS-like systems have been used in a
number of operational systems, including in Prince William
Sound, Alaska, and ports in Canada, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom.  The USCG began an AIS demonstration with 50

vessels in the Lower Mississippi River in 1998.The effectiveness of AIS as a safety measure dependslargely on the proportion of vessels that participate and the
ability of AIS to function in the ship-to-ship mode.  Existing

systems are limited to a few specific vessels or a local cover-
age area or only a ship-to-shore mode.  However, many

stakeholders support the universal use of AIS (National Dia-
log on Vessel Traffic Services, 1997).  International efforts

to upgrade and promote the application of this technology
are under way, and the USCG now supports the completion
of universal shipborne AIS standards and the establishment
of carriage requirements for vessels nationally and interna-
tionally as early as July 2002.AIS can be used as a stand-alone system to provide vessel-location and identification data to mariners on the many
waterways that do not have shoreside traffic management
systems.  AIS can also be combined with radar or VTS sys-
tems, depending on local needs and choices.4  Universal re-quirements for the carriage of AIS transponders cannot be
implemented until an agreement has been reached on stan-
dards and requirements.5  In general, this emerging technol-
ogy appears to meet the vessel traffic management needs in
many situations and will probably be adopted more widelyBOX 3-1How AIS WorksMaritime AIS is similar to the technology used (in con-
junction with radar) by air traffic controllers to keep track

of aircraft.  The basic maritime AIS technology is a ship-

board transponder that operates in the VHF maritime
band and is capable of sending a variety of vessel infor-

mation (e.g., identification, position, heading, length,
beam, type, draft, and cargo) to other ships and to shore.
The receiving stations can display the locations and iden-

tity of all transponder-equipped vessels on an electronic

chart.  Because the data transfer is automatic, there is no

need for extensive voice-radio communicationsÑa major
benefit because it frees mariners for other duties and
reduces what some perceive as the intrusiveness of VTS

systems.A complete AIS system consists of a VHF transmitter, a
frequency-agile VHF receiver, an accurate positioning sys-
tem, and a display of ship vector and other information
on an electronic chart.  (A single vessel that has a com-
plete system on board can both transmit its own signals
and receive and display information from other vessels.)

Position information is usually derived from DGPS.  Op-

erational requirements are for 2,000 reports per minute

with updates every two seconds.A functional example of a ship-shore tracking system is
the international tug of opportunity system (ITOS), which

is designed to prevent drift groundings of disabled vessels

in the Puget Sound area.  The local marine exchange main-

tains a database of the location and capabilities of local

tugboats outfitted with transponders.  The tug nearest to a

vessel in need can be located within seconds of entering

the vesselÕs location into the ITOS system.  The system is

entirely funded by industry (SMART Forum, 1997), but

visual readouts of the identification, location, course, and

speed of each tug are displayed at USCG offices.
4 The various technological tools available for, and used in, VTS instal-lations are discussed in the committeeÕs interim report (NRC, 1996).  For
example, radar and closed-circuit television have traditionally been used by
traffic managers for surveillance of congested waterways and do not requirethat vessels carry special equipment.  Newer technologies, such as AIS,
would provide more precise vessel identification and position information
but would require that vessels carry transponders.5 A performance standard describing the operational requirements for ship-
board AIS transponders was adopted by the IMO Maritime Safety Committee
in May 1998.  (The final standard is expected to be available soon on the IMO
Web site, http://www.imo.org).  The standard is based on a recommendation
made in 1996 by the International Association of Lighthouse Authorities
(IALA), which has been the primary organization sponsoring and coordinat-ing the development of AIS.  In 1997, at the request of the United States andother countries, IALA hosted a working group of AIS manufacturers and
administrators to decide on a standard technology for AIS transponders thatmeets the IMO performance standard.  The working group
Õs recommenda-tion was submitted to the International Telecommunications Union, which is
now defining the telecommunications protocol for AIS.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS23in the next several years.  However, some technical prob-
lems, such as the allocation of standard worldwide radio fre-
quencies for AIS operation, must still be resolved.The United States will not be able to dedicate eitherwideband or narrowband VHF channels to AIS anytime
soon, although it should be able to designate an available
channel locally for AIS purposes.  The National Telecom-

munications and Information Administration has been asked
to develop a nationwide AIS frequency plan based on the
results of a forthcoming decision by the Federal Communi-
cations Commission (FCC).6NEW PERSPECTIVE ON VESSEL TRAFFICSERVICES SYSTEMSThe most contentious debates about public and privateroles in navigation information systems have centered
around the funding and operation of VTS systems.  The

USCG has established and operates eight VTS systems.  The

information generated by these systems, and their traffic
management, also benefit commercial interests at the af-
fected ports (NRC, 1996).  However, the commercial ben-

efits have probably not been maximized because much of
the data cannot be accessed easily by all potential users.
Because both private interests and the public benefit from
VTS systems, questions have been raised about who should
design and operate these systems and whether the costs
should be borne by the federal government alone or should
be shared by system users.Proposals for user fees have sparked controversies aboutoverall system costs and capabilities.  If users are asked to

pay, then they want maximum utility from the VTS informa-
tion at the lowest possible cost.  The USCG
Õs plans to installVTS systems in as many as 17 ports were canceled in late
1996 when Congress eliminated funding for the procurement
program, which was criticized by some as overly expensive
and not suitable for all local port communities (U.S. House
of Representatives, 1996).Various means of reconciling these conflicting concernshave been suggested.  One solution is public-private partner-

ships, exemplified by the Los Angeles-Long Beach (LA/LB)
VTIS, where users cover the costs of operation, and the
USCG uses the system to carry out its responsibilities.  To

ensure that authority is properly exercised, USCG personnel
are assigned as watchstanders.  The cost of their services is
currently borne by users, but the USCG is seeking federalfunds to pay for its watchstanders.  The LA/LB VTIS is the

model for partnerships being developed in the San Francisco
Bay region (involving federal, state, and private entities) and
the Port of San Diego (involving the U.S. Navy and the port).
Box 3-2 describes the partnership evolving in San Francisco.The overall approach to vessel traffic management is stillevolving.  The Port and Waterway Safety System (PAWSS)

project, which is being developed by the USCG with input
from the national dialog group, is currently building a VTS
system in New Orleans and other locations (see Figure 3-2),
and locations for new VTS systems will be selected using a
process based on risk analyses.  The PAWSS approach envi-

sions traffic management as a five-stage hierarchy, with tradi-
tional aids to navigation providing the most basic safety
baseline.  At the next level, which provides additional security

and controls, is vessel-to-vessel AIS.  The third level is en-

hanced AIS, which includes additional shore-based sources of
information.  The fourth level is VTIS.  The top level is full

VTS (24-hour-a-day shore-based surveillance and advisory
activity under the direct authority of the USCG).In the meantime, the private sector has often stepped inwhere no formal VTS systems exist.  A few VTS-like systems

are operated by pilots, some of whom carry laptop computers
that combine electronic charts with satellite positioning sys-
tems.  Although these private systems are narrower in scope

than USCG-operated VTS systems, the laptop devices offer
several important benefits, including independence of ship-
board equipment, training focused on a single device, and
growing confidence with ongoing use of the same equipment
(NRC, 1996).  (These benefits may be outweighed by the ten-

dency to exclude the master and bridge management team
from the navigational process, which could encourage reli-
ance on separate systems.)  Growing confidence in and in-

creasing use of DGPS systems might allow more vessels to be
moved under a wider range of conditions, but only if system
limitations are known and users have been adequately trained.The previous report of this committee (NRC, 1996),called for the definition of a Ògeneric, baseline systemÓ in
response to the USCGÕs original plans to use a single sys-tems integration contractor for all new VTS systems.  Those

plans were canceled, however, and the USCG and the mari-
time community have adopted a cooperative approach to
defining specific user needs and the most effective roles of
key stakeholders.It has now become apparent to stakeholdersÑand to thiscommitteeÑthat the process of identifying ports and water-ways that require VTS systems, and determining their capa-
bilities, will be more complex than was originally recognized.
The basis for the original plans, the cost-benefit analysis in
the Port Needs Study (Maio et al., 1991), focused only on
preventing and avoiding oil spills, whereas the current selec-
tion and design criteria have many more dimensions.  Most

stakeholders now believe that a comprehensive approach to
maritime safety should extend far beyond VTS systems.6 The 1997 World Radio Conference designated two worldwide chan-
nels for AIS, channels 87B and 88B.  In the United States, channel 87B is
used for Òpublic correspondenceÓ coast stations, and channel 88B is a fed-eral land mobile frequency designated for use by all government agencies.The conference decided to remove public correspondence designations fromboth channels 87B and 88B.  In August 1997, the USCG petitioned the FCC

for two duplex channels from the VHF maritime band for the AIS transpon-der.  The FCC incorporated the USCG petition as a comment in PR Docket
92-257.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
Elements of VTSBased on new information and perspectives since the in-terim report, the committee has identified five factors that

should be considered in decisions regarding the establishment
of VTS systems:  (1) the conditions requiring vessel traffic

management and the role of VTS in ameliorating them;
(2)funding mechanisms for VTS installations and operations;

(3) the operating government agency or private entity; (4) the
extent of the services; and (5) the selection of technologies.Other factors, which have been identified elsewhere,should also be taken into account (National Dialog on Vessel
Traffic Services, 1997).  First, many waterways do not re-

quire a VTS to achieve an appropriate level of safety.  VTS

is only one of many factors involved in maritime safety, and
other systems may be more critical to safety in a particular
waterway.  Representatives of a wide range of port commu-

nities have noted that assigning proper priorities is critical.Second, VTS is not a synonym for Òhigh technology,Óalthough it does require technological tools to perform itsintended functions.  VTS is a systematic regime for manag-ing a waterway.  In the committee
Õs judgment, overempha-sis of VTS technology could overshadow the consideration
of other management tools.Third, VTS is not a new concept.  It is a proven, interna-tionally accepted tool that enhances vessel safety, promotes
the efficient movement of vessel traffic, and helps protect
the environment.  Until the 1990s, the United States had held

back from the conceptual development and application of
VTS.  A positive consequence of this delay is that the United

States can now benefit from VTS developments by Euro-
pean nations and others.Redefining the Federal Role in VTSThe new perspective on VTS requires that the federal rolebe redefined, based in part on evolving international stan-
dards. The IMO is in the late stages of incorporating VTS
capabilities, requirements, and operations into a regime of
internationally accepted standards.  To date, the IMO has
BOX 3-2Information Systems and Partners in San Francisco BayThe San Francisco Bay region features a VTS system,
PORTS, laptop navigation and identification units carried

by pilots, a cooperative marine information service,
NOAAÕs prototype electronic charts, and a variety of on-going waterways management experiments.  The ben-

efits of these systems are being maximized through the

cooperative efforts of many entities, including five fed-

eral agencies,* the state Office of Oil Spill Prevention and

Response and the Department of Boating and Waterways,
and private sector organizations, such as the San Fran-

cisco Marine Exchange, marine pilots, and tug and ferry

operators.  One of the notable aspects of this partnership

is that federally funded research and development
projects were expanded to fill the urgent needs of other

levels of government and the private sector.
The goal of the evolving partnership is to provide mari-
ners with timely, accurate information about hydro-
graphic and meteorological conditions in San Francisco

Bay, together with near real-time information about ves-

sel traffic and harbor construction and dredging projects.

This comprehensive information will be distributed
through AIS and the Internet.The Marine Exchange will serve as the information Òhub.ÓTo facilitate the flow of information, it could be co-located

with the VTS Vessel Traffic Center (VTC), which would have
to be modified to accommodate both operations.  VTC

equipment would have to be adapted to display information
generated by AIS on vessel movements.  Transponders
have been installed in tugs and ferries operating in the

bay, and pilots will carry portable AIS units when on board

deep-draft ships.  The use of AIS in the total system could
allow the USCG to reduce its staffing, which would free

personnel for transfer to other duties.  The Marine

Exchange currently provides a Web site with PORTS data

and other, more general information.  The Bay Area VTC

image will be added to the Web site and updated fre-

quently using data available from AIS and the VTS.
The two California state agencies will fund the opera-tion, as well as maintenance of the PORTS system, for

two years and will contribute funds to the AIS program.

Responsible parties plan to seek legislative authorization

to implement user fees to support long-term operations

of the overall information system, including PORTS.
A project known as SmartBridge sponsored the devel-opment of an integrated VTS and intelligent pilot carry-

aboard system that was installed at the VTS for evalua-

tion during 1997Ð1998._______________
* In addition to the USCG and NOAA, the U.S. Geological

Survey is using PORTS data in hydrodynamic models; a

MARAD grant was used to test the portable pilot units;

and USACE is working with NOAA on experiments to
detect variations in ship drafts in real time using DGPS

(Marsh and Richards, 1996).
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS25FIGURE 3-2 PWASS project concept
ÑVTS system based on automatic identification system (AIS).established Guidelines for Vessel Traffic Services7 and
Guidelines for the Recruitment, Qualifications and Training
of Vessel Traffic Service Operators.8  It has also defined VTS
as Òa service implemented by a competent authority, de-signed to improve safety and efficiency of vessel traffic and
to protect the environment.  The service has the capability to

interact with the traffic and respond to traffic situations de-
veloping in the VTS area.Ó9In the committeeÕs judgment, based on interactions withstakeholders, a significant percentage of the U.S. maritime
community has no personal experience with VTS because
they do not exist in many U.S. ports.  Consequently, many

U.S. mariners do not fully understand the role of a VTS and
two elements of the IMO definition are sometimes misinter-
preted.  Competent authority has been defined as 
Òthe au-thority made responsible, in whole or in part, by theGovernment for the safety, including environmental safety,and efficiency of vessel traffic and the protection of the envi-
ronment.Ó10  The phrase 
Òinteract with traffic and respond totraffic situationsÓ is interpreted by the IMO to mean the
ability of a VTS to recognize, analyze, and intervene in a
situation that might otherwise lead to an accident, and,
through its intervention, prevent incidents from developing
into accidents.Comprehensive guidelines for establishing and operatingVTS are included in a manual published by the International
Association of Lighthouse Authorities (IALA) (1993).  The
IALA membership consists of government agencies from
many countries responsible for aids to navigation, including
VTS.  The manual, therefore, represents an international con-

sensus, which, in the absence of binding international con-
ventions, has become a de facto standard.  The IMO is ex-

pected to seek greater standardization for VTS and related
activities, and operator qualifications will undoubtedly be7 IMO Resolution A.857(20), adopted November 27, 1997.
8 IMO Resolution A.857(20), adopted November 27, 1997.
9 As adopted by the Subcommittee on Safety of Navigation, 39th Session
of the IMO, London, November 27, 1997.10 Annex 20 to MSC67/22, Guidelines for Vessel Traffic Services.
Vessel data
processing systemRadar data*Weather

Currents
DepthAlertsPosition dataWatchstander
*only where appropriateEmergencyinformationPortstakeholder's
informationVessel provides:
ID, position, course, heading,
and speedVessel receives:
information on vessels, port
data, and hazardsVTCApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
added to the International Convention on Standards forTraining, Certification and Watchstanding, 1978.  Other as-
pects of VTS requirements will be brought within the frame-
work of the International Convention on the Safety of Life
atSea.
Federal Government as Competent AuthorityThe committee considers the federal role in VTS as hav-ing two dimensions.  The first is to serve as competent au-

thority and fulfill the associated duties and responsibilities.
The second is to provide vessel traffic managementÑandfundingÑin areas where the national interest would beserved by VTS.Although arguments can be made for individual statesassuming the role of competent authority for VTS systems
that operate wholly within their waters, maritime safety is
best served in a consistent operating environment among
ports and among nations.  Consistency can be maintained

only if standards, operator qualifications, and procedures are
uniform, nationally and internationally. Most VTS areas of
responsibility extend beyond state waters to ensure that ves-
sels are entered into the system before they reach congested
port approaches. For these reasons, the role of ÒcompetentauthorityÓ should be reserved for the federal government and
should be carried out exclusively by the USCG, the nationÕsprimary maritime safety organization.The role of the competent authority is primarily to es-tablish standards for VTS operations, including the train-
ing and certification of operators and monitoring to ensure
that standards are met.  This role should be extended to the

development of a process for formally authorizing non-

federal VTIS systems to ensure that they have adequate
support infrastructures.Establishing VTS to Serve the National InterestFrom a national perspective, the committee identified fourpossible reasons for establishing a VTS to serve the national
interest.  First, the USCG may determine that a VTS is nec-
essary in a port for the fulfillment of its responsibilities for
maritime safety as articulated in the Ports and Waterways
Safety Act (P.L. 95-474).  This determination would be

likely, for example, for a port or waterway where a maritime
accident might result in a Òspill of national significance.Ó 11Second, a formal traffic management capability may berequired for reasons of national security, includingconducting naval operations and logistics support for majormilitary deployments, or to fulfill USCG mission require-
ments.  A port that is home to a large number of Navy ships

operating on a cycle that causes peaks of congestion might
develop problems related to safety or affect the movement of
commercial vessels.Third, a formal traffic management capability may be re-quired for national economic reasons.  The committee iden-

tified two representative situations.  Ports that are critical to
the transport of heating fuel could, in the winter, be consid-
ered essential to the public welfare.  Ports that serve as hubs

for container shipments could be critical to the economy.Fourth, traffic management requirements of an interna-tional waterway could necessitate the participation of more
than one nation.  An example is the Strait of Juan de Fuca,

where traffic is co-managed by the United States and Canada.If a port or waterway meets one or more of these criteria,a VTS system could be justified, and installation and opera-
tion of the system could be considered the responsibility of
the federal government.12  The USCG has begun a process
(see Figure 3-3) of evaluating risks at individual ports to
determine their safety needs.  A five-tier hierarchy of safety

enhancements has also been developed, with a full VTS sys-
tem as the top tier (see Figure 3-4).  The process is a combi-

nation of a risk assessment, a cost-benefit analysis, and con-
sultations with stakeholders, including selected agencies of
the departments of Transportation, Commerce, and Defense.
Planners would also do well to involve port authorities, ves-
sel operators, pilot organizations, and other port-related en-
tities that would be affected by changes in the traffic man-
agement regime.As part of the process, the USCG could conduct analysesto identify the ports that warrant federal vessel traffic man-
agement based on national economic importance.  The

USCG could use NOAAÕs identification of priority areas forsurveys and charting as a basis for some analyses.  The U.S.

Department of Defense could also be asked to identify areas
where defense considerations require traffic management
capabilities.  To obtain the greatest benefit from limited

funds, the analyses should be appropriate to the situation.
Where simple, inexpensive systems can be implemented,
only simple analyses are necessary to justify them.To ensure that the process is consistent and fair, a stan-dard set of questions could be used to determine the require-
ments for VTS.  For example, the following questions were

developed by the National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services
(1997):¥What existing local navigational management systemsare in place and how effective are they?¥What are the existing or likely future conditions in the11 Commandant Instruction 16465.1, Spills of National Significance Re-
sponse Management System, summarizes the factors for determining if aspill has national significance.  The factors include the extent of the poten-tially affected area; the probable impact on public health and welfare and
the economy; the period of time over which the pollutant would be dis-charged or that would be required for cleanup; the level of public concern;and the level of political and public interest.12 Whether the systems were funded from general revenues or user feeswould, according to the current approach, depend on their safety functionsas compared to improvements in efficiency.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS27port with respect to traffic density, traffic patterns, andcomplexity of traffic or vessel movements?¥What are the sizes, types, and numbers of vessels oper-ating in the port area?¥What is the history (including the causes) of accidents,casualties, pollution incidents, and other vessel safety
problems within the port area?¥What are the physical limitations of the port?¥What types and amounts of hazardous or environmen-tally sensitive cargoes are transported within the port?¥What are the prevailing conditions and extremes ofweather and oceanography in the port?¥What are the environmental, safety, and economic con-sequences of having or not having a VTS within a given
port?The dialog group did not consider USCG missions, suchas national security and law enforcement, which should also
be included.FIGURE 3-3 U.S. Coast Guard risk-based port selection process.
FIGURE 3-4 Vessel traffic management hierarchy.
VTSVTISEnhancedAISAISTraditional
Navigation AidsPerformpreliminaryport selection usingavailable informationHave risk factorsbeen adequatelyaddressed?DevelopassessmentprocessApply processto selectedportsApply USCGvessel traffic management tools
in ascending orderStopInvestigate non-USCGvessel traffic management tools.
Install VTSsystemImplementneeded changesYes
NoNoNoYes
Yes
Should aVTSsystem beinstalled?Can risks beaddressedwithout aVTS system?Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
Nonfederal VTISIn some areas, a federal VTS may not be warranted butregional or local interests would support a traffic manage-
ment scheme.  The legislature of the state of California, for

example, has identified waterways for which environmental
protection is a matter of significant state interest.13  Some of
these waterways were not even evaluated in the Port NeedsStudy and hence were not identified as being of national sig-
nificance.When considering the establishment of a VTIS, the issuesto be considered include: whether or not a system is really
necessary; who would pay for its installation; who would
operate it; and who would be liable if the VTS contributed to
an accident.  The need for the system can be determined by

state or local governments (such as port authorities) or the
user community; the USCG, the competent authority, should

participate in the process.  The USCG would determine if

national interests, including support for its own missions,
would be served by federal involvement in the establishment
or operation of the system, and, if so, to what extent.Defining a Baseline SystemIn its interim report, the committee recommended that theCoast Guard select ports with the greatest safety needs for
VTS and define a minimum generic baseline system that
would meet national safety needs as well as Coast Guard
mission requirements.  The committee
Õs description of aÒgeneric, baseline systemÓ can now be modified in terms ofits updated perspective on VTS.  The tools needed to provide

VTS capabilities will vary from place to place depending on
waterway shape and dimensions, vessel traffic patterns, and
other considerations.  The capabilities, however, will be gen-

erally the same for all waterways.  It can be argued that na-

tional safety needs are subsumed within the statutory respon-
sibilities of each captain of the port (COTP) for ensuring
vessel safety, waterways management, and environmental
protection.  It follows, then, that the national VTS baseline

for federal systems can be defined in terms of the capabili-
ties required by COTPs to discharge their statutory responsi-
bilities.  In some cases, a VTS may be justified based on the

USCGÕs mission and not directly related to commercial ves-sel safety (e.g., law enforcement or national security).  The

catalog of capabilities can be used to select the technological
tools appropriate for each port on a case-by-case basis, giv-
ing due consideration to relevant policy issues and costs.A port-by-port definition of system requirements wouldhelp minimize costs and maximize the benefits of invest-
ments in VTS by tailoring each system to meet the needs ofa specific port.  Some tools, of course, will be useful for all
ports regardless of the complexity of the system or the vol-
ume of traffic. Certain communications technologies, for
example, will be useful in all areas.As an example of how the necessary tools can be derivedfrom general capabilities, consider the issue of enforcing
compliance within a regulated navigation area (RNA).  Ob-

viously, the necessary tools will depend on the requirements
imposed in the RNA.  For example, in Hampton Roads, Vir-

ginia, rules have been established for vessel movement and
anchorage (33 CFR 165.501).  In Tampa Bay, the require-

ments deal only with communications (33 CFR 165.753).
The Hampton Roads RNA may require surveillance, whereas
the Tampa Bay RNA may require only monitoring and re-
cording of VHF-FM Channel 13 transmissions.All federal VTS systems must support the full range ofUSCG mission areas, including search and rescue operations,
law enforcement, and maritime defense.  If cost-effective

enhancements can support these missions without compro-
mising the USCGÕs primary focus on safety and environ-mental protection, then the additional capabilities should be
provided.  It is also appropriate for a traffic service to ad-

dress the needs of the commercial port community for traffic
management and information exchange.  The commercial

aspects of VTS will undoubtedly vary by port, however, and
can best be determined through partnerships between the port
community and the USCG. The user community should also
be involved in the development of port-specific operating
rules and procedures.  The California harbor safety commit-

tees provide useful models for this process.14The technical components of a baseline system would bedetermined on a port-by-port basis.  For example, the ben-

efits of AIS may warrant the incorporation of this technol-
ogy into all future and existing federal VTS systems.  The

services provided by a VTIS should be tailored to support
the needs of the sponsor(s), subject to the approval and over-
sight of the USCG (the competent authority).  Like federal

systems, VTIS systems might be improved by the incorpora-
tion of AIS.Technology SelectionThe selection of VTS technology is an important exercisebecause it will substantially influence the effectiveness and
cost of the system.  The committee identified several consid-

erations that may be helpful in the selection process.  First,

system capabilities should be defined before the technology13 See the Lempert-Keene-Seastrand Oil Spill Prevention and ResponseAct of 1990.14 The requirements for these committees, including membership and
responsibilities, are spelled out in the Lempert-Keene-Seastrand Oil Spill
Prevention and Response Act of 1990, Section 8670.23.  A key provision
requires the development of harbor safety plans that address the safe move-ment of all vessel traffic in ports covered by the plans.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING NAVIGATION SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEMS29is selected to prevent the system design from being drivenby equipment vendors or the acquisition process rather than
actual needs.  Second, the components should not increase

the workload of vessel crews unnecessarily.  From this stand-

point, the best technology is one that limits verbal radio ex-
changes to critical matters, minimizes the need to exchange
fixed data, and enables mariners to extract the right data at
the right time.  Third, onboard equipment should meet both

international carriage requirements and domestic standards,
so the operating environment is consistent, training require-
ments can be standardized, and costs to vessel operators can
be controlled.  It is assumed that the equipment will meet

appropriate standards of performance and interfacing.Another key issue is the cost of the infrastructure requiredfor mariners to benefit from a new technology.  For example,

the combination of DGPS and ECDIS promises to enhance
both maritime safety and efficiency; however, several major
infrastructure issues (e.g., upgrading nautical charts to the
same level of accuracy as the positioning system) must be
addressed before these benefits can be fully realized.Intelligent Transportation SystemsNew technologies for the enhancement of rail and high-way traffic efficiency and safety have been the subject of
research carried out by the Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems Office of the U.S. Department of Transportation.  Some

of the research areas have included electronic tracking tags,
identifiers, position locators, and other automated systems
that could perform the labor-intensive operations in traffic
management.  A recent review of these systems as applied to

intermodal freight transportation listed applications ranging
from smart cards and bar codes to cargo tracking using DGPS

and transponder identifiers (Alyward, 1996).  The USCG

should monitor this research to take advantage of the latest
innovations in transportation technology to help solve wa-
terways management problems.SUMMARYWaterways management depends fundamentally on welltrained personnel following rules for safe vessel transits.
However, technology can also contribute substantially to navi-
gation safety.  A number of opportunities exist for enhancing
the effectiveness and application of technologies in the United
States.  The greater availability and use of electronic charts,

PORTS, and AIS could enhance safety in many U.S. ports and
waterways, if reliable funding can be arranged and carriage
requirements can be established for transponders.Determining where VTS systems should be installed andthe specifics of their design is a complex process.  The
committeeÕs vision calls for uniform VTS standards and ca-pabilities across the nation, but the technological tools for
each system would be selected on a port-by-port basis.  The

federal government is responsible for maritime safety, en-
suring a consistent operating environment and compatible
technologies, and enforcing regulations.  Therefore, the fed-

eral government should be the competent authority for VTS
systems and should provide vessel traffic management in
areas where this would serve the national interest.  The pro-

cess for identifying ports that require new or enhanced VTS
systems and for selecting the technologies to be used in each
system should be updated and formally adopted.  This pro-

cess should take into account all of the USCGÕs missions.REFERENCESAylward, A. 1996. Intelligent Transportation Systems and IntermodalFreight Transportation. Report prepared for the ITS Joint Program Of-fice by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Research and SpecialPrograms Administration. Cambridge, Mass.: Volpe National Trans-
portation Systems Center.IALA (International Association of Lighthouse Authorities). 1993. IALAVessel Traffic Services Manual. St. Germain en Laye, France: IALA.INTERTANKO. 1996. U.S. Port and Terminal Safety Study: A DiscussionPaper. Oslo, Norway: INTERTANKO.Lockwood, M. 1998. NOAA. Presentation to National Dialog on VesselTraffic Services, Washington, D.C., May 20, 1998.Maio., D., R. Ricci, M. Rossetti, J. Schwenk, and T. Liu. 1991. Port NeedsStudy. Report No. DOT-CG-N-01-91-1.2, three volumes, prepared byJohn A. Volpe National Transportation Systems Center. Washington,D.C.: U.S. Coast Guard.Marsh, P., and T. Richards. 1996. Maritime Technology in the San Fran-cisco Bay Region. Pp. 6Ð15 in Proceedings of the Marine Safety Coun-cil, U.S. Coast Guard, JulyÐSeptember, 1996. Arlington, Va.: U.S. CoastGuard National Maritime Center.National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services. 1997. Summary of Guidancefrom the National Dialog on Vessel Traffic Services. Available from
the Marine Board, National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Ave.,N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418. Tel. 202-334-3119.NOS (National Ocean Service). 1998. Hydrographic Data Acquisition Planfor Nautical Charting. Silver Spring, Md.: National Oceanic and Atmo-spheric Administration, NOS.NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 1997a. TheNautical Charting Plan, 3rd ed. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofCommerce.NOAA. 1997b. NOAAÕs Hydrographic Survey Plan, draft. Silver Spring,Md.: NOAANRC (National Research Council). 1996. Vessel Navigation and TrafficServices for Safe and Efficient Ports and Waterways, Interim Report.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.SMART Forum. 1997. Forum on Safe Marine Transportation (SMART),February 27, 1997, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
Unpublished report.U.S. House of Representatives. 1996. Congressional Record, September16, 1996. H10398. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
304Vision of the Future and How to Achieve ItIn the long recorded history of navigation, many impor-tant advances have been made in marinersÕ ability to travel
the seas with safety, speed, and reliability.  From the begin-
ning, improvements in information and in the knowledge of
how best to use it have been at least as important to mari-
nersÕ survival in perilous seas and crowded harbors as im-
proved vessel design, construction, and materials or the
many other advances in seafaring.The earliest charts of land masses, currents, wind pat-terns, and a few hand soundings, for example, apprised suc-
ceeding generations of seafarers of the conditions and haz-
ards their predecessors had encountered.  With advancing

knowledge of the positions and movements of heavenly bod-
ies, expert sailors using astrolabes (the predecessors of sex-
tants) could approximate their position.  A rudimentary com-

pass was used to keep the vessel on course even when the
heavens were obscured.  A critical breakthrough was the in-

vention of the Harrison chronometer, which for the first time
provided accurate and reliable time so that longitude could
be determined to within a few miles.  For near-shore pilot-

ing, increasingly sophisticated visual and audible navigation
aids were developed over a period of several centuries.More recent breakthroughs, mostly resulting from mili-tary research and development, have included the gyro-

compass, radio aids to navigation (from radio direction
finders to Loran and Decca), and satellite navigation.  All of

them have improved a navigatorÕs ability to determine the
vesselÕs location and physical challenges, including shoals,
reefs, tides, water depths, currents, and weather conditions.
Radar, a World War II breakthrough, in combination with
the VHF radio, has improved the sailorÕs ability to identify
the challenges posed by other vessels.  Despite all of these

advances, however, if visibility was poor or traffic very
heavy, none of these systems assured mariners that they had
accurate and complete information or the technical capability
of solving their navigation and traffic problems.1Most of these problems can now be solved, at least con-ceptually.  Furthermore, a common vision of the future is

emerging within the maritime community, both in the United
States and abroad, in which computers, satellites, and elec-
tronics will be deployed wisely and widely to provide a new
level of navigational safety.  This chapter describes the vi-

sion and the elements the United States must have in place to
realize it.THE VISIONEnvironmental ConditionsIn the future, existing and emerging technologies will pro-vide mariners with timely warnings of obstacles in surround-
ing waters and accurate predictions of inclement weather.
Highly accurate information will be available in various for-
matsÑelectronic displays, by radio, or on the Internet.  Mari-

ners will also be able to fix their positions quickly, easily,
and accurately.Basic hydrographic information, regularly

updated, will be available for geographic regions of interest
to all types of users.  The technical means are already avail-

able to acquire all types of data, but adequate resources are
lacking for updating obsolete data.  The information will

include geographic positions of land masses, shoals, and
important features to the accuracy standard of 5 to 10 meters
now set by DGPS.Real-time hydrographic and meteorological data are es-sential for large, fast vessels entering dredged channels with
minimum under-keel clearance.  The technical means for

obtaining these data have been proven effective by the suc-
cess of the PORTS and other systems.  Once the issue of

chronic underfunding has been addressed, either through in-
creased budgets or through partnerships, these vital informa-
tion systems will realize their full potential.Data will be available to users in many formats, rangingfrom updated paper charts to the most advanced electronic
charts, which will be written to international specifications
and will enable many users to take advantage of full ECDIS1 Reliance on imperfect technology can even introduce new hazards,
like Òradar-assisted collisions,Ó for example. (NRC, 1994).Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION OF THE FUTURE AND HOW TO ACHIEVE IT31capability.  Tides, currents, and 
Coast Pilot-type informa-tion will be published in hard copy and on the Internet and
updated through electronic transmissions in varying degrees
of detail (e.g., more detailed for big commercial ships and
less detailed for recreational boats).  However, because ship-

board systems are not likely to match the speed of land-line
data connections (now 28,800 bits per second) in the near
future, some files, especially long or graphics-laden docu-
ments, may take too long to download from the Internet to
benefit mariners.Precision electronic navigation technology, such asDGPS, has already proven to be extremely accurate.  In the

future, fixing positions in all weather will not only be pos-
sible (as it is today) but will also be reliable.  Prudent mari-

ners, however, will continue to fix their positions by mul-
tiple, independent means when their vessels are close to haz-
ards or in constricted waterways, especially when visibility
is poor.2  In other words, the mariner of the future will not
rely solely on any one technology but will continue to exer-
cise his or her critical judgment and will have the necessary
training and qualifications to do so.Other VesselsIn the future, mariners will be able to detect the presenceand determine the position of other vessels quickly and ac-
curately, regardless of weather or location.  They will also

have the tools to make sound decisions about taking evasive
action, if necessary.  All vessels will be equipped with AIS,
which will be linked to shore-based VTS systems in busy
harbors.AIS, in combination with precision navigation systems,will become a critical tool for detecting other ships and se-
lecting anticollision strategies, especially in low visibility.
This technology suite will enable mariners on the bridges of
two or more vessels to identify each other and exchange in-
formation silently and immediately on their courses and
speed.  ÒSilent, bridge-to-bridge VTSÓ will be tested in a
prototype installation in the AIS pilot project on the Lower
Mississippi River.  Similar systems in Alaska, Canada, and

Europe have demonstrated their usefulness in close-quarters
situations and in avoiding collisions.This ÒVTS of the futureÓ will have many advantages over
radar (which cannot ÒseeÓ around corners, such as islands)
and will enable mariners to interact over dedicated frequen-
cies that are not blocked by competing or extraneous trans-
missions.  Silent, screen-to-screen interactions will enable

mariners to communicate when and how they choose, elimi-
nating the distraction of constantly monitoring VHF chan-
nels from several vessels and sometimes from shore.The success of the ÒVTS of the futureÓ will depend on all
vessels (or at least all vessels above a certain size) carryinginternationally compatible transponders and other equipmentand all operators being trained in their use.  The equipment

will be internationally interchangeable and not dependent on
unique or proprietary technology.  Future VTS systems will

be easy to use and affordable.  Fortunately, the proliferation

of electronic equipment and the tendency for prices to de-
cline over time suggests that this vision of the future can be
achieved.Traditional systems, such as radar, automatic radar plot-ting aid,3 and VHF radio, will continue to be used for redun-
dancy and to ensure reliability.  Furthermore, in most heavily

trafficked harbors, an information link to a shore-based VTS
system will provide both information and active traffic man-
agement by the appropriate authority, when necessary.REALIZING THE VISIONRealizing the vision described above will not be easy.  A
firm foundation will first have be laid so that the most effec-
tive systems can be widely deployed in the United States.  The

committee identified eight elements of this firm foundation.Coordinated National Policy on the MaritimeInformation InfrastructureAt least four federal agencies are currently responsiblefor various types of information and data critical to the navi-
gation of vessels.  USACE is responsible for channel main-

tenance and inland waterway operation, including locks on
federal systems; NOAA is responsible for hydrographic sur-
veys, charts, bathymetric data, Coast Pilot information, andweather information; the USCG is responsible for aids to
navigation, Notices to Mariners, navigational broadcasts,List of Lights, and VTS; and the National Imagery and Map-ping Agency is responsible for rebroadcasting some infor-
mation from Notices to Mariners, keeping track of mobiledrilling rigs and acts of violence directed against shipping,
the Navigation Information Network, and sailing directions.The effective use of the data depends on the capability ofthese agencies to coordinate their activities, set common pri-
orities for collecting and disseminating data, and cooperate
in the delivery of services to users.  Too often mariners must

evaluate a variety of services and sources to determine which
one is most accurate and reliable in a given situation.  A

coordinated policy on the development and support of the
maritime information infrastructure would eliminate, or at
least lessen, this uncertainty.  Coordinated planning could

provide mariners with the most accurate data on a timely
basis in a user-oriented format.3 Automatic radar plotting aid is a computer that quickly and automati-
cally plots radar targets based on information about the target vesselÕs courseand speed.  It is used to assess passing or overtaking situations and can help
prevent collisions.2 DGPS has some limitations when used in constricted waterways
(USCG, 1997).Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
Mechanisms for Identifying and Responding toStakeholder NeedsIdentifying all stakeholders in port and waterways opera-tions, let alone cataloging and satisfying their needs, can be
difficult.  Nevertheless, stakeholders
Õ needs must be met in a
way that enhances safety for all users, not just the most vocal
ones or a select group.  If improving efficiency is the goal,

then competing interests should be balanced to raise the over-
all threshold, not just the efficiency of one sector at the ex-
pense of others.  In some ports, organized stakeholder

groups, such as harbor safety committees, are already in
place and can provide a mechanism for making decisions.  In

others, federal agencies should encourage the formation of
stakeholder organizations and decision-making procedures.Technical, Operational, and PerformanceStandardsStandards for data exchange, component interfaces, anduser interfaces with critical navigation systems are all essen-
tial for creating a uniform operating environment among all
ports and waterways.  Other standards may also be neces-

sary for mariners to act confidently on the basis of safety
information, other types of data, instructions, or guidance.
Centralized, consistent, reliable sources of navigational in-
formation will provide a solid foundation for realizing the
future vision.  Responsible parties should move forward ex-

peditiously with the development, especially in the interna-
tional arena, of technical standards and carriage requirements
for essential navigational technology, including ECDIS and
AIS.  The federal government has sole authority to act on

behalf of the nation in setting international standards.Appropriate and Predictable FundingAlthough adequate and predictable funding are not al-ways available at the federal level, the future vision can only
be realized if support is somewhat predictable.  The mini-

mum level of support could plausibly be ensured through a
combination of public and private funds through partnerships
to fund and operate systems.Development and Maintenance of the MaritimeInformation InfrastructureFederal agencies must develop and maintain the basic in-frastructure necessary for navigational safety.  The infra-

structure must include the following essential elements:¥Up-to-date charts of all waterways essential to U.S.commerce must be available in both hard copy and elec-
tronic form, with chart data identical to those of GPS
and as accurate as those of DGPS.  Electronic formats
must meet the international standards for use withECDIS.¥Real-time data on tides, currents, wave heights, andweather conditions for all waterways essential to U.S.
interests must be electronically accessible (with backup
hard copy) to vessels far enough offshore to plan a safe
passage.¥Up-to-date, port-specific navigational data (e.g., infor-mation now available in Coast Pilots, light lists, andNotices to Mariners) must be made available to mari-ners electronically (with backup hard copy) sufficiently
far offshore to enable the planning of safe passage.¥Vessels must be equipped with a mechanism for elec-tronic vessel-to-vessel and vessel-to-shore exchanges
of information essential to emergency responses and
navigational safety.¥Maintenance of conventional aids to navigation mustbe continued.¥An electronic system, accessible by the USCG andemergency response teams, must be in place for keep-
ing track of hazardous cargoes carried by vessels in
U.S. waters or stored at U.S. marine terminals.Appendix E describes the necessary data and formatsfrom the point of approach to the departure from a port.  This

description could be used to guide all agencies or organiza-
tions that coordinate and deliver information services.Silent, Automated Systems for InformationExchangeInformation should be delivered in ways that do not in-terfere with or distract shipboard personnel, particularly
bridge watchstanders, from the performance of their du-
ties.  Thus, the reliance on voice communications should

be drastically reduced, and the availability of real-time

data, on an as-needed basis, should be greatly expanded.
Two necessary advances will be an Internet service that
enables mariners to access and print out information di-
rectly, as needed, thus eliminating the need to maintain an
onboard library of preprinted and corrected hard copies,
and AIS for the exchange of selected data on vessel move-
ments and other information.Strict Compliance with Rules for WaterwayOperationsMechanisms should be established to ensure that all mari-ners and vessels transiting U.S. waterways comply with es-
tablished rules and regulations so that everyone can enjoy
the benefits of safe, consistent, and orderly operations.  En-

forcement methods may vary among ports and regions, but
the federal responsibility for this function is well established.
In addition to traditional USCG enforcement, economicApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION OF THE FUTURE AND HOW TO ACHIEVE IT33incentives might be used to reward, and thereby encourage,the use of advanced safety systems and practices.  Another

enforcement technique would be to create peer pressure for
compliance through forums, such as harbor safety commit-
tees. If nonpunitive measures do not result in consistent com-
pliance, punitive action should be taken.REFERENCESNRC (National Research Council). 1994. Minding the Helm: Marine Navi-gation and Piloting. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.USCG (U.S. Coast Guard). 1997. Differential GPS Mission Needs Analy-sis: Harbor Entry and Approach. Alexandria, Va.: USCG NavigationCenter.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
345Conclusions and RecommendationsAdvanced information systems are needed to ensure therapid, accurate exchange of vital information related to navi-
gation safety.  To provide a safe operating environment in

U.S. ports and waterways and support the nationÕs economic
and national security in the future, a variety of navigation
information technologies, strategies, and practices will have
to be improved and integrated.  Rather than focusing on spe-

cific changes that should be made in individual information
systems, the committee defined the general steps the govern-
ment should take to make U.S. ports and waterways as safe
as possible.Information systems that promote navigation safety arealready being used by a number of federal agencies to carry
out their missions.  These systems also contribute to the na-
tional goals of protecting the environmental and human
health.  The federal government has a responsibility to take

the lead in the development and implementation of these
systems to promote navigation safety.  At the same time, the

government should take into account stakeholder needs and
should attempt to secure private sources of cofunding, wher-
ever it is appropriate or essential to operations.  Cooperation

among federal agencies and partnerships of public and pri-
vate stakeholders are emerging mechanisms for improving
navigation safety.PROVIDING AN INFORMATIONINFRASTRUCTUREThe navigation information infrastructure includes nauti-cal charts (based on timely, accurate underlying data); sys-
tems for delivering chart data to users; systems for collecting
and disseminating real-time data on weather conditions, cur-
rents, and tides; conventional aids to navigation (e.g., buoys,
lights, and markers); electronic navigation systems (e.g.,
DGPS); and electronic information exchange systems.  Some

of the nationÕs most vital water transportation links do not
have an adequate navigation information infrastructure or
accessible, accurate, real-time data.Most federal agencies with responsibilities in these areashave already defined infrastructure needs, but no integrated
implementation plan or arrangement for ensuring consistent
support has been developed.  Furthermore, many of the fed-

eral responsibilities are shared with other public or private
entities; areas of responsibility often vary from port to port.Conclusion 1.  The federal government should strengthenits commitment to providing the basic infrastructure neces-
sary for navigation safety and environmental protection.  The

best way to promote the consistent implementation of criti-
cal infrastructure elements is to develop a national plan, with
local input and periodic reassessments of the needs of par-
ticular ports and waterways.  The development of a national

plan will require strong leadership from both the govern-
ment and port stakeholders to justify the necessary public
and private investments.Recommendation 1.  The Interagency Committee on Wa-
terways Management should coordinate the efforts of the
U.S. Coast Guard, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and National
Imagery and Mapping Agency to develop an integrated,
comprehensive plan for developing and maintaining the
navigation information infrastructure for all significant U.S.
ports and waterways and should secure consistent, long-term
support (public and private) to implement the plan.TRACKING HAZARDOUS CARGOThe USCG does not operate any electronic systems fortracking hazardous cargo and does not currently have regu-
lar access to the U.S. Customs Service comprehensive infor-
mation systems, which contain electronic manifests from
most cargo vessels sailing within, or planning to enter, U.S.
waters.  Furthermore, port information systems (which are

often linked to the U.S. Customs Service database) rarely
provide emergency response teams with direct access to thisApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS35data.  A number of  port closings and other shipping delays
have been caused by difficulties encountered by public safety

personnel trying to identify unknown cargo after spills, fires,
and other incidents.  Time is of the essence in an emergency,

and real-time access to electronic data on hazardous cargoes
would be much quicker than the current practice of relying
on paper records and hoping that marine terminal and vessel
personnel who can identify cargoes are available.Conclusion 2.  The safety of U.S. ports and waterways
would be enhanced if the USCG and local emergency re-
sponse personnel had access to electronic manifest data for
commercial cargo vessels.Recommendation 2.  The U.S. Coast Guard and the U.S.
Customs Service should develop a system to disseminate
automatically electronic information on hazardous cargo
from the existing cargo-tracking database to emergency re-
sponse organizations and personnel.IMPROVING VESSEL TRAFFIC MANAGEMENTThe USCG is implementing a program to meet the needsof key U.S. ports and waterways that do not have adequate
VTS systems while also satisfying the concerns of local port
stakeholders.  The committee
Õs interim report recommendedthat the Coast Guard involve local stakeholders and promote
public/private partnerships in its efforts to implement VTS
systems in ports with identified safety needs, and the Coast
Guard has incorporated these recommendations into its cur-
rent program.  However, the committee still has some con-

cerns about maintaining national standards of operation and
accommodating local needs and circumstances.  Mariners

need consistent rules of operation and compatible equipment
worldwide.  The committee is concerned about the inconsis-

tencies among VTS systems and the VTIS systems operated
by a variety of organizations (e.g., federal, state, and private
entities and combinations thereof).  Mariners need
ÑandwantÑa consistent operating environment, which can onlybe provided if uniform guidelines are devised for VTS and
VTIS systems.  Furthermore, the effectiveness of these sys-
tems will be maximized if they all use compatible equipment
designed to the highest standards and if they provide the
most essential capabilities for navigation safety.Conclusion 3.  Minimum system design and operational
standards compatible with established international stan-
dards would enable VTS and VTIS systems to maintain a
baseline level of safety nationwide.Recommendation 3.  The U.S. Coast Guard should con-tinue to move forward, in consultation with local port stake-
holders, with a comprehensive national effort to implementvessel traffic services systems in key U.S. ports and water-ways where such systems are needed.  Periodic assessments

of safety needs should be made to keep up to date.  The U.S.

Coast Guard should also provide a uniform national system
of traffic management implemented through coordinated
federal vessel traffic services systems and local vessel traffic
information services systems.  The U.S. Coast Guard should

take the following steps while moving forward with the over-
all program:¥develop, standardize, and implement objective criteriafor selecting ports to be served by federally funded ves-
sel traffic services systems; upgrade  existing systems;
implement new systems that are urgently needed¥develop training, certification, watchstanding, and op-erating standards applicable to all vessel traffic services
regardless of who operates them¥as the competent authority, ensure that all shore-basedvessel traffic management activities, regardless of who
operates them, comply with established international
standards¥facilitate communication among ports on lessonslearned about the implementation of these systemsUNIVERSAL CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTSConsistent traffic management depends on all vessels, orat least all vessels of certain sizes using specific waterways,
carrying the same basic information systems and operating
them according to uniform standards.  A VTS system that

incorporates AIS will not be very effective if, for example,
only 50 percent of the cargo ships in local waterways carry
transponders.  The requirements for AIS can be generic, but

the international character of the shipping industry and the
prevalence of foreign-flag vessels in U.S. waters argue for
the carriage of systems that meet international standards.
The presence of significant numbers of large ferries, tugs,
and other vessels operating in certain waterways argues for
carriage requirements that cover that traffic as well.Conclusion 4.  To achieve the committee
Õs vision of thefuture, all major vessels must be required to carry certain
advanced navigation information systems so they can par-
ticipate in traffic management schemes and navigate safely
in and out of all U.S. ports.Recommendation 4.  The U.S. Coast Guard should worktoward the implementation of international carriage require-
ments for electronic navigation and identification/location
systems on board all major vessels using U.S. ports and
should continue to take steps to provide necessary commu-
nications frequencies to ensure the international compatibil-
ity of automatic identification systems.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36APPLYING ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS  TO PORTS AND WATERWAYS MANAGEMENT
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B37APPENDICESApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38APPENDIX AApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B3939APPENDIXABiographies of Committee MembersH. Thomas Kornegay, chair, is executive director of the
Port of Houston Authority, which he joined in 1972.  He

previously served as the portÕs planning and administrative
engineer, chief engineer, director of engineering, managing
director, and acting executive director.  Mr. Kornegay is a

member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, the
Permanent International Association of Navigation Con-
gresses, and Chi Epsilon, an honorary fraternity for civil

engineers.  He has a B.S. degree in architectural engineering

from the University of Texas and an M.S. degree in architec-
tural engineering from Oklahoma State University.William A. Wallace, vice chair, is professor of decision sci-ences and engineering systems at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.  As a researcher and a consultant in management

science and information systems, Dr. Wallace has more than
20 years of experience in developing decision-support sys-
tems for industry and government.  He has held academic

positions at Carnegie-Mellon University and the State Uni-
versity of New York at Albany and served as chairman of
the Statistical, Management, and Information Sciences De-
partment at Rensselaer.  Dr. Wallace also has been a research

scientist and visiting professor at a number of institutions
abroad, including the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
and the National Center for Industrial Science and Technol-
ogy Management Development in China.  He has authored

or co-authored six books and more than 100 articles and pa-
pers.  He has a B.S. in chemical engineering from the Illinois

Institute of Technology and an M.S. and Ph.D. in manage-
ment science from Rensselaer.Anne D. Aylward is a senior consultant to the Volpe Na-tional Transportation Systems Center, which advises the U.S.
Department of Transportation on port and freight issues.  She

is past maritime director of the Massachusetts Port Author-
ity and served as executive director of the National Commis-
sion on Intermodal Transportation.  She has provided local

and national leadership on port and intermodal freight issues
while serving as chair of the American Association of PortAuthorities and a board member of the North Atlantic PortConference, North Atlantic Ports Association, Boston Ship-
ping Association, and Boston Harbor Association.  Ms.

Aylward has also served on the National Research CouncilÕs
Marine Board and is currently a member of the Transporta-
tion Research BoardÕs Committee on Intermodal Transpor-
tation.  She has an A.B. degree from Radcliffe College and

an M.S. degree in city planning from the Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology.William O. Gray is president of Gray Maritime Company, amarine consulting firm.  He works closely with

INTERTANKO, which represents 70 percent of the world
tanker fleet, to promote safe waterway transits in the United
States.  Previously with the Skaarup Group, Mr. Gray ini-

tially operated the Skaarup fleet and then managed special
tanker projects, working with organizations such as the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences and INTERTANKO.  Mr. Gray

also spent more than 22 years with Exxon Corporation work-
ing primarily in the development of very large tankers.  He

managed ExxonÕs Arctic Tanker Project, a successful transit
of the Northwest Passage by the T/V Manhattan.  Mr. Gray
also spent four years with Bethlehem Steel working on the
preliminary design of merchant ships, especially tankers.  He

previously served as vice chair of the Marine Board Com-
mittee on Tank Vessel Design.  He has a B.S.E. degree in

naval architecture, with honors, from the University of

Michigan, and an M.E. degree in mechanical engineering
from Yale University.Jerrol Larrieu is director of management information sys-tems for the Port of New Orleans, where he supervised the
installation of the nationÕs most sophisticated automated port
information system.  Previously, he was a consultant to the

port on its automation project, coordinating design teams for
major portions of the community cargo release system.  Prior

to that, Mr. Larrieu was manager of computer services for
the Ingram Corporation for nearly 10 years, providing cor-
porate consulting services.  He has 28 years of experience in
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40APPENDIX Aadvanced information systems, including service with Gen-eral Electric Company and the Chrysler Corporation.  He is

currently chair of the American Association of Port Authori-
ties Information Technology Committee and is a member of
the Executive Board of the U.S. Customs Automation Advi-
sory Committee.  He has a B.S. degree in mathematics from

Xavier University of Louisiana.Robert G. Moore is president of Coastwatch, Incorporated,a maritime management and consulting firm involved in the
design of vessel traffic service (VTS) systems.  The firm has

developed VTS design requirements for 23 U.S. ports.  Pre-

viously, he was a career officer in the U.S. Coast Guard.  As

chief of military readiness, he was responsible for service-
wide security, contingency and defense planning, and train-
ing.  Capt. Moore also has broad international experience.

He was the U.S. State Department advisor to the government
of Somalia and served in London as deputy commander, U.S.
Coast Guard Activities Europe.  Capt. Moore
Õs extensiveexperience with VTS systems includes visits to major VTS
systems in Europe and service as the U.S. observer to the
international committee that developed the traffic separation
schemes for Dover Straits and the North Sea.  He also played

a leading role in the 1991 Port Needs Study, a study for the
U.S. Coast Guard that identified U.S. ports that require VTS
systems.  Capt. Moore has a B.S. degree in engineering from

the U.S. Coast Guard Academy.J.S. Niederhauser is an active marine pilot and past presi-dent of Puget Sound Pilots.  He is the pilot representative to

the Port of Tacoma project for the computer simulation of
large container ship navigation in the Blair Waterway.  He

holds an unrestricted pilot license for Puget Sound waters
from the U.S. Coast Guard and the state of Washington and
is a member of Masters, Mates, and Pilots and the American
Pilots Association.  Previously, Capt. Niederhauser spent 19

years with Foss Maritime Company, where he gained sea
experience on ocean, coastal, river, and harbor towing ves-
sels.  As a tug captain, he qualified for pilotage in British

Columbia waters and pilotage while towing loaded petro-
leum barges on the Columbia River and southeast Alaska
inland waters.  A charter member and past commodore of

the Pacific Northwest Fleet of the Classic Yacht Associa-
tion, Capt. Niederhauser also has considerable experience in
recreational boating on Puget Sound and British Columbia
waters.  He was educated at Western Washington State Uni-

versity in Bellingham.F.D.R. Posthumus is director of fleet projects for Sea-Land
Services, Incorporated.  He has a wealth of experience in

virtually all aspects of vessel operations and fleet manage-
ment and has managed foreign-flag charter vessels as well as
U.S.-flag vessels.  Capt. Posthumus was also manager of

Marine Operations Europe, Booking and Equipment Con-
trol Europe, and vessel operations in several areas of theworld.  Prior to joining Sea-Land in 1970, Capt. Posthumussailed extensively with the Dutch Merchant Marine.  He has

a masterÕs license from the Hogere Zeevaartschool and alicense as chief engineer of unlimited powered diesel ships.
He is a graduate of the Dutch Army Transportation Corps
Officers Academy.Steve Valerius is executive vice president of Hollywood
Marine, Incorporated, one of the largest tank barge compa-
nies in the United States.  He is active in numerous marine

industry organizations, serving on the boards of directors of
the American Waterways Operators, Texas Waterway Op-
erators Association, and Louisiana Association of Waterway
Operators.  He is an advisory director of LaPorte State Bank

and a member of the Texas General Land Office Oil Spill
Commission.  Mr. Valerius is also chairman of the Execu-

tive Committee of the Galveston Bay Foundation.  He is a

graduate of the University of Texas at Austin and has a J.D.
degree from the South Texas College of Law in Houston.Cameron Williams is vice president for academic affairs atthe Massachusetts Maritime Academy.  He is also a profes-

sor in the Joint Diploma Programme in Shipping and Port
Management, Graduate College of Marine Studies, Univer-
sity of Delaware and Singapore Port Institute.  Previously,

he taught marine transportation, economics, and marketing
at the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy.  He holds U.S. Coast

Guard licenses as master of steam and motor vessels up to
1,600 tons (oceans), second mate of vessels of any tonnage
(oceans), and radar observer.  He is also a captain in the U.S.

Naval Reserve, specializing in naval control of shipping and
convoy operations.  He is a member of the Academic Advi-
sory Committee and Intermodal Association of North
America and a past member of the Chief of Naval Opera-
tions Advisory Board for Naval Control and Protection of
Shipping.  Dr. Williams has a B.S. degree in marine trans-

portation from the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, an M.A.
degree in business management (marketing) from Central
Michigan University, and a Ph.D. degree in business admin-
istration (marketing) from the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill.Russell Woodill is executive vice president and nationalpositions chairman for the Council of American Master
Mariners, which represents more than 1,500 shipmasters and
pilots.  He is also master of the Sea-Land 
Performance,which trades internationally and is one of the largest con-
tainer ships in the world.  He has been active in the U.S.

Merchant Marine for nearly 30 years, rising through the
ranks of junior officers to his current position of licensed
shipmaster, unlimited tonnage, any ocean.  Captain Woodill

has expertise in marine navigation, ship management, ship
construction, cargo requirements, and vessel operations.  He

has a B.S. degree from the Massachusetts Maritime
Academy.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B4141APPENDIXBExcerpt fromThe National Dialog on Vessel Traffic ServicesApril 1997PREAMBLEIn January 1997, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) conveneda national dialog with maritime and port community stake-
holders1 to identify the needs of waterway users with re-
spect to Vessel Traffic Service (VTS) systems or other means
of ensuring the safety of navigation in U.S. ports and water-
ways.2 The stakeholders, representing all major sectors of
the U.S. and foreign-flag maritime industry, port authorities,
pilots, the environmental community, and the USCG, were
asked to provide guidance on the following issues:¥the information needs of a mariner to ensure a safe pas-
sage;¥the process that should be used to identify candidate
ports for the installation of VTS systems; and¥the basic elements of a VTS, where such a system is
determined to be necessary.A list of all participants in the stakeholder dialogue isattached. Under the auspices of the Marine Board of the

National Research Council (NRC), the group held four meet-
ings between January and March 1997. This document is
not an official report of the NRC, which has neither endorsed
nor taken any other official position on its contents.The national dialog was intended to provide the foundationfor the development of an approach to VTS that would meetthe shared government, industry, and public objective of
ensuring the safety of vessel traffic in U.S. ports and water-
ways, in a technologically sound and cost-effective way. It is
important for the United States to move forward in develop-
ing and implementing such an approach so as to remain at
the forefront of maritime safety.Underlying PremisesThe responses of dialog participants to the specific ques-tions posed to them were based on the following underlying
premises:¥The primary goal of a VTS system is to ensure the
safety of vessel traffic in U.S. ports and waterways and
to protect the marine environment by ensuring that the
mariner has the information necessary to prevent or
avoid collisions, allisions, and groundings. By promot-
ing safe navigation, a VTS also fosters the goal of effi-
cient navigation. A VTS should have the capability to
interact with traffic and respond to traffic situations in
its area.¥Existing aids to navigation; charts, radar, VHF radios,
publications, and other navigation tools; pilotage sys-
tems; navigation regulations, including the Interna-
tional and Inland Navigation Rules; current licensing
and training requirements for mariners; existing navi-
gation management systems; and existing USCG regu-
latory authority and enforcement practices make a sig-
nificant contribution to the safety of navigation in U.S.
ports and waterways today. These existing tools serve
to ensure a high level of safety and environmental pro-
tection, and therefore, VTS systems are not needed in
all ports.¥In some ports, additional tools may be necessary to en-
sure an acceptable level of safety and environmental
protection. These tools may include a VTS system. The
specific needs of individual ports to ensure safe
1 These stakeholders included: the Natural Resources Defense Council,
U.S. Chamber of Shipping, American Association of Port Authorities, Pas-
senger Vessel Association, Council of American Master Mariners, Ameri-can Pilots Association, American Waterways Operators, INTERTANKO,and U.S. Coast Guard.2 This summary uses the International Maritime Organization (IMO)
definition of VTS as Òa service implemented by a competent authority de-signed to improve safety and efficiency of vessel traffic and to protect the
environment. The service should have the capability to interact with thetraffic and to respond to traffic situations developing in the VTS area.Ó  In
its proposed Guidelines for VTS, the IMO defines Òcompetent authorityÓ as
Òthe authority made responsible, in whole or in part, by the government forthe safety, including environmental safety, and efficiency of vessel trafficand protection of the environment.ÓApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42APPENDIX Bnavigation may vary given port and waterway trafficcharacteristics. However, certain common elements of
a VTS (where such systems are deemed necessary) may
be applied.¥The decision to establish a VTS in a given port shouldbe made cooperatively by the USCG and the port user/
stakeholder community. It is not the intention of dialog
participants to invalidate existing navigation safety sys-
tems established by states, pilot associations, or other
entities but rather to provide guidelines for the imple-
mentation of future VTS systems.¥Every mariner has the responsibility to operate vesselsin a safe manner. In addition, the USCG has the statu-
tory obligation to ensure the safety and environmental
protection of U.S. ports and waterways. The USCG is
the federal agency with primary responsibility for en-
suring port safety and as such should play the leading
role by ensuring that the marinerÕs navigation informa-tion needs for safe passage are being met.¥Waterways users are seeking enhanced navigation ca-pabilities that would be compatible with new VTS sys-
tems but that would also have utility beyond a VTS-
covered area. Safe navigation and environmental pro-
tection outside of port boundariesÑin coastal waters,rivers and other inland waterways, as well as on the
high seasÑare equally important.¥Dialog participants strongly endorse the widespread useof Automatic Identification Systems (AIS) employing
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) and on-
board transponder technologies. These technologies
provide a foundation for effective navigation safety,
both within and outside areas where VTS systems are
determined to be necessary. They also provide for im-
proved vessel-to-vessel information exchange in ports
and waterways in which no VTS system is established.
Dialog participants believe that national use of AIS
technology on the greatest number of vessels is essen-
tial both as a foundation of a VTS system, where such a
system is necessary, and as the basis for improving
navigation safety. Dialog participants strongly urge the
USCG to take the lead both domestically and interna-
tionally in developing equipment and procedural stan-
dards that will promote universal use of AIS technol-
ogy. Although port conditions and user/stakeholder

needs may favor the establishment of VTS systems in
selected ports, dialog participants believe that wide-

spread use of AIS can serve as an effective navigation
safety system.Basic Information Needs of a Mariner to Ensure aSafe PassageDialog participants identified the following as the basicinformation needs of a mariner to ensure a safe passage:1.up-to-date knowledge and/or information regarding
the route to be transited;2.timely, relevant, and accurate information about
other vessels within the area that might affect safety
or the decision making of the mariner (this informa-
tion should include vessel identity, type, size, posi-
tion, course, and speed);3.timely information about emergency and environ-
mental conditions that might affect safety or the de-
cision making of the mariner;4.reliable bridge-to-bridge communications; and

5.transmission of relevant information to the mariner
in a manner that does not distract from the task at
hand, particularly in narrow, confined channels
where there is heavy traffic.Existing navigation aids and tools, pilotage systems, naviga-tion management systems, and regulations may be sufficient
to provide this information effectively to a mariner given the
characteristics of a particular port.Factors to be Considered in Determining Whethera VTS is NecessaryAs noted above, dialog participants agreed that existingnavigation aids and tools, pilotage systems, navigation man-
agement systems, and regulations may be adequate to meet a
marinerÕs information needs for safe operations in a givenport. Dialog participants agreed that the process of deter-
mining whether a VTS is necessary in a particular port should
include the USCG and port users/stakeholders. Questions to
be considered in making this determination include, but are
not necessarily limited to, the following:1.What existing local navigation management systems
are in place and how effective are they?2.What are the existing or likely future conditions in
the port with respect to traffic density, traffic
patterns, and complexity of traffic or vessel
movements?3.What are the sizes, types, and numbers of vessels
operating in the port area?4.What is the history (including the causes) of acci-
dents, casualties, pollution incidents, and other ves-
sel safety problems within the port area?5.What are the physical limitations of the port?

6.What types and amounts of hazardous or environ-
mentally sensitive cargoes are transported within the
port?7.What are the prevailing conditions and extremes of
weather and oceanography in the port?8.What are the environmental, safety, and economic
consequences of having or not having a VTS within
the port?Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B43Dialog participants agreed that the USCG should usethese questions to conduct an initial screening and identify
ports which might be candidates for a VTS. Port users/
stakeholders should be engaged to consider these questions
in more detail and to determine whether a VTS is in fact
necessary in a given port.Basic Elements of a VTSWhere the USCG and local stakeholders determine that aVTS is necessary, dialog participants identified several ba-
sic elements that such systems should include. Within the
framework provided by these elements, local variations may
be needed to meet the particular needs of a given port com-
munity. However, vessel-based equipment required for par-
ticipation in a VTS should be consistent from one port to
another and should have utility outside port boundaries.Where the need for a VTS system has been identified, itshould include the following elements:1.A 
VTS should be based upon AIS technology as ameans to provide timely, relevant, and accurate navi-
gation information to the mariner. Widespread use of
vessel transponders that use DGPS for positioning is
essential to a VTS system for three reasons:
a)AIS technologies will improve safe navigation
both inside and outside of a VTS area;b)Information collection and transmission by the
VTS will be less intrusive and distracting to the
mariner than will a voice-based control system;
and,c)DGPS-based transponder systems are gaining
worldwide acceptance as an effective and cost-
effective means of vessel-to-vessel and vessel-
to-shore information exchange.2.Local conditions may require the use of other sur-veillance and communications technologies.3.With emphasis on minimizing distractions, the com-
mon goal of dialog participants, including the USCG,
is to fully employ AIS technology to minimize voicecommunications in a VTS area. Dialog participants
believe that use of AIS technology should largely
obviate the need for USCG-to-vessel voice commu-
nication except in navigation emergency situations.
The VTS system should be as transparent to the mari-

ner and to the USCG as possible.4.AIS technology should be applied in a cost-effective manner using commercially available tech-
nology in an open architecture. Successful imple-
mentation of an AIS-based VTS system will depend
on adherence to the following guidelines:
a)The federal government should 
develop anddistribute accurate electronic navigation in-
formation, including¥up-to-date navigation charts in electronicformat;¥DGPS broadcasts; and,¥timely updates of information, includingUSCG Notices to Mariners, in electronic
format where appropriate.The USCG should develop standards for reliable,electronic vessel-to-vessel and vessel-to-shore in-
formation exchange that minimize voice communi-
cation and that can provide essential information to
the mariner both within and outside designated ports
or VTS areas.¥Standards should be performance-based, allow-
ing the use of technology and equipment that is
commercially available on a competitive basis.¥Information system requirements should becompatible nationwide and, preferably, inter-
nationally.b)Timely and appropriate emergency and envi-ronmental information should be provided in a
compatible format.5.To be effective, 
a VTS system should be imple-mented by a competent authority. The USCGÕsinvolvement, at a minimum, means the promulga-
tion and enforcement of minimum technical stan-
dards, promulgation and enforcement of on-board
equipment requirements, and responsibility for se-
curing, if necessary, adequate spectrum capacity for

operation of the system. USCG involvement in a
VTS system should not preclude VTS partnership
options and cooperative arrangements with other
entities such as state governments, port authorities,
or pilot associations.6.The competent authorityÕs fulfillment of statutoryobligations and enforcement of mandatory par-
ticipation may require some level of shoreside
oversight. The level of oversight needed will vary
from port to port; however, this oversight component
should take full advantage of AIS technology as the
primary means for monitoring waterway activities
and vessel movements in the port to avoid potentially
burdensome and costly systems. In general, dialog
participants believe that use of AIS technology will
greatly reduce the number of shoreside personnel and
other resources needed for effective involvement in a
VTS. The USCGÕs use of VTS to accomplish relatedmissions and responsibilities should not interfere
with the primary goal of promoting safe navigation.7.VTS systems should be 
compatible with interna-tional guidelines for VTS.
Participation (including the carriage of AIS-compatible
equipment and technology) should be mandatory for ves-
sels identified in 33 CFR Part 161 (all vessels greater than 20Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44APPENDIX Bmeters, vessels greater than 8 meters while engaged in tow-ing, and vessels certified to carry 50 or more passengers).3ATTACHMENT C-1ADDITIONAL COMMENTS OF THE NATURALRESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCILApril 24, 1997The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) hasthe following additional comments to make regarding the
National Dialogue on Vessel Traffic Services Summary
Guidance document, dated April, 1997.  NRDC represented

by Sarah Chasis participated in the national dialogue, con-
vened by the U.S. Coast Guard, to discuss Vessel Traffic
Service (VTS) systems to enhance safety for our nationÕswaterways.On page 3 of the draft Guidance document, we have prob-lems with the wording of the last sentence of the first full
paragraph (ÒAlthough...).  We favor substituting the follow-
ing sentence: ÒThe stakeholders believe that AIS has utilityboth as the foundation of a VTS system (where such a sys-
tem has been determined to be necessary) and as the basis3 According to 33 CFR Part 161, vessels greater than 40 meters must
participate but vessels greater than 20 meters must monitor the system. Tomonitor an AIS system, a vessel requires the related equipment. Therefore,participation is in effect required of vessels greater than 20 metersfor improved vessel-to-vessel information exchange in portsand waterways in which no VTS system is established.Ó  We
believe this better reflects the value of Advanced Informa-
tion SystemsÑeither as a basis for a VTS system or for im-proved navigational safety in the absence of a VTS system.
We do not believe that AIS is a substitute for VTS systems.On page 4, we have problems with the suggestion in eachof the paragraphs that the Coast Guard and port users deter-mine whether a VTS is necessary in a particular port.  The
Coast Guard has the legal duty to protect safety and the envi-
ronment in the nationÕs waterways and, therefore, it must be
the one to determine whether a VTS is necessary.  This de-

termination should be made in consultation with Òlocal stake-holdersÓ (who, we believe, should include environmentalists
and other interested in protecting the marine environment),
but ultimately it is the Coast Guard who must decide.Finally, in the discussion on the last page regarding whatconstitutes a VTS, it should be made clear that a VTS system
provides for control over vessel movements by the compe-tent authority, that it requires shoreside oversight of vessel
traffic and that, while AIS technology may be an integral
part of VTS, it is not always necessarily the 
primary means
of monitoring vessel movements.We appreciate this opportunity to provide these additional
comments.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C4545APPENDIXCMaritime Advanced Information SystemsPuget Sound RegionREGIONAL CHARACTERISTICSThe Puget Sound region includes two major container and
general cargo ports, Seattle and Tacoma.  These two ports

combined rank second in volume of container traffic among
U.S. ports on the West Coast.  Besides containers, Seattle

and Tacoma also handle a variety of other cargoes, such as
lumber, automobiles, fruit, and grain.  The smaller ports in

Cherry Point, Ferndale, Bellingham, Anacortes, Port Ange-
les, Port Townsend, Everett, and Olympia handle petroleum
and forest products.The northern seaward entrance to Puget Sound is throughthe Strait of Juan de Fuca, which is the U.S.-Canadian bor-
der.  The strait is also the entrance to the Canadian port of

Vancouver to the north.  Seattle is approximately 125 miles
down the strait from the ocean, and Tacoma is approximately
150 miles from the ocean.Major oil terminals receiving tanker shipments fromAlaska and elsewhere are located in the northern section of
Puget Sound, which is also home to a large deep-sea and
local fishing fleet, several major U.S. Navy installations, and

a substantial coastal freighter fleet.  In addition, many pas-

senger and car ferries operate throughout the region because
of the numerous large bodies of water separating population
centers.Because of its natural beauty, Puget Sound is highly re-garded as a recreational boating center, and pleasure boat
traffic is substantial.  The local population is very concerned

with protecting the environment of the sound and numerous
other adjacent waterways.  Dating back at least to 1935,
1 the
state of Washington has imposed special requirements for
shipping in state waters to protect the environment and natu-
ral resources.The Puget Sound waterways are subject to a variety ofweather and oceanographic conditions, including storms,strong currents, and low visibility due to rain and seasonal
fog.  Although the main channels are deep and wide, naviga-

tion in some waterways in ports is restricted by vessel size
and draft.  Because of the diversity in vessel types and sizes

in the area, mariners must exercise extreme care in monitor-
ing other vessel traffic.  The substantial numbers of ferry

operations, often crossing at right angles to the shipping

lanes, present special traffic management problems.The ports of Seattle and Tacoma are mainly Òlandlordports,Ó owning and leasing property for terminal opera-
tions.  The major container terminals are operated by large

steamship lines (e.g., Sea-Land, American President Lines,
Hanjin, NYK, Maersk) and certain independent terminal
operators, such as Stevedoring Services of America.  The

Port AuthorityÕs role is to serve as a catalyst for economic
growth and job creation through port development and the
expansion of private industry.  The port has substantial in-

vestments in land and certain capital improvements but is
not responsible for day-to-day operations of terminals or
other facilities.SUMMARY OF MARITIME INFORMATIONSYSTEMSA committee work group held a one-day meeting in thePort of Seattle.  Representatives of government and industry

organizations that provide or use certain key port or terminal
information systems were invited.  Participants included the

U.S. Coast Guard, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration, Washington State Office of Marine Safety,
Puget Sound ferry operators, terminal operators, and the
marine exchange.  The major systems they use are described

below.U.S. Coast GuardThe vessel traffic service (VTS) system in Puget Sound isone of the most comprehensive systems operated by the U.S.1 In the state Pilotage Act of 1935, Òthe legislature finds and declares that
it is the policy of the state of Washington to prevent loss of human lives,loss of property and vessels, and to protect the marine environment throughthe sound application of compulsory pilotage . . .ÓApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46APPENDIX CCoast Guard (USCG).  It covers an extensive geographic
region that includes a number of harbors and cooperates with
the Canadian Coast Guard in monitoring vessel traffic along
the international border.  The Vessel Traffic Center (VTC)

in Seattle receives signals from 12 strategically located radar
sites throughout the Puget Sound area.  These radars cover

approximately 2,900 square miles, including the Strait of
Juan de Fuca, Rosario Strait, Admiralty Inlet, and Puget
Sound south to Commencement Bay at Tacoma.  In addi-

tion, several critical waterways are covered by closed-circuit
television.This system has been in continuous operation since 1972,and participation has been mandatory for certain vessels
since 1974.  (All powered vessels more than 40 meters in

length, tugs more than 8 meters in length, and vessels carry-
ing 50 or more passengers are required to participate.)  The

three major components of the VTS are the surveillance net-
work, a traffic separation scheme (as adopted by the Inter-
national Maritime Organization), and a vessel movement
reporting system.  The reporting system uses a VHF-FM

communications network with 10 low-elevation, low-power
sites and 3 high-elevation, high-power sites continuously
maintained by the VTC in Seattle.  The VTS operators pro-

cess all information received from vessels and disseminate
all navigational safety information to mariners who ask for
or require it.The VTS data management, processing, and display sys-tems were recently upgraded and, according to most users
and the local maritime community, they now provide excel-
lent traffic monitoring and oversight, as well as safety in the
region.  The system has broad support even though the avail-

able analyses of benefits are subjective and rely on anecdotal
evidence.  One drawback is the lack of compatibility

betweenthe current software and other Windows-based

systems and databases; improvements are planned in that
regard.Plans for future enhancements include the addition of anautomatic identification system (AIS), which will enable the
VTC to receive continuous identification and tracking infor-
mation from each vessel equipped with a transponder and
will eliminate the need for voice communications for identi-
fication.  The local USCG office and the state ferry system

are participating in demonstrations and tests of using tran-
sponders on ferries.  Experience to date indicates that AIS

offers benefits both in terms of safety and improved ferry
operations, and discussions are under way to move ahead
with adopting a specific system.Although the Puget Sound VTS system is achieving itsmission of safe traffic management and aiding navigation, it
operates as a self-contained system, with virtually no elec-
tronic connection to other maritime information systems in
the regional port complex.  For example, every two hours

VTC operators fax a report on vessels in the system to the
local marine exchange, which maintains a database on ship
arrivals and departures.  It is theoretically (and probably
technically) possible to link the VTS data directly with themarine exchange database, but this option has not been
explored because the USCG is concerned about unauthorized
access to its data.The USCG does not even integrate its own informationsystems.  There is no electronic data link between the VTC

and the local USCG Marine Safety Office (MSO); instead,
the data are exchanged by fax.  The MSO operates the ma-

rine safety information system, which was developed in the
1970s and is difficult to integrate with other databases.  These

information systems do not provide adequate support for the
ship inspectors, who must sort through numerous paper docu-
ments to check a vesselÕs accident history.  Similarly, the
USCG maintains paper records of hazardous materials noti-
fications for all vessels entering the port.National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationThe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA) performs its traditional maritime information ser-
vices, including hydrographic surveys and nautical charting,
weather forecasting, and operation of tidal gauges.  Weather

information, forecasts, and tidal gauge data have recently

been available to all users over the Internet.  Updated survey

information is made available to local pilots, and electronic
charts are already available for the region.Because local mariners do not seem willing to support anextensive physical oceanographic real-time system (PORTS)
in the region, NOAA operates a modest system, which in-
cludes user-accessible tidal gauges at three locations.  The

ports of Seattle and Tacoma have been encouraged to con-
tribute to system maintenance.NOAA also is engaged in a variety of local research andinvestigations to promote safe marine transportation and pre-
vent environmental damage.  NOAA
Õs other responsibilitiesinclude tracking the movement of oil spills and evaluating
their effects on sensitive areas.  Because the relevant data

systems have to be coordinated with the rest of the maritime
community, NOAA works closely with local stakeholders
and supports the collection of data on marine casualties.Washington State Department of EcologyThe Washington State Department of Ecology is respon-sible for enforcing certain state regulations governing vessel
transits within state waters and certain required safety fea-
tures.  The office has developed a system to evaluate the

potential environmental threat posed by a vessel, based on
factors such as age, flag state, and casualty history.  Informa-

tion from the USCG, LloydÕs, and other sources is enteredinto the system.  The agency screens vessels entering the

sound and selects certain ones to board and inspect based on
the risk factors determined by the model.  In addition, a near-

miss reporting system is being developed as another
accident-prevention tool.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C47Representatives of this office assert that a central data-base for the entire region, accessible to everyone, would help
reduce vessel accidents and protect the marine environment.
To achieve this vision, greater cooperation would be required
among federal and local agencies and the industry, and ex-
isting databases would have to be linked (requiring improve-
ments in interfaces and systems compatibility).  Data from

the American Waterways Operators and the Washington
State Pilotage Commission could also be included.Washington State Ferry SystemThe high volume of ferry traffic on numerous waterwaysin the Puget Sound region poses unique challenges for vessel
management.  The state ferry system operates 25 vessels that

engage in a total of 450 to 550 trips per day, depending on
the season.  Many of these transits take place in busy port

regions, and routes typically cross the major shipping lanes.
Safety is a primary concern to the operators.All ferries participate in the VTS system, which providesimportant safety information.  Recent tests of transponders

aboard ferries suggest that this technology enhances the VTS
systemÕs capabilities and may also improve operational effi-ciency and customer service.  The ferry operators are now

considering whether to make transponders a permanent part
of their operations and evaluating the various purposes for
which they might be used.  For example, it might be possible

to track each vesselÕs position and estimated time of arrivalat a terminal continuously and accurately.  This information

could be used to manage automobile traffic at terminals and
provide customers with up-to-date information about traffic
delays and other particulars.  Thus, it may be possible to

justify the cost of a complete transponder tracking system
based on both business and safety concerns.  Currently AIS

is only installed on selected ferries.Container Terminal OperationsSeveral major container terminals are located in the portsof Seattle and Tacoma.  Each has an information system that

provides data on cargo entering and leaving the terminal and
manages the cargo data needed by ocean and land carriers,
shippers, agents, and government agencies.  Most systems

are automated and are electronically connected with the U.S.
Customs Service system.  The terminal information systems

are usually internal to an organization and contain propri-
etary data.  Independent terminal operators handle cargo

from many ocean carriers and must accommodate the sys-
tems used by each one.  Several large terminals are operated

by ocean carriers themselves and, therefore, can readily inte-
grate ship-to-terminal information flow.The terminal operated by American President Lines is ex-perimenting with a satellite-tracking and container-tagging
system that is capable of providing location information within
four feet for each container, in a terminal (or any other location
with an electronic relay station nearby).  The system appears
to offer substantial benefits in terms of improving the man-
agement of cargo movements within terminals.  Whether this
system can be used efficiently to track containers on vessels
and land carriers depends on the value of the information com-
pared to the cost and difficulty of obtaining it.Puget Sound Marine ExchangeThe Puget Sound Marine Exchange is active in this portregion.  It maintains data on commercial vessels, their move-

ments, and their projected and actual port arrival and depar-
ture times.  These data are supplied to a variety of users in

the marine industry.  The marine exchange is thus an infor-

mation broker of increasing importance.  It is one of four

marine exchanges on the West Coast that recently formed a
cooperative organization known as the Maritime Informa-
tion System of North America.  The partners are currently

sharing data on vessel movements and locations through the
Internet in an effort to improve both the accuracy and time-
liness of information.  They also plan to discuss the concept

with marine exchanges in other areas of the United States
interested in inproving data exchange.  The marine exchange

database is not linked electronically to the VTS system.  Nor

is it linked to the data system operated by local pilots.Another project developed by the Puget Sound MarineExchange on behalf of vessel owners and operators is the
international tug of opportunity system (ITOS).  This project

is an industry response to a proposal for a dedicated standby
tug stationed at the entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca to
assist tankers and other vessels during emergencies.  The

ITOS was proposed by stakeholders as a less costly and more
effective alternative to the dedicated, standby tug.Under ITOS, the marine exchange maintains a database onthe location and capabilities of all tugs in the region at all
times, manages an emergency response plan, and notifies the
right persons to dispatch a capable tug to the scene in case of
an incident.  The program requires both an automated data

system and an accurate vessel tracking system.  A transponder-

based tracking system has been proposed for the tugs.  An AIS

(different from the ferry system) is currently installed on tugs

and other craft and is being evaluated.The marine exchange is developing information systemsthat serve the local and regional maritime community as a
nonprofit organization offering fee-based services.  It is the

only industry organization that integrates information flow
for customers who pay for the service.  The marine exchange

is investigating whether the collection and dissemination of
real-time data on water depth would be supported by industry.Puget Sound PilotsThe Puget Sound Pilotage District is managed by theWashington State Board of Pilotage Commission under state
regulations.  Pilots must pass a rigorous examination and
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48APPENDIX Cdemonstrate both a high level of knowledge and the appro-priate and accurate use of that knowledge.  They use many

sources of navigational information, including Coast Pilots,Light Lists, applicable excerpts from the Code of FederalRegulations, NOAA charts, U.S. Army Corps of Engineerssurveys, berth surveys from port and terminal operators, and
maritime reference manuals and textbooks.On-duty pilots are assigned to vessels by dispatchers us-ing a special computer system.  This system is accessible to
dispatchers at the Seattle office during working hours and at
their homes by modem after hours and on weekends.  The

system is also accessible to pilots and boatmen standing by
at the Port Angeles pilot station, and by pilots from their
homes when standing by for outbound assignments.  The

system provides the following primary functions:¥transmits orders to dispatchers and provides a list ofpending and assigned vessel movements¥calculates billing amounts from pilotage tariffs and pre-pares invoices¥maintains a vessel database that dispatchers can verifyand update based on the vessel itself, a printed LloydÕsList, and other sources¥maintains a database of predicted tides and currents andcalculates tide levels at scheduled departure and arrival
times¥stores and maintains assignment information (e.g.,
berth spotting criteria, number of tugs assigned, nameof tug company) relayed from the vessel master oragent¥provides dispatchers with information needed to assignrested pilots¥uses historical data to forecast the end of assignmenttime and total pilot requirements so that off-duty pilots
can be called, if necessary, to accommodate heavy ves-
sel traffic¥creates reports required by the state of pilot assignments,rest periods, and analysis of assignments and billing
used to substantiate manning levels and tariff adjustmentsThe pilot dispatch computer system also incorporateswarnings, which are activated if a dispatcher enters data that
exceeds set limits, such as a vessel draft.  The system also

provides a warning if a vessel is bound for a berth that is
already occupied.  This design allows the dispatcher to

coordinate vessel arrival and departure times with each
vesselÕs agent and thus minimize delays.  Certain warnings
may be reviewed by the pilot association president, who
advises on the most appropriate transit times and other

aspects of vessel movement.In addition to using the computer system, dispatchers alsoverify scheduling of vessel movements by telephone with
the marine exchange, tug companies, and others to minimize
conflicts and delays. Also, the arrival times of vessels under
way are obtained from the VTS system or directly from the
vessel by VHF radio or a pilotÕs cellular telephone.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D4949APPENDIXDMaritime Information SystemsPort of Charleston, South CarolinaPORT CHARACTERISTICSThe Port of Charleston, South Carolina, is the second larg-est (after New York/New Jersey) container port on the U.S.
East Coast.  The port serves a brisk trade in container, bulk,
and chemical products at both private and public terminals
along the banks of two of the three rivers that converge at the
port.  A growing volume of vessel traffic poses challenges

with regard to physical space, traffic management, and in-
formation systems that will have to be solved for the port to
grow, remain competitive, and operate safely.  In this way,

Charleston is representative of many U.S. ports.As a river port, Charleston is affected by seasonal flowlevels of the Ashley, Cooper, and Wando rivers, as well as
twice-daily variations in ocean tides.  The interaction of

flowing, freshwater rivers with ocean tidal fluctuations gen-
erates unpredictable currents.  Silting from the rivers creates

a constant need to maintain berth and channel depths.  In

addition, differences in water temperatures contribute to sea-
sonal fog.Most of the private berths and all three public terminalsare located very close to dense population centers.  The Co-

lumbus Street terminal is approximately one mile from the
Charleston city center.  The cityÕs status as a major tourist

attraction has generated a great deal of concern about the
presence of oil, chemicals, and hazardous commodities and
the potential threats these materials represent to nearby resi-
dents, tourists, and the environment.Protection of the environment is a serious matter to thecitizens of Charleston.  The tourist industry is based in large

measure on the scenic beauty of the city, the harbor, and
rivers.  Wildlife is abundant and varied.  A substantial boat-

ing industry and thriving commercial fishing industry use
the port, rivers, and the surrounding coastal areas.  Aqua-

culture is being developed nearby, and seafood is a staple of
Carolina low-country diets.MARITIME INFORMATION SYSTEMSIn June 1996, a work group of the Committee on Mari-time Advanced Information Systems interviewed represen-
tatives of 16 organizations1 with interests in port activities
to determine the capabilities and deficiencies of the informa-
tion systems.  Based on the information collected, the work

group made the following general observations:¥No single resource or authority is responsible for
coordinating or promoting the use of advanced infor-
mation technology in the Port of Charleston.¥A wide range of relevant and important information is
available, but it is not being fully exploited to optimize
the safety and efficiency of maritime transportation.¥Stakeholders are generally satisfied with the quality and
amount of information they receive or have access to,
but they believe that current levels will not be adequate
in the future as the port expands.  They say additional
relevant, real-time information would be useful now,
but only if it is selective and easy to obtain.  All stake-
holders acknowledge that advanced navigation and in-
formation systems would enhance the safety and effi-
ciency of what is generally considered a safe and well
run port.¥With the exception of the portÕs Orion system for pro-
cessing U.S. Customs Service data, very little informa-
tion is exchanged among stakeholders by computer or1 Charleston Port Authority; Sea-Land Service, Inc.; Carolina ShippingCo.; Charleston Marine Exchange; Charleston Harbor Pilots; Charlestonharbormaster; U.S. Coast Guard; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-ministration; National Weather Service; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;
U.S. Customs Service; U.S. Naturalization and Immigration Service; Caro-lina Port Police; Mount Pleasant Fire Department; Coastal Carolina Coun-cil; and the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50APPENDIX Dthe Internet.  Most information exchanges take place
by fax, with telephone calls and mailed newsletters as
alternatives.¥With the exception of the Orion system, most stake-holders use hardware and software that meets their own
information needs.  Very little, if any, consideration

has been given to developing information systems that
are accessible by other local port stakeholders or are
network compatible.¥No single organization is capable of developing anoverarching port information infrastructure without
substantial financial and technical assistance from other
sources.INFORMATION SYSTEMS BY ORGANIZATIONU.S. Coast GuardIn Charleston, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) fulfills itstraditional roles and is an active participant in most port ad-
visory committees.  Charleston does not have a vessel traffic

services (VTS) system and is not a candidate for a VTS sys-
tem in the eyes of either the USCG or the local port commu-
nity.  Except in emergencies, vessel traffic management is

left to the pilots and waterways users.The  USCG does provide some real-time information ser-
vices within the port.  When notified that a navigational aid is

extinguished, missing, or improperly located, the USCG noti-
fies waterways users through the local navigational warning
broadcasts on radio channel 22A.  If they miss the broadcast,

then waterways users can obtain the information by calling
the local USCG office, accessing the NAVINFONET, or read-
ing the next Notice to Mariners.  (The USCG reports the prob-
lem to the Miami office for inclusion in the notices, which are
updated weekly and mailed to subscribers.)  The Charleston

USCG office is creating a Web site and intends to include
some of this information.  Most port stakeholders say that

timely reporting of this information is a low priority.The USCG appears on all the National Weather Service(NWS) severe weather warning checklists and can rebroad-
cast information as a navigational warning as well as take
the appropriate actions regarding waterways safety.U.S. Customs ServiceThe U.S. Customs Service, working with the port author-ity, has been a leader in using advanced technology to pro-
mote efficiency.  This agency has long collected cargo mani-fests electronically and provided pre-arrival and departure
clearances of cargo, either through its own automated sys-
tems or through the Charleston Port AuthorityÕs Orion Sys-tem (described below).  The U.S. Customs Service appears

to be moving steadily toward a paperless system that takes
full advantage of available technology.National Weather ServiceThe Charleston office of the NWS serves the local mari-time community in a number of ways.  It provides the fore-

cast information for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) weather radio broadcasts, includ-
ing a specific Charleston harbor forecast.  Weather forecasts

can also be obtained by telephone recordings, which are up-
dated several times a day.  The Charleston station is manned

around the clock and accepts calls requesting information.The office maintains four severe weather warning calllists: (1) a special marine warning checklist, (2) a winter
storm/high winds watch/warning checklist, (3) a tornado/
severe thunderstorm/flash flood watch/warning checklist,
and (4) a coastal flood watch/warning checklist . The USCG,
harbor pilots, and South Carolina Ports Authority appear on
every checklist and are contacted by the NWS whenever se-
vere weather is forecasted.  Conditions favorable for harbor
and coastal fog are also relayed to the checklist participants.The NWS provides their weather radar picture to severalapproved and contracted vendors, which market the image
and information to the maritime community.  Updated radar

information can be viewed on a computer monitor in near
real time.  The pilots were the only stakeholders interviewed

who used this service.U.S. Army Corps of EngineersThe U.S. Army Corps of Engineers generates consider-able waterways information.  The Corps is involved in

several proposed dredging projects, and the hydrographic
information generated is made available to the Charleston
maritime community by mail.CHARLESTON PORT AUTHORITYThe Charleston Port Authority uses its Orion System forU.S. Customs Service pre-arrival and departure clearances,
as well as for inventory control.  Initially, stakeholder par-

ticipation in Orion was mandatory in the port.  However, the

system has since been eclipsed by the U.S. Customs
ServiceÕs systems,  and larger commercial stakeholders can
now bypass Orion and go directly to these more sophisti-
cated systems for clearance.  Smaller commercial stakehold-

ers who cannot afford a direct Customs interface still use
Orion.  The port authority intends to upgrade this prototype

system and perhaps expand its functions to promote effi-
ciency and keep the system viable.Information concerning traffic congestion, berth space,navigational warnings, draft restrictions, and severe weather
is gathered and exchanged by telephone and fax on an as-
needed basis.  The port authority does appear on the NWS

severe weather warning lists.  The port authority, harbor-

master, and pilots coordinate their information by telephoneApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D51and fax.  The port authority is considering expanding Orionto capture and distribute some of this information to its cus-
tomers.An advantage of Orion is the capability for local control ofthe cargo information database.  Information passing through

Orion is captured, stored, and used for analysis of port activi-
ties.  Real-time cargo-related information, including a run-

ning inventory of hazardous commodities, is also available.
Unfortunately, hazardous-cargo information is not readily ac-
cessible and is not currently transferable to those responsible
for responding to an emergency.  For example, in the event of

a terminal fire, a list of the hazardous materials currently lo-
cated in the terminal would have to be printed out by person-
nel capable of operating the system who would then meet the
arriving Mount Pleasant firefighters.  It is not clear how well

this approach would work in the middle of the night, for ex-
ample, when no cargo operations were under way.Charleston HarbormasterThe Charleston harbormaster, an employee of the SouthCarolina Ports Authority, coordinates the docking and un-
docking of vessels calling on Charleston harbor.  The

harbormaster relies heavily on telephone and fax messages.
Although not specifically listed on the NWS severe weather
warning call lists, the harbormaster can call the NWS or
pilots to ask about weather conditions or can obtain faxed
information from the port authority.The harbormaster is in a unique position.  In the event of
an emergency, this individual is expected to provide infor-
mation that may, or may not, be obtainable.  For example, if

a container of hazardous material falls over the side of a
vessel docked at a public terminal, then the harbormaster, in
conjunction with the port police and USCG, is responsible
for the recovery of the container and cargo.  Yet there is

almost no real-time information available concerning tidal
stage or the direction and strength of currents.  If spills of

hazardous materials are within the harbor or river system
they pose a serious threat to the port.  The need for improved,

real-time hydrographic information was expressed by the
harbormaster and others (including pilots, the port authority,
and the port police).Charleston Harbor PilotsThe information hub in Charleston is the pilots associa-tion.  Most stakeholders say they obtain waterways and har-

bor information by telephoning the pilotsÕ office.  The pilots
are normally the first to report missing or damaged naviga-
tional aids.  They are also the most well informed sources of

information on vessel arrivals, departures, and the immedi-
ate status of the harbor.  In the absence of a VTS system in

Charleston, the pilots have assumed the role of traffic man-
ager, and they play a major part in coordinating the use of
local waterways.To handle the growing volume of traffic, the pilots havecomputerized their operations and maintain a database of
customers and their vessels.  They can fax vessel arrival and

departure information to port stakeholders.  They can re-

ceive weather information by fax from the NWS and are on
the severe weather warning call list.  In addition, the pilots

subscribe to a third-party weather service that provides videoimages of local weather that can be viewed on personal com-
puters and are updated hourly.To improve the coordination of vessel arrivals with work-ing pilots, they have extended the operational range of their
VHF station out to 250 miles.  In addition, they can access

real-time information from a NOAA-operated water-level
gauge that is linked by a telephone line to the pilotsÕ office.
The water-level information is available to anyone who calls.
No information on currents is available from this station or
anywhere else in the port harbor area.The pilots find themselves playing a public relations roleof dispensing waterways information to a wide range of in-
formation seekers.  The demand for information has been

growing along with the port.  Therefore, it is no surprise that

the pilots support the formation of a local marine exchange
that could act as an information broker.Charleston Maritime Association/Marine ExchangeThe Maritime Association of Charleston is attempting toestablish a marine exchange.  The concept is still in its early

stages, and the services that would be provided have not been
fully defined.  Supporters of the marine exchange envision an

organization that will take the lead in collecting and distribut-
ing port-related information and coordinate the various portadvisory committees, of which the association is one.  Clearly,

the attempt to create a marine exchange is directly related to
the recognized need among port stakeholders for the expan-
sion, centralization, and management of information.Port advisory committees address common problems inthe area.  Existing panels include the Port Advisory Com-

mittee, Liquid Spillage Control Committee, and Maritime
Association (within which the Intermodal, Navigation, and
Operations Committee and Hazardous Materials Response
Committee operate).  Various subcommittees, such as the

Vessel Agents Subcommittee, have been established as well.
Communication among the various committees, their mem-
bers, and the larger maritime community takes place during
meetings and by telephone, fax, newsletters, and published
reports.  Computers are used very little.
Sea-Land Service, Inc.Sea-LandÕs Wando Terminal is the East Coast test bed ofthe companyÕs terminal automated system (TAS).  When
fully functional, TAS will provide the company with complete
gate, yard, and inventory control over containers enteringApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52APPENDIX Dand leaving the terminal.  At the time of the work group
Õsvisit, only the shore gate portion of the system was operable.The shore gate consists of 13 unmanned gates.  An arriv-
ing truck drives into a vacant gate and telephones a checker
located in a nearby building.  The checker records the

truckerÕs verbal information while using several scanningcameras to enter the container and chassis number into the
TAS computer.  The information is then fed into the

companyÕs mainframe computer, where it can be used asneeded for business purposes.Once through the main gate and checked into the TAS,the truck driver proceeds to another gate, where the chassis
and container are checked for damage and serviceability.  An

employee with a hand-held, short-range, radio-equipped
computer/transmitter relays the inspection information to the

TAS, and the equipment is routed into the yard or a service
area.  (The hand-held computer/transmitter was unsuccess-

ful in trials.)The number and location of a container in the yard isrecorded on paper by individuals driving through the yard.
The transfer and loading of containers through the sea gate is
also recorded by hand, on paper.The TAS is an in-house system that serves only the con-tainer information needs of Sea-Land.  Used in conjunction

with the mainframe computer, TAS does allow Sea-Land to
determine the terminal status of hazardous cargo (although
not the exact location of individual containers) and to par-
ticipate in the port authorityÕs Orion system.Information concerning port traffic congestion, naviga-tional warnings, tides and currents, and severe weather is
acquired as needed by telephone, fax, and sometimes local
weather and warning broadcasts.  Pilots are informed of ves-

sel arrival times by telephone or fax.  Sea-Land does not

receive the local NWS radar image and is not listed on the
severe weather warning list.Carolina Shipping CompanyCarolina Shipping Company uses the Orion system forU.S. Customs Service activities and, as an agent, operates its
own in-house data system.  Company officials are satisfied

with the way they gather information, even when not elec-
tronic.  For example, to determine the arrival of a vessel they

simply telephone the pilotÕs office.  This works well for
them.Representatives of the company expressed little interestin the idea of forming a local marine exchange that would
provide information (at a price).  They acknowledged that

real-time information on navigational restrictions, water
depth affecting vessel loading drafts, and severe weather
would be of some indirect value to them and would promote
a safer port.  However, they are most interested in informa-

tion that would contribute to their business mission and cost
effectiveness.South Carolina Ports PoliceLocal police and fire departments oversee the police andfire protection of private terminals.  Accordingly, the ports

police need port and cargo-specific information.  They are

among the first responders in the event of a casualty in the
water adjacent to the public terminals or  an emergency in

public terminal areas.  In the event of a fire, the police are in

charge until the firefighters arrive.Nevertheless, the police have no access to real-time portor cargo information, such as the information provided by
Orion.  Instead, they rely on terminal tenants to supply rel-

evant cargo information.  Access to this information is not

always available, and terminal personnel do not always know
what is in the individual containers.  Terminal personnel of-

ten require assistance to identify hazardous materials and
dangerous products, and they have no in-house means of
determining the appropriate first responder for a hazardous
commodity fire.  The police also expressed a need for easier

access to the information on crews and hazardous materials
for vessels berthed at a terminal.Mount Pleasant Fire DepartmentThe Mount Pleasant Fire Department is responsible forfighting fires at the Wando terminal, which is used by several
container companies.  The department also responds to fires

on board vessels alongside the terminal.  Like the police, the

fire department generally has to respond to emergencies with-
out knowing exactly what commodities are involved or what
hazardous commodities are on board.  The department does

not have direct access to cargo information systems, such as
Sea-LandÕs TAS or the Port AuthorityÕs Orion.Upon arriving at a vessel fire, firefighters rely entirely ona printed list of hazardous cargo and the capability of the
vesselÕs personnel to locate those commodities.  Crew lists,
cargo plans, ventilation systems, and safety/fire plans also
have to be provided by the vessel crew.  Firefighters could

obtain information from the terminal operator, but it would
have to be delivered by hand.  Delayed delivery of a list of

hazardous cargo clearly impedes firefighting.  Municipal

firefighters are not necessarily familiar with all of the haz-
ardous commodities carried in the international shipping
trade, and it could take some time for them to determine an
appropriate response.  To compound the apparent safety

risks, fire departments are not on the NWS severe weather
warning call lists, and none directly receives real-time har-
bor information.South Carolina Department of Natural ResourcesThe South Carolina Department of Natural Resourcesdoes not generate real-time information related to the move-
ment of cargo in Charleston, but its impact on the port isApplying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D53considerable.  Its mission includes balancing the demands of
trade with the maintenance of a healthy environment for
other marine activities in the harbor and along the coast.  The

department reviews plans for the expansion of existing ter-
minals, the location of new terminals, proposed bridges, and
vessel anchorage areas.  The discharge of vessel ballast wa-
ter into local waters is another concern of this department
that has a direct effect on vessel cargo operations.To make good decisions, the department needs real-timedata on tides and currents as well as improved hydrographic
data on bottom types, accurate location of the shoreline, and
shallow water depths.  Thus, the use of advanced informa-

tion systems would enhance its decision making regardingthe environmental parameters within which the port must
operate.  Port efficiency depends on how well trade activi-

ties can meet the challenges of environmental concerns.Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54APPENDIX E54APPENDIXEArrival-to-Departure Information ExchangeWorking Outline of Efficient Vessel Waterways NavigationUsing Advanced Technology in Systems for U.S. Ports1.Introduction
The following summary of the information exchange between ship and shore upon the arrival in or departure from a U.S.port indicates the scope of information required and the means by which data are currently obtained by ships in trans-
oceanic transit.2.Pre-arrival Harbor Transit Preparations
Situation: Ship at sea, open ocean, 24 hours prior to arrival at a major U.S. port.  Systems used and information exchanged
are shown below.Ocean Navigation Information and Supporting Systems¥Inmarsat A, B, C, or M (communications system)

¥MF/HF/VHF  (NBDP - radio telex)

¥GMDSS (global maritime distress and safety system)

¥GPS (global positioning system)

¥LORAN C (long range radio navigation system)

¥ECDIS (electronic chart display and information system)
Information Exchanged¥automated notice to mariners

¥automated local notice to mariners

¥automated chart corrections in electronic chart and ECDIS support

¥local port weather and visibility conditions and predictions

¥available port real-time hydrographic information/history

¥available port real-time water height, current, and density information/history

¥transmit vessel ETA for pilots, U.S. Coast Guard, vessel traffic services, U.S. Customs Service, and others

¥transmit crew lists for immigration pre-arrival clearance

¥transmit vessel entry documents and certificates for pre-arrival Customs clearance

¥transmit entry documents for agriculture pre-arrival clearance
3.Vessel Arrival and Harbor Transit to Berth
Situation: Ship in harbor approaches and harbor, transiting to its assigned berth. Systems used and information exchangedare shown below.Harbor Navigation Information and Supporting Systems¥U.S. Coast Guard aids to navigation(buoys, fixed aids, racons and ranges)
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E55¥Inmarsat A, B, C or M(communications system)
¥GMDSS(communications system - VHF-DSC, etc.)
¥VHF Radio Network(communications system - VHF-DSC, etc.)
¥cellular telephone network(communications system - VHF-DSC, etc.)
¥transponder system network(communications/navigation system)
¥vessel traffic services(information and management system)
¥GPS/DGPS(differential global positioning system - navigation)
¥ECDIS(electronic chart display and information system)
¥PORTS(physical oceanographic real-time systems)
Information Exchanged¥arrival at pilot station¥real-time vessel position (aids to navigation and electronic charts)¥real-time channel water depth and density information (PORTS)¥real-time channel current information (PORTS)¥real-time port weather and visibility information (PORTS, NAVTEX, VTS, and VHF)¥real-time navigational information/vessels in system (ECDIS, VTS, and transponder)¥real-time VTS system waterways management (VTS)¥vessel emergency information (via transponder/hazardous commodities list, etc.)¥route prediction and time of arrival at berth (ECDIS, VTS, and transponder)4.Vessel at Berth
Situation: Ship at berth, preparing for departure.  Systems used and information exchanged are shown below.
Operations Navigation Information and Supporting Systems¥GMDSS(communications system)
¥VHF radio network(communications system)
¥cellular telephone network(communications system)
¥transponder system network(communications/navigation system)
¥PORTS(physical oceanographic real-time system)
¥vessel traffic services(navigation information and management system)
Information Exchanged¥navigational warnings (Navtex, VHF radio, and VTS)¥weather warnings and predictions (Navtex, VHF radio, and VTS)¥real-time water height and density with 24 hour predictions (PORTS)¥real-time current conditions with 24-hour predictions (PORTS)¥real-time weather conditions with 24-hour predictions (PORTS)¥waterways traffic status (VTS)¥real-time emergency response status (transponder messages/real-time cargo ops)5.Vessel Departure and Port Transit to Sea
Situation: Ship in harbor and harbor approaches, transiting from assigned berth to departure to sea. Systems used andinformation exchanged are shown below.Harbor Navigation Information and Supporting Systems¥U.S. Coast Guard aids to navigation(navigation system)
¥Inmarsat A, B, C or M(communications system)
¥GMDSS(communications system -VHF-DSC, etc.)
¥VHF Radio network(communications system)
¥cellphone network(communications system)
¥transponder system network(communications/navigation system)
¥vessel traffic services(navigation information and management system)
Applying Advanced Information Systems to Ports and Waterways ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56APPENDIX E¥GPS/GPS(differential global positioning system, navigation)
¥ECDIS(electronic chart display and information system)
¥PORTS(physical oceanographic real-time systems)
Information Exchanged¥real-time vessel position (aids to navigation and electronic charts)¥real-time channel water depth and density information (PORTS)¥real-time channel current information (PORTS)¥real-time port weather and visibility information (PORTS, NAVTEX, VTS, and VHF)¥real-time navigational information/vessels in system (ECDIS, VTS, and transponder)¥real-time VTS waterways management (VTS)¥vessel emergency information (via transponder/hazardous commodities list, etc.)¥route prediction and time of departure at pilot station (ECDIS, VTS, and transponder)