DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/6482Being Fluent with Information Technology128 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06399-9 | DOI 10.17226/6482Committee on Information Technology Literacy, National Research CouncilBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Information Technology LiteracyComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.Being FluentwithInformation Technology
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Boardof the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medi-
cine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special
competences and with regard for appropriate balance.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the fur-therance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the au-
thority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that
requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce
Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of theNational Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the Na-tional Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The

National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achieve-ments of engineers.  Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineer-

ing.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of
policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the responsi-
bility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an ad-viser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical
care, research, and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs pur-poses of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in accor-
dance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the princi-
pal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academyof Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific andengineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the

Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman and vice
chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under Con-tract Number CDA-9616681. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendationsexpressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the sponsor.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 99-63379International Standard Book Number 0-309-06399-XAdditional copies of this report are available from:
National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Box 285, Washington, DC  20055
800/624-6242,  202/334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area), http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 1999 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LITERACYLAWRENCE SNYDER, University of Washington, ChairALFRED V. AHO, Lucent Technologies, Inc.
MARCIA LINN, University of California at Berkeley
ARNOLD PACKER, Johns Hopkins University
ALLEN TUCKER, Bowdoin College
JEFFREY ULLMAN, Stanford University
ANDRIES VAN DAM, Brown UniversityStaffHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist and Study DirectorGAIL PRITCHARD, Research Associate
LISA SHUM, Project Assistant (through August 1998)
RITA GASKINS, Project Assistant (from August 1998)iiiBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairFRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JAMES CHIDDIX, Time Warner Cable
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
A.G. (SANDY) FRASER, AT&T
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
JAMES GRAY, Microsoft Corporation
PATRICK M. HANRAHAN, Stanford University
JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, Interval Research
JOHN MAJOR, Wireless Knowledge
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DONALD NORMAN, Nielsen Norman Group
RAYMOND OZZIE, Groove Networks
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
LEE SPROULL, Boston University
LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel CorporationStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Senior Program Officer
ALAN S. INOUYE, Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Program Officer
JANET D. BRISCOE, Administrative Associate
RITA GASKINS, Project Assistant
NICCI T. DOWD, Project Assistant
DAVID PADGHAM, Project Assistant
MARGARET MARSH, Project AssistantivBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONSPETER M. BANKS, ERIM International, Inc., Co-chairW. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, Co-chairWILLIAM BROWDER, Princeton University
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, University of Pennsylvania
MARSHALL H. COHEN, California Institute of Technology
RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University
JOHN E. ESTES, University of California at Santa Barbara
JERRY P. GOLLUB, Haverford College
MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University
JOHN L. HENNESSY, Stanford University
CAROL M. JANTZEN, Westinghouse Savannah River Company
PAUL G. KAMINSKI, Technovation, Inc.
KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota
MARGARET G. KIVELSON, University of California at Los Angeles
DANIEL KLEPPNER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company
MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania
M. ELISABETH PAT…-CORNELL, Stanford UniversityNICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory
CHANG-LIN TIEN, University of California at BerkeleyNORMAN METZGER, Executive DirectorvBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
In response to a request from the National Science Foundation, theComputer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National
Research Council initiated a study in August 1997 to address the subject
of information technology literacy.  The rationale for such a study was

that the increasing importance and ubiquity of information technology in
daily life make it essential to articulate what everyone needs to know and
understand about information technology.  Such an articulation would be

an essential first step toward empowering all citizens to participate in the
information age.Information technology as a topic for literacy has multiple constituen-cies.  For example, the library science community has developed a con-

ceptual underpinning for skills that are important for finding, evaluating,
and using information, all of which are important aspects of any defini-
tion of information technology literacy.  Because they spend their profes-
sional lives as creators of information technology, computer scientists

have their own perspectives, as do practitioners in disciplines that have
traditionally relied on computational tools, such as science and engineer-
ing.  Disciplines in the arts and humanities are just beginning to tap the

potential of information technology and will become (indeed, some would
argue are now) important stakeholders.  More generally, the broad cat-

egory Òknowledge workerÓ encompasses many professions in the work-
place, and virtually all knowledge workers make use in greater and lesser
degrees (increasingly greater) of information technology.  Traditionally

Òblue-collarÓ workers such as auto mechanics and heating/air-condition-
ing technicians must also cope with a proliferation of embedded comput-viiBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEing devices.  And as government begins to provide more services to the
public using information technology, the citizenry itself becomes an inter-
ested constituent.THE COMMITTEEÕS APPROACHIn addressing its charge, the committee chose a broad definition ofinformation technology. Information technology was defined to include
the more traditional components of information technology (such as gen-
eral-purpose computational devices, associated peripherals, operating en-
vironments, applications software, and information), as well as embed-
ded computing devices, communications, and the science underlying the
technology.As for the knowledge and understanding component of its charge,the committee decided to use the term 
Òfluency.Ó  Professor Yasmin Kafai,
who briefed the committee, noted that fluency connotes the ability to re-
formulate knowledge, to express oneself creatively and appropriately, and

to produce and generate information (rather than simply to comprehend
it).  This report uses the term 
Òfluency with information technology,Ó or
FITness, and it characterizes as fluent with information technology (FIT)
those who use, understand, and know about information technology in
the ways described in Chapter 2.  Chapter 1 contrasts fluency with the

more common term Òliteracy.ÓAll of the committee believed in the social desirability of the broadestpossible dissemination of a set of fundamental concepts, skills, and capa-
bilities.  Good arguments were made to and by the committee for defining

ÒeveryoneÓ in terms of all junior high school graduates, all high school
graduates, all non-college-bound individuals, all college-bound individu-
als, and all adult citizens (as lifelong learners).  But in the end, rather than

argue that FITness was required of everyone in some demographic cat-
egory of the population, the committee instead chose to make its case for
the education of individuals who want to be able to use information tech-
nology effectively.  Furthermore, issues of committee expertise and bud-

get imposed some practical constraints on the committeeÕs work, and thecommittee decided that it was best qualified to focus, as a first step to-
ward fuller implementation, on the group of learners with which it was
most familiarÑthe four-year college or university graduate.  This first
step toward implementation is discussed in Chapter 4.The intent of this report is to lay an intellectual framework for fluencywith information technology that is useful for others in developing disci-
pline-specific and/or grade-appropriate efforts to promote FITness.  How-

ever, this report is not a FITness textbook, a curriculum for FITness, or
even a description of standards for FITness.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixMETHODOLOGYThe committee sought input in three ways:  through briefings on the
topic from individuals who have worked in the field (Appendix C), from
electronic input in response to a set of questions about FITness that the
committee broadcast widely over the Internet, and from perspectives pro-
vided at an invitation-only workshop in Irvine, California, held to explore
the subject, for which participants were sought from a broad range of
backgrounds and interests (Appendix D).  The committee, itself composed

of individuals representing varied backgrounds and expertise (Appendix
E), used this broad range of input in an integrative manner to inform its
own deliberations on the appropriate scope and nature of FITness.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe committee appreciates the sponsorship of the Cross-DisciplinaryActivities of the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering of the National Science Foundation for this project, and espe-
cially the support of John Cherniavsky.The committee benefited from input from a broad range of sources.  A
list of workshop participants is contained in Appendix D; a list of briefers
is provided in Appendix C.  Douglas Brown of Bellevue Community Col-

lege and Mary Lindquist of Columbus State University provided useful
comments on Chapter 2.  Comments of reviewers (listed immediately

following this preface) helped the committee to tighten its presentation
and to determine the appropriate emphasis on the various topics con-
tained in the report.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersThis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the National Research CouncilÕs (NRCÕs) Report Review Com-mittee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and

critical comments that will assist the authors and the NRC in making the
published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge.  The contents of the review comments and draft manuscript

remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in the
review of this report:George Bugliarello, Polytechnic University,Robert Patterson Cook, University of Mississippi,
Ronald Danielson, Santa Clara University,
Scot Drysdale, Dartmouth College,
John Hennessy, Stanford University,
Leah Jamison, Purdue University,
Joan Lippincott, Coalition for Networked Information,
Arthur Melmed, George Mason University,
Susan L. Perry, Mount Holyoke College,
Jane Prey, University of Virginia,
Harold Salzman, University of Massachusetts Ð Lowell, and
Kendall N. Starkweather, International Technology EducationAssociation.Although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this
report rests solely with the study committee and the NRC.xiBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1WHY KNOW ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?6

2THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FLUENCY15
WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY3COLLATERAL ISSUES41

4IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS51
APPENDIXESAIllustrative Projects, 67
BRelated Work, 78

CIndividuals Who Briefed the Committee, 102

DWorkshop Participants and Questions Posted
on the Internet, 103EMembers of the Committee, 109
xiiiBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryInformation technology is playing an increasingly important role inthe work and personal lives of citizens.  Computers, communications,

digital information, softwareÑthe constituents of the information ageÑ
are everywhere.Between those who search aggressively for opportunities to learnmore about information technology and those who choose not to learn
anything at all about information technology, there are many who recog-
nize the potential value of information technology for their everyday lives
and who realize that a better understanding of information technology
will be helpful to them.  This realization is based on several factors:
¥Information technology has entered our lives over a relatively brief
period of time with little warning and essentially no formal educational
preparation for most people.¥Many who currently use information technology have only a lim-
ited understanding of the tools they use and a (probably correct) belief
that they are underutilizing them.¥Many citizens do not feel confident or in control when confronted
by information technology, and they would like to be more certain of
themselves.¥There have been impressive claims for the potential benefits of in-
formation technology, and many would like to realize those benefits.¥There is concern on the part of some citizens that changes implied
by information technology embody potential risks to social values, free-
doms or economic interests, etc., obligating them to become informed.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYAnd, naturally, there is simple curiosity about how this powerful and per-
vasive technology works.These various motivations to learn more about information technol-ogy raise the general question, What should everyone know about infor-
mation technology in order to use it more effectively now and in the fu-
ture?  Addressing that question is the subject of this report.
The answer to this question is complicated by the fact that informa-tion technology is changing rapidly.  The electronic computer is just over
50 years old, ÒPC,Ó as in personal computer, is less than 20 years old, and
the World Wide Web has been known to the public for less than 5 years.
In the presence of rapid change, it is impossible to give a fixed, once-and-
for-all course that will remain current and effective.Generally, Òcomputer literacyÓ has acquired a 
ÒskillsÓ connotation,
implying competency with a few of todayÕs computer applications, suchas word processing and e-mail.  Literacy is too modest a goal in the pres-
ence of rapid change, because it lacks the necessary Òstaying power.Ó  Asthe technology changes by leaps and bounds, existing skills become anti-
quated and there is no migration path to new skills.  A better solution is

for the individual to plan to adapt to changes in the technology.  This

involves learning sufficient foundational material to enable one to acquire
new skills independently after oneÕs formal education is complete.This requirement of a deeper understanding than is implied by therudimentary term Òcomputer literacyÓ motivated the committee to adopt
ÒfluencyÓ as a term connoting a higher level of competency.  People flu-
ent with information technology (FIT persons) are able to express them-
selves creatively, to reformulate knowledge, and to synthesize new infor-
mation.  Fluency with information technology (i.e., what this report calls

FITness) entails a process of lifelong learning in which individuals con-
tinually apply what they know to adapt to change and acquire more
knowledge to be more effective at applying information technology to
their work and personal lives.Fluency with information technology requires three kinds of knowl-edge:  contemporary skills, foundational concepts, and intellectual capa-

bilities.  These three kinds of knowledge prepare a person in different

ways for FITness.¥Contemporary skills, the ability to use todayÕs computer applica-tions, enable people to apply information technology immediately.  In the

present labor market, skills are an essential component of job readiness.
Most importantly, skills provide a store of practical experience on which
to build new competence.¥Foundational concepts, the basic principles and ideas of comput-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3ers, networks, and information, underpin the technology.  Concepts ex-
plain the how and why of information technology, and they give insight
into its opportunities and limitations.  Concepts are the raw material for

understanding new information technology as it evolves.¥Intellectual capabilities, the ability to apply information technol-ogy in complex and sustained situations, encapsulate higher-level think-
ing in the context of information technology.  Capabilities empower

people to manipulate the medium to their advantage and to handle unin-
tended and unexpected problems when they arise.  The intellectual capa-

bilities foster more abstract thinking about information and its manipula-
tion.For specificity, the report enumerates the ten highest-priority itemsfor each of the three types of knowledge.  (Box ES.1 lists these ten items

for each type of knowledge.)  The skills, linked closely to today
Õs com-puter usage, will change over time, but the concepts and capabilities are
timeless.Concepts, capabilities, and skillsÑthe three different types of knowl-edge of FITnessÑoccupy separate dimensions, implying that a particularactivity involving information technology will involve elements of each
type of knowledge.  Learning the skills and concepts and developing the

intellectual capabilities can be undertaken without reference to each other,

but such an effort will not promote FITness to any significant degree.  The

three elements of FITness are co-equal, each reinforcing the others, and all
are essential to FITness.FITness is personal in the sense that individuals fluent with informa-tion technology evaluate, distinguish, learn, and use new information
technology as appropriate to their own personal and professional activi-
ties.  What is appropriate for an individual depends on the particular ap-
plications, activities, and opportunities for being FIT that are associated
with the individualÕs area of interest or specialization.FITness is also graduated and dynamic.  It is graduated in the sense
that FITness is characterized by different levels of sophistication (rather
than a single fluent/not fluent judgment).  And, it is dynamic in that

FITness entails lifelong learning as information technology evolves.In short, FITness should not be regarded as an end state that is inde-pendent of domain, but rather as something that develops over a lifetime
in particular domains of interest and that has a different character and
tone depending on which domains are involved.  Accordingly, the

pedagogic goal is to provide students with a sufficiently complete foun-
dation of the three types of knowledge that they can Òlearn the rest of itÓon their own as the need arises throughout life.Because FITness is fundamentally integrative, calling upon an indi-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox ES.1The Components of Fluency with Information TechnologyNOTE: Readers are urged to read Chapter 2 for more elaboration of
these items.Intellectual Capabilities1.Engage in sustained reasoning.
2.Manage complexity.
3.Test a solution.
4.Manage problems in faulty solutions.

5.Organize and navigate information structures and evaluate informa-
tion.6.Collaborate.

7.Communicate to other audiences.
8.Expect the unexpected.
9.Anticipate changing technologies.
10.Think about information technology abstractly.
Information Technology Concepts1.Computers
2.Information systems

3.Networks
4.Digital representation of information
5.Information organization

6.Modeling and abstraction
7.Algorithmic thinking and programming
8.Universality

9.Limitations of information technology
10.Societal impact of information and information technology
Information Technology Skills1.Setting up a personal computer
2.Using basic operating system features
3.Using a word processor to create a text document

4.Using a graphics and/or artwork package to create illustrations, slides,
or other image-based expressions of ideas5.Connecting a computer to a network

6.Using the Internet to find information and resources
7.Using a computer to communicate with others
8.Using a spreadsheet to model simple processes or financial tables

9.Using a database system to set up and access useful information
10.Using instructional materials to learn how to use new applications or
featuresBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5vidual to coordinate information and skills with respect to multiple di-mensions of a problem and to make overall judgments and decisions tak-
ing all such information into account, a project-based approach to devel-
oping FITness is most appropriate.  Projects of appropriate scale and scope

inherently involve multiple iterations, each of which provides an oppor-
tunity for an instructional checkpoint or intervention.  The domain of a

project can be tailored to an individualÕs interest (e.g., in the departmentof a studentÕs major), thereby providing motivation for a person to ex-pend the (non-trivial) effort to master the concepts and skills of FITness.
In addition, a project of appropriate scope will be sufficiently complex
that intellectual integration is necessary to complete it.  Note also that

much of the infrastructure of existing skills-based computer or informa-
tion technology literacy efforts (e.g., hardware, software, network con-
nections, support staff) will be important elements of efforts to promote
FITness.Although the essentials of FITness are for the most part not depen-dent on sophisticated mathematics, and should therefore generally be ac-
cessible in some form to every citizen, any program or effort to make indi-
viduals more FIT must be customized to the target population.  Because

the committee was composed of college and university faculty, the com-
mittee chose to focus its implementational concerns on the four-year col-
lege or university graduate as one important starting point for the devel-
opment of FITness across the citizenry.  Further, the committee believes

that successful implementation of FITness instruction will require serious
rethinking of the college and university curriculum.  It will not be suffi-

cient for individual instructors to revisit their course content or approach.
Rather, entire departments must examine the question of the extent to
which their students will graduate FIT.  Universities need to concern

themselves with the FITness of students who cross discipline boundaries
and with the extent to which each discipline is meeting the goals of uni-
versal FITness.In summary, FIT individuals, those who know a starter set of infor-mation technology skills, who understand the basic concepts on which
information technology is founded, and who have engaged in the higher-
level thinking embodied in the intellectual capabilities, should use infor-
mation technology confidently, should come to work ready to learn new
business systems quickly and use them effectively, should be able to apply
information technology to personally relevant problems, and should be
able to adapt to the inevitable change as information technology evolves
over their lifetime.  To be FIT is to possess knowledge essential to using

information technology now and in the future.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY61Why Know About
Information Technology?
This report focuses on what an individual must know and understandabout information technology in order to use it effectively and produc-
tively for his or her own purposes.  There are at least four broad catego-

ries of rationale motivating an understanding of information technology:
personal, workforce, educational, and societal.1.1PERSONAL RATIONALES
America is increasingly an information society.  Computers and com-
munications not only perform routine tasks like controlling microwave
ovens and connecting cellular phones, but with the Internet they give the
computer-capable among us access to much of the worldÕs digital infor-
mation and the means to process it.  From finding a subway map of Prague

for vacation planning to locating the best buys for books, mortgages, and
cowboy boots, many Americans find that the use of information technol-
ogy is a valuable enhancement to their way of life. Information technol-
ogy helps people to keep in contact with family and friends via e-mail,
manage their finances with spreadsheets and online banking, track in-
vestments through an online broker, pursue hobbies like genealogy or
gardening with specialized software packages, help their children with
homework and school projects using word processing and graphing tools,
find medical information, become informed about political candidates and
communicate with their political representatives, and track environmen-
tal issues or monitor public policy issues over the World Wide Web.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY KNOW ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?71.2A WORKFORCE RATIONALE
In todayÕs workplace, information technology is increasingly com-mon.  If the nation is to obtain the maximum benefit from its investments

in information technology, a labor pool capable of using it appropriately
is necessary.  It is obvious that individuals who work with information

and knowledge (so-called Òknowledge workersÓ) need to understand theubiquitous office information technologies, but it is also true that few job
classifications require no knowledge of information technology at all.  For

example, the clerk in a retail establishment at one time had only to know
how to use a cash register.  Today, the same clerk can come into contact

with inventory systems, order tracking, and credit card and other busi-
ness systems, which are becoming more sophisticated and integrated.  In

the manufacturing industry, many traditionally Òblue-collarÓ workers
must cope with a variety of manufacturing systems for tracking materials,
parts inventory and production, process control, and online manuals and
procedures.Though a company must train its employees in the use of its businesssystems, it is naŁve to consider such training as a one-time activity.  The
systems are upgraded frequently and become more complex.  Opportuni-

ties to apply information technology to business problems and opportu-
nities to integrate existing information technology solutions continue,
implying a continual training mission.  Obviously, this training task is

greatly simplified if the labor pool is already well educated in informa-
tion technology, since employees come up to speed faster and require less
training overall.  Further, they will probably utilize existing systems more

fully and adapt to upgrades better.  Employee productivity is directly

affected by the employeesÕ knowledge of information technology.
From the employeeÕs point of view expertise in information technol-ogy is valuable.  It not only leads to the simple satisfaction of performing
oneÕs job well and nimbly responding to problems; it can also improve jobmobility.  More facility with a company
Õs information technology infra-structure can be a valuable job asset that may be considered in promo-
tions.  Finding a job at another company will entail learning new informa-

tion systems, but understanding them more abstractlyÑknowing whichfeatures should be common and how they might differÑis also an asset ina labor market where employees no longer enjoy a Òjob for life.Ó1.3AN EDUCATIONAL RATIONALE
Information technology is an enabler for many new types of educa-tional opportunities. One type is based on the access of students to an
array of educational resources that were not previously accessible to them.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYConsider, for example, the Kids as Global Scientists program, operated bythe University of Colorado in conjunction with the University of
MichiganÕs Weather Underground and the Weather Channel.  The goal of
this program is to help students use the Internet to learn about weather
and environmental science issues as they also get to know other students
from different regions of the United States and the world.   The program

and associated curriculum offer student-directed discussions and predic-
tions about the paths and history of this yearÕs tropical storms that can becompared with those of the experts and with the actual event as it occurs;
hands-on activities, real-time data collection, and instructions on how to
view and interpret a variety of satellite images; guided access to interac-
tive displays of current hurricane data and trajectories; links to newspa-
per stories and other current reports; student-collected data that is posted
to the Internet to share with other classrooms around the world; content
expertise from hurricane specialists via online questioning and confer-
encing; online discussion groups for teachers, students, and experts, pro-
viding support on technical, content, and pedagogical issues; and a ve-
hicle for posting information and graphics about a studentÕs school in anonline newspaper.1A second type of educational opportunity is described by MIT com-puter scientist Seymour Papert.  In 
ÒMindstorms,Ó Papert asserts that a
deep understanding of programming, in particular the notions of succes-
sive decomposition as a mode of analysis and debugging of trial solu-
tions, results in significant educational benefits in many domains of
discourse, including those unrelated to computers and information tech-
nology per se.2  He further argues that computers can be the means for
educators Òto support the development of new ways of thinking andlearningÓ (p. xiv).  He believes that computers can be a conduit of power-
ful ideas and Òthe seeds of cultural change, . . . help[ing] people form newrelationships with knowledge that cuts across the traditional lines sepa-
rating humanities from sciences and knowledge of the self . . .Ó (p. 4).  Bytransforming abstractions into concrete representations via programming,
students Òbuild their own intellectual structures with materials drawnfrom surrounding cultureÓ (pp. 31-32).
Finally, a third type of opportunity is the medium that informationtechnology provides for students to develop and exercise their critical
thinking abilities.   Information conveyed through advanced information1For more information, see <http://www.onesky.umich.edu/kgs/htdocs/home1.html>.2Seymour A. Papert.  1999.  
Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas, SecondEdition, Basic Books, New York.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY KNOW ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?9technology such as computers and the World Wide Web can appear moreconvincing than the same information conveyed through a conversation
with a stranger or the newspaper, despite the fact that it may have equiva-
lent accuracy and validity.  Students must evaluate all information criti-

cally.  Their ability to present information using information technology

can aid in developing an ability to separate form from content in all infor-
mation, and in assessing its accuracy and validity.  The result is a more

critical evaluation of all information.  Such critical ability helps individu-

als to evaluate information technology-mediated claims for alternative
medicines, advertisements for energy-efficient homes, and homework
advice from peers.1.4A SOCIETAL RATIONALE
The practice of democracy is based on an informed citizenry.  In
todayÕs increasingly technological society, many public policy debates areconnected to information technology.  For example:
¥A person with a basic understanding of database technology canbetter appreciate the risks to privacy entailed in data-mining based on his
or her credit-card transactions.¥A jury that understands the basics of computer animation and im-age manipulation may have a better understanding of what counts as
Òphotographic truthÓ in the reconstruction of a crime or an accident.
¥Understanding choices about representation of information can bekey to understanding how copyright laws may apply to information in
electronic media.¥A person who understands the structure and operation of theWorld Wide Web is in a better position to evaluate and appreciate policy
issues related to the First Amendment, free expression, and the availabil-
ity of pornography on the Internet.While some of these issues were argued and debated before the ad-vent of modern information technology, the pervasiveness of information
technology has brought many of them into the public consciousness in a
more poignant and vivid manner.  Some basic understanding of informa-

tion technology thus is needed to make informed judgments about these
public policy issues, many of which have a direct impact on citizens

whether or not they use information technology in their daily lives.As information technology becomes more and more ubiquitous, citi-zens need to know how to evaluate the social impact of information tech-
nology and when to complain about information technology solutions
embedded in their lives.  The 
ÒYear 2000Ó problem reminds citizens, tech-
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYnology experts, government policy makers, and industry leaders thatseemingly transparent technological solutions can have substantial weak-
nesses.  Citizens who live in a world where information technology grows,

changes, advances, and fails require some level of understanding of infor-
mation technology if they are to make informed choices.Finally, entirely apart from public policy concerns per se, the growinguse of information technology throughout the world may have profound
social effects (Box 1.1).1.5UNDERSTANDING, KNOWING, AND
USING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThis report asserts that individuals must understand informationtechnology in order to use it effectively.  This assertion may seem to be

curious advice considering that the foregoing rationales argue substantial
benefits already exist from the use of information technology even for
individuals who lack an enhanced understanding of the topic.  Further,

industry is eager to make information technologies as easy to use as pos-
sible.  Why should there be anything more to learn?
Though both observations have some truth, they overlook severalcritical points about current and future uses of information technology.¥Almost by definition, new technologies have not yet been deeplyexplored, and applications or products or services based on new tech-
nologies are often fragile, quirky, unintuitive, and flawed.  (The same

qualities may also beset applications or products or services based on rela-
tively old technologies!)  An understanding of the underlying technolo-

gies helps the user to cope with the difficulties inevitably encountered in
use.¥The information technology needs of an individual may not be metby an off-the-shelf application, implying that it may not be possible to
fulfill needs simply by punching a single button (as individuals might in
using a specialized information ÒapplianceÓ).  Thus, having some under-
standing of information technology will help individuals make more ef-
fective use of whatever technology is available to them.¥The ability to use a tool in a rudimentary manner for a limited setof purposes is not the same as the ability to use the tool safely, effectively,
and flexibly.  The former may be sufficient for many individuals, but the

more an individual possesses the latter ability, the more useful the tool is
to that individual.¥New information technologies and applications of that technologyemerge rapidly.  In some cases, the power and capabilities of new devel-

opments will be well matched to the needs of a particular individual.  An
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY KNOW ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?11individual who has a robust understanding of information technologywill be able to exploit these developments and to comprehend the capa-
bilities and implications of new technologies more quickly.¥Many people approach computers tentatively and with little confi-dence, even if they have been using computers for years.  This seeming

paradox probably derives from the fact that they have little true under-
standing of the technology.  The training for the applications they know

has concentrated on using the tools, and has ignored more general de-
scription of principles and concepts.  When something goes wrong, or a

new application is available, people with such backgrounds are at a loss
to know what to do and often experience frustration.  They must get help,

further adding to their feeling of not being in control, and the help they
receive usually treats the immediate problem without imparting more
basic knowledge, thus perpetuating the problem.Granting that some knowledge of information technology is neces-sary for its use, many efforts have focused on what has come to be known
as Òcomputer literacy.Ó  This term has a long history, and in common
parlance it means the ability to use a few computer applications.  For ex-

ample, computer literacy often refers to the ability to use a spreadsheet
and a word processor and to search the World Wide Web for information.
In an era in which the most useful applications change rapidly, the ÒskillsÓapproach lacks Òstaying power.Ó  New tools or new versions of tools
emerge frequently, requiring new skills.  For example, searching the

World Wide Web would not have been a skill included in a literacy course
five years ago.  Skills with specific applications are thus necessary but not

sufficient for individuals to prosper in the information age.The following analogy illustrates one difference between ÒcomputerliteracyÓ and the robust understanding of information technology de-
scribed in Chapter 2.  Consider a person who has visited a certain city

several times and who has learned a single route from the airport to some
final destination.  This visitor
Õs understanding of the local geography islimited and fragile, whereas residents have a fuller understanding of arte-
rial streets and landmarks.  When a traffic jam occurs, the visitor doubt-

less chooses to wait it out, while the resident is more able to find an alter-
nate route.  Though the resident may not necessarily be familiar with the

local streets of the exit, knowing the landmarks and general organization
of the arterials will allow a rapid recovery.  In the same way, a computer-

literate individual knowing only basic information technology skillsÑword processing, e-mail, simple Web browsingÑmay appear not to needa deep or robust understanding of information technology, but when
faced with an unexpected event or a problem, may well be less able to
adapt or to find a work-around.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox 1.1Possible Social Effects of Information TechnologyInformation technology has brought or is bringing more abstract or in-tangible changes than those enumerated in the text.¥Freedom.  Information technology is an enabler for the opportunity
for individuals to express themselves freely, unfettered by intermediaries.For a modest investment in a computer and the nominal cost of a connec-
tion to an Internet service provider, anyone can post anything on a per-sonal home page or say anything in a chat room, and the potential audi-ence for such postings is quite large.  Such convenient, inexpensive, and

sustained opportunities for free speech are unprecedented, as are the darksides of easy expression (e.g., the ease of disseminating misinformation ordisinformation, hate speech, child pornography, and so on).¥World connectivity.  Information technology is cheap, fast, 
Òpoint topoint,Ó and asynchronous, giving e-mail a convenience and immediacy
that postal and telephonic communications have never had, and a person-alization that broadcast media cannot provide.  With the World Wide Web,
access to local information is possible at unprecedented speedsÑone canread the Sydney Morning Herald in Sydney, Nova Scotia, at the same mo-
ment that Australians are reading it.  The ease with which information
technology allows citizens of the world to keep in touch with people andevents elsewhere unifies the world profoundly.   And this effect will in-

crease as information technology becomes adopted more completelyaround the world.¥Loss of remoteness.  A corollary to the world-connecting property of
information technology is that information resources are now much more
accessible to individuals worldwide.  Although the entire holdings of the

New York Public Library will not soon be completely online, the informa-1.6FLUENCY WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
This report addresses the question, What must an individual knowand understand about information technology in order to use it effectively
and productively for his or her own purposes?  Because the technology is

changing continually (and rapidly), the answer to this question cannot be
static.  The rapid pace of change in information technology
Ñelectroniccomputers are barely 50 years old, the term ÒPCÓ is less than 20 years old,
and the World Wide Web has been known to the public for less than 5Ñimplies that neither a fixed repertoire of skills nor a static curriculum
taught Òonce and for allÓ can possibly suffice.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY KNOW ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?13tion access advantages of those living in geographically remote areas withaccess to the World Wide Web compare favorably to those living in the BigApple.  The information needed by many people, though perhaps not schol-

ars, is largely available electronically.   Telecommuting is another manifes-
tation of information technologyÕs location independence.¥Alienation.  There is recent, preliminary evidence that even a modest
amount of time (one or a few hours per day) spent on the Internet can lead
some users to feelings of depression and alienation.1  An apparent source ofsome alienation is that ÒfriendshipsÓ formed via chat rooms can be more
superficial than those formed through face-to-face interaction.  In addition,
the time spent in front of a screen reduces normal interpersonal contact.
This topic requires further study, and if the findings of the Carnegie MellonUniversity study are confirmed, would suggest the need for attention to themental health consequences of changes associated with the use of infor-
mation technology.¥Predominance of English.  Information technology is largely an En-
glish-oriented medium, because its development has followed the English-centric tradition of post-World War II science, and, perhaps more impor-tantly, because the United States has played a dominant role in the
deployment of information technology.   While information in almost ev-

ery written language can be found on the World Wide Web, a surfer musthave at least a passable understanding of English to reap the greatest ad-
vantage of information technology globally.  The implications for other

natural languages are unclear, but it is likely that many world residents willwant to be bilingual in the near future.1Robert Kraut et al. 1998.  ÒInternet Paradox:  A Social Technology That Reduces
Social Involvement and Psychological Well-Being?Ó, American Psychologist,53(9):1017-1031.And, because the technology is powerful, the answer to the questioncannot be superficial.  If effectively using information technology were as

simple as driving a car or using an automatic teller machine, it would be
easy to teach what one would need to know about information technol-
ogy in order to use it.  But computers and communication are more versa-

tile and in a deep sense more powerful technologies, making the educa-
tional task more challenging. (Chapter 2 grounds this assertion in more
precise terms, and explicitly addresses the oft-mentioned analogy between
driving and computing.)While some applications of information technology require relativelyBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYlittle knowledge to use, other quite useful applications are accessible onlyto those who have some understanding of the underlying technology.
Those who have this understanding, perhaps because they are technically
trained, acquired it in connection with their work, or are simply curious,
motivated, and persistent enough to have figured it out on their own,
have greater facility operating in the digital world and thus greater access
to the benefits it offers.While no term is perfect, the notion of fluency captures best for thecommittee connotations of the ability to reformulate knowledge, to ex-
press oneself creatively and appropriately, and to produce and generate
information (rather than simply to comprehend it).   For this reason, the

committee chose Òfluency with information technology,Ó or FITness, as a
label for the robust understanding of what is needed to use information
technology effectively across a broad range of applications.FITness involves three distinct but interrelated dimensionsÑintellec-tual capabilities, conceptual knowledge, and an appropriate skill set.  An

individual who develops these capabilities, knowledge, and skills be-
comes more fluent with information technology (FIT).  Functionally, a

more FIT individual is better able to use todayÕs information technologyeffectively in personal and professional life, to adapt information technol-
ogy to be personally relevant, and to acquire future knowledge as infor-
mation technology changes than a person who is less FIT.   An adequate

level of FITness provides an individual with the foundational knowledge
and understanding that enable him or her to advance along a continuum,
becoming more and more adept at applying information technology for a
range of purposes and having a deeper understanding of the technologi-
cal opportunities for doing so.In Chapter 2, each of these dimensions of FITness is defined and ex-plained more carefully.  Chapter 2 outlines the intellectual core of FITness.

Chapter 3 discusses several collateral issues associated with the FITness
framework.  Chapter 4 addresses 
Òimplementational efforts,Ó which are
necessarily tied to specific grade levels.  In the case of this report, they are

tied to college undergraduates.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness15152The Intellectual Framework ofFluency with Information Technology
2.1WHAT IS FLUENCY WITH
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?Fluency with information technology (abbreviated as FITness) goesbeyond traditional notions of computer literacy.   As noted in Chapter 1,

literacy about information technology might call for a minimal level of
familiarity with technological tools like word processors, e-mail, and Web
browsers.  By contrast, FITness requires that persons understand infor-

mation technology broadly enough to be able to apply it productively at
work and in their everyday lives, to recognize when information technol-
ogy would assist or impede the achievement of a goal, and to continually
adapt to the changes in and advancement of information technology.
FITness therefore requires a deeper, more essential understanding and
mastery of information technology for information processing, communi-
cation, and problem solving than does computer literacy as traditionally
defined. (Box 2.1 addresses the difference between literacy and FITness in
more specific terms.)  Note also that FITness as described in this chapter

builds on many other fundamental competencies, such as textual literacy,
logical reasoning, and knowledge of civics and society.Information technology is a medium that permits the expression of avast array of information, ideas, concepts, and messages, and FITness is
about effectively exploiting that expressive power.  FITness enables a per-

son to accomplish a variety of different tasks using information technol-
ogy and to develop different ways of accomplishing a given task.FITness comes in degrees and gradations and is tied to different pur-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYposes.  FITness is thus not an Òend stateÓ that is independent of domain,
but rather develops over a lifetime in particular domains of interest in-
volving particular applications.  Aspects of FITness can be developed by

using spreadsheets for personal or professional budgeting, desktop pub-
lishing tools to create or edit documents or Web pages, search engines
and database management tools for locating information on the Web or in
large databases, and design tools to create visualizations in various scien-
tific and engineering disciplines.The wide variety of contexts in which FITness is relevant is matchedby the rapid pace at which information technology evolves.  Most profes-

sionals today require constant upgrading of technological skills as new
tools become useful in their work; they learn new word processing pro-
grams, new computer-assisted design environments, or new techniques
for searching the World Wide Web.  Different applications of information
Box 2.1I Use Computers All DayÑAm I FIT?Many Americans use information technology daily in their work, butsuch contact does not automatically bestow fluency with information tech-
nology.  Although many jobsÑmedical records data entry, submitting credit
card transactions, building spreadsheets in an accounting department,
designing homes using architectural computer-aided design tools, and nu-merous othersÑrequire facility with the tools provided by specific infor-mation technology systems, this kind of expertise is often restricted largely
to the skills dimension of FITness.  Developing FITness as described in this
report requires more than sustained contact with information technology,though such experience can nevertheless provide a good point of depar-
ture.  Common fears about Òbreaking somethingÓ will have been over-
come, certain common protocols will have been learned, and unusual situ-ations will have been encountered.There are highly FIT individuals across America and the world, ofcourse.  Through a combination of classes, experience, reading, curiosity,
and probably persistence, these individuals not only have acquired skills
that make information technology useful in their work and personal lives,but they also have learned a base of concepts and intellectual capabilitiessufficient to acquire new knowledge about information technology inde-

pendently, allowing them to expand their use and to adapt to change.  Some

are Òtechies,Ó but many are simply individuals who by various means havegained enough basic knowledge to become independent, lifelong learners.As they learn more, they become more FIT, more adept at applying infor-

mation technology to personally relevant tasks.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness17technology emerge rather frequently, both in areas with long traditions ofusing information and information technology and in areas that are not
usually seen as being technology-intensive.  Perhaps the major challenge

for individuals embarking on the goal of lifelong FITness involves decid-
ing when to learn a new tool, when to change to a new technology, when
to devote energy to increasing technological competency, and when to
allocate time to other professional activities.The above comments suggest that FITness is personal, graduated, anddynamic.  FITness is personal in the sense that individuals evaluate, dis-

tinguish, learn, and use new information technology as appropriate to
their own sustained personal and professional activities.  What is appro-

priate for an individual depends on the particular applications, activities,
and opportunities for FITness that are associated with the individualÕsarea of interest or specialization, and what is reasonable for a FIT lawyer
or a historian to know and be able to do may well differ from what is
required for a FIT scientist or engineer.  FITness is graduated in the sense

that it is characterized by different levels of sophistication (rather than a
single FIT/not-FIT judgment), and it is dynamic in that it requires lifelong
learning as information technology evolves.Put differently, FITness should not be assessed according to whethera person Òhas/does not haveÓ all ten capabilities, and is not a single
Òpass/fail judgment.Ó  People with different needs and interests and goals
will have lesser or greater stakes in the various components of FITnessÑthey will obviously have greater stakes in those components that are most
directly linked to their own individual needs.  Nevertheless, the commit-

tee believes that all of the elements discussed below are necessary for in-
dividuals to exploit effectively the power of information technology across
even a relatively small range of interests and needs.2.2THE ELEMENTS OF FITness
FITness involves three types of knowledge.  These types, described
briefly below, interact to reinforce each other, leading to deeper under-
standing of information technology and its uses.¥Intellectual capabilities.  The intellectual capabilities of FITness referto oneÕs ability to apply information technology in complex and sustainedsituations and to understand the consequences of doing so.  These capa-

bilities transcend particular hardware or software applications.  Indeed,

the items listed as capabilities in Section 2.4 have general applicability to
many domains other than information technology.  But a great deal of

research (and everyday experience as well) indicates that these capabili-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYties do not easily transfer between problem domains,1 and in general, few
individuals are equally adept with these capabilities in all domains.  For

this reason, these capabilities can be regarded as Òlife skillsÓ that are for-
mulated in the context of information technology.¥Fundamental concepts.  Concepts refer to the foundations on which
information technology is built.  This is the 
Òbook learningÓ part of flu-
ency, although it is highly doubtful that a decent understanding of the
concepts described in Section 2.5  can be achieved strictly through the use

of textbooks.  The concepts are fundamental to information and comput-

ing and are enduring in the sense that new concepts may become impor-
tant in the future as qualitatively new information technologies emerge,
but the presented list of fundamental concepts will be augmented with
rather than replaced by new concepts.¥Contemporary skills.  Skills refer to the ability to use particular (and
contemporary) hardware or software resources to accomplish informa-
tion processing tasks.  Skills embody the intent of the phrase 
Òknowinghow to use a computerÓ as that phrase is colloquially understood.  Skills
include (but are not limited to) the use of several common software appli-
cations.  The 
ÒskillsÓ component of FITness necessarily changes over time
because the information technology products and services available to
citizens continually change.  The enumeration given in Section 2.6 is

appropriate for today, but the list would have been different five years
ago and will surely be different five years from now.Section 2.3 discusses the relationship of capabilities, concepts, andskills, as well as the role of knowledge in particular domains.Intellectual capabilities and fundamental concepts of informationtechnology are instantiated in or relevant to a wide variety of contexts.
Intellectual capabilities and skills relate to very practical matters, getting
at the heart of what it means to function in a complex technology-oriented
world.  And all have the characteristic that the acquisition of information
technology skills, the understanding of information technology concepts,
and the development of intellectual capabilities are lifelong activities.

Over a lifetime, an individual will acquire more skills and develop addi-
tional proficiency with those skills, understand information technology1See for example,  National Research Council. 1999. 
How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experi-ence, and School, Chapter 3, ÒLearning and Transfer,Ó National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness19concepts in a richer and more textured manner, and enhance his or herintellectual capabilities through engagement in multiple domains.The discussion below proposes a Òtop tenÓ in each classification.  (The
ten are not listed in any order of priority.)  Experts will doubtless recog-

nize omissions and the list could easily be extended.  But it is easy to

generate longer lists, and at some point, the length of a list exceeds need,
practicality, and even feasibility.  The committee believes that it is impor-

tant to identify the items of highest significance among possible alterna-
tives, and the ten items in each category represent the committeeÕs collec-tive judgment of the most important.  It is the committee
Õs hope that allwho draw from, build on, critique, or modify these lists will also impose a
limit of ten on themselves.2.3A TRIPARTITE APPROACH TO FITness
Capabilities, concepts, and skillsÑthe three different types of knowl-edge basic to FITnessÑoccupy separate dimensions, implying that a par-ticular activity involving information technology will involve elements of
each type of knowledge.  Learning information technology skills and con-

cepts and developing the intellectual capabilities can be undertaken with-
out reference to each other, but such an effort will not promote FITness to
any significant degree.  The three elements of FITness are co-equal, each

reinforcing the others, and all are essential to FITness.2¥Study that emphasizes skills without fundamental concepts andintellectual capabilities meets some needs for utility in the short term.  But

although these skills enable one to perform basic tasks with a word pro-
cessor (for example), they may not help much in countering the frustra-
tion felt when the computer freezes, the printer cannot be accessed, or the
paragraphs mysteriously develop new fonts.  Similar frustration is often

experienced by an individual learning a new word-processor.  The funda-

mental concepts underlying information technology are the basis for a
mental model of how a specific application is (or is not) working, a model
that enables reflective thought about what might be done to fix a problem
or how a new application might work.  The capabilities of FITness enable

a person to deal with unexpected consequences and make appropriate
decisions about learning new features or new software, and they are nec-2The statement that Òconcepts, capabilities, and skills are co-equalÓ applies only to their
epistemological importance to FITness.  It does not argue that the appropriate pedagogies
for each type of knowledge are, or should be, identical.  This point is addressed at somewhat
greater length in Section 4.3.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYessary for one to engage in any kind of sustained effort using informationtechnology.¥Study of information technology concepts in isolation from skillsor capabilities is reminiscent of computer science education in the days
before computers became abundant.  The concepts represent abstract in-

formation about deep and interesting phenomena.  They are worthy of

study for their inherent interest, like studying sub-atomic particles and
the structure of matter.  But taught in the context of skills and capabilities,

concepts also become the foundation on which one codifies oneÕs experi-ence, abstracts to new situations, and reasons about information technol-
ogy.  As information technology changes, concepts provide the basis for

adapting to the change, inasmuch as the new systems adhere to the same
principles the old systems did.  Further, concepts provide the raw mate-

rial needed to engage in capability-based action such as engaging in sus-
tained reasoning and managing complexity.¥Study that emphasizes capabilities at the expense of concepts andskills will lack the essential connection to information technology.  Al-

though the intellectual capabilities are quite general, their development
in the context of FITness requires a substantive connection to information
technology that is provided by exposure to the concepts and skills.  For

example, to learn to ÒdebugÓ a program or test an application, students
need to understand the concepts implemented in the artifact.  To imple-

ment their designs and work with others they need communication and

search skills.FITness integrates skills, concepts, and capabilities into an effectiveunderstanding of information technology, enabling citizens to use infor-
mation technology to solve personally relevant problems and apply their
knowledge of information technology to new situations.  This integration

is an essential element for individuals to learn over a lifetime.  Thus, a

pedagogical approach that balances the treatment of these three elements
is essentialÑthis is the subject of Chapter 4.2.4INTELLECTUAL CAPABILITIES FOR FITness
Within the framework of FITness as described above, the intellectualcapabilities integrate knowledge specific to information technology with
problem domains of personal interest to individuals.  Many of the capa-

bilities on this Òtop tenÕÕ list might be familiar in other disciplines
Ñengi-neering design, library science, or general educationÑor even from anunderstanding of what is needed to live a productive life.  Indeed, no

assertion is made that these capabilities are unique or ÒbelongÓ to infor-
mation technology.  However, the prominence and importance of infor-
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness21mation technology in society today take them out of the world of the de-signer or engineering specialist and put them squarely in the lives and
workspaces of us all.The essential elements of FITness include the ability to:1.Engage in sustained reasoning.Sustained reasoning starts with defining and clarifying a problem.Understanding exactly what problem is to be solved and knowing when
it has been solved are often the most difficult aspects of problem solving.
And, because information technology will in general operate in the way
in which one directs it to operate, rather than the way in which one in-
tends it to operate, precise specification of the problem to be solved with
information technology is even more critical for solving other types of
problems.Once the problem has been defined, multiple attempts at formulatinga solution are often required.   An initial solution is often revised or im-

proved by iteration, which often causes a refinement in the definition of
the problem.  Reasoning is used for planning, designing, executing, and

evaluating a solution.The ÒsustainedÓ aspect of this capability is intended to convey an in-
tegrated effort that covers days or weeks rather than a one-time event.
Thus, individuals might use desktop publishing programs, computer-as-
sisted design tools, visualization and modeling environments, Web-search
engines, or a variety of other technological resources to help implement a
solution.2.Manage complexity.Problems often have a variety of solutions, each with its advantagesand disadvantages, and trade-offs are often necessary in determining the
most appropriate solution.  One solution may require extensive design

but result in a relatively straightforward implementation; another may
require the oppositeÑa simple design but a costly implementation.  Fur-
thermore, any given approach to a solution will often result in compo-
nents of a system interacting in complex, unexpected ways.A sustained activity involving information technology will typicallybe complex, involving a number of tasks, such as problem clarification,
solution formulation, solution design and implementation, and testing
and evaluation of the outcome.  The solution developed for the problem

will often contain several components, including both hardware and soft-
ware.  A person needs to be able to plan a project, design a solution, inte-
grate the components, respond to unexpected interactions, and diagnose
what is needed from each task.  Some of the steps of the project may in-
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYvolve some type of computer programming.  Such programming could
entail configuring system control panels, using and adapting existing soft-
ware packages for oneÕs needs, or writing code in some programminglanguage.Another source of complexity is the need to manage the resourcesthat technology provides, especially when the resources available are in-
adequate.  Thus, a user of information technology needs to be able to man-

age resources:  Do processes require too much time?  Too much disk

space?  Is the bandwidth available to download what is offered?  And of

course, are there ways to perform necessary tasks that will not exceed the
limits imposed by resource availability and/or adequacy?A third source of complexity is the fact that large information technol-ogy-based systems often have interdependencies.  That is, small changes

in one part of the system can have large effects on another part of the
system that is ÒapparentlyÓ separate from that part.  Such interdependen-
cies can be reduced by enforcing a rigid separation between different sys-
tem parts, but this practice is much easier to describe than to implement.3.Test a solution.Determining the scope, nature, and conditions under which a techno-logical solution is intended to operate can be difficult.  A solution to a

problem must be tested in two waysÑto determine that the design is cor-rect or appropriate to the problem at hand (i.e., that the solution, when
implemented correctly, will meet user needs) and to determine that the
implementation of a given design is correct.Testing entails determining whether a proposed solution meets de-sign goals and works under diverse conditions, taking into account that
most systems will be used in ways that were not intended, as well as in
expected ways.  Testing involves identifying the uses most likely to cause

a failure, developing ways of testing for all normal modes of operation,
determining typical misuses of the system, and designing the system so
that it responds gracefully when misused.   Furthermore, because some

fixes to problems may introduce more problems, special care is necessary
to fix (or manage) the initial flaws.  Testing is also best seen as an activity
concurrent with design, because the alternative is to implement a com-
plete system before knowing whether the implementation is correct.4.Manage problems in faulty solutions.When systems crash and technological tools fail, users need the abil-ity to Òdebug,Ó that is, to detect, diagnose, and correct problems and faults
(i.e., bugs).  Debugging is a complex process that often goes beyond the

technology and includes the personal and social aspects of the undertak-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness23ing (e.g., when a system has multiple interacting components, each ofwhich is the responsibility of a different individual).  Debugging also in-

volves other capabilites, such as sustained reasoning, managing complex-
ity, and testing.Debugging is necessary because the best-designed and best-integratedsystems will still exhibit unanticipated behavior.  Bugs are inevitably en-

countered in any ongoing effort using information technology, and thus
users must anticipate the need to identify them, diagnose their sources
(e.g., by recognizing patterns in observations or in fault reports, distin-
guishing root causes from derivative but proximate causes, and design-
ing systematic diagnostic experiments), understand the implications of
eliminating those sources, and take steps to modify the system appropri-
ately.  Alternatively, the appropriate response to a faulty system that is

vital to some application may well be to structure the environment in
which the system operates to limit the risk associated with its use.Testing reveals bugs, but once discovered, bugs need to be repairedcleanly and correctly.  Good design also involves designing systems that

are more easily fixed when something goes wrong (a process often known
as Òanti-buggingÓ).  For example, a well-designed system has clear docu-mentation.  Well-designed systems avoid hidden dependencies, so fixes

at one point do not create new flaws at another.  The system design itself

facilitates examination of what the system is doing and enables the re-
porting of unexpected events.Debugging also involves making the everyday elements of technol-ogy work.  When something goes wrong, it is desirable to be able to trace

the chain of events upon which correct operation depends.  A typical ex-

ample today starts with a person who tries to print a document prepared
with a word processor, and the printer doesnÕt produce any output.  There
could be a flaw anywhere along a chain of potential causes:  the printer

isnÕt plugged in or is turned off; the printer isnÕt connected to the com-puter; the wrong driver is selected; the printer queue is blocked; improper
parameters were set in the print command; and many other possible
events.  A user needs to recognize that this is a solvable problem, find the

broken link in the chain, and either solve the problem or call the appropri-
ate expert.5.Organize and navigate information structures and evaluate information.Most sustained activities involve the location, evaluation, use, andorganization of information.  Often searching for and locating informa-

tion involve other aspects of FITness, including evaluating the validity of
information and resolving conflicting accounts of situations.  (Note also

the connection to information literacy, discussed in Section 3.2.)Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThis capability also involves the ability to find and evaluate informa-tion at different levels of sophistication.  Tasks range from reading a

manual to finding and using online help.  Web searches may be necessary

to find more complex information.  Of course, as the level of complexity

rises, it becomes increasingly important (and more difficult) to ascertain
accuracy.  An individual must be prepared to evaluate the reliability of a

source, understand the nature of a shared information space such as the
Web, and regard with appropriate caution the quality of the information
retrieved.This capability also suggests that one must be able to structure infor-mation appropriately to make it useful.  The information created must be

retrievable and useful for the intended purpose.  Thus, the design process

for information structures involves elements of communication (and may
involve programming of some sort).6.Collaborate.When project responsibilities must be divided among a number ofpeople, collaboration abilities are involved.  Among other things, collabo-

ration involves a strategy for dividing a task into pieces that can be
worked on individually.  In practice, how a problem is divided is based

on both the structure of the problem and the organizational structure of
the team that will solve it (e.g., different individuals may have different
talents).  In collaborating, individuals need to avoid duplication of effort

as well as inconsistencies in the parts that they deliver for integration into
the final product.  Furthermore, each must have a clear sense for how the
various parts of a solution are made to operate together as well as the
expectations for his or her own part, the importance of clearly specified
interfaces as a technique for increasing the likelihood that parts of a solu-
tion can operate together, and a strategy for ensuring that team members
work on an appropriately recent version of the solution.Information technologies used for collaboration do not change whatis required of a collaboration, but they do change how a collaboration
takes place.  Information technologies such as telephones, e-mail, video-

conferencing, shared Web pages, chat rooms, and so on enable collabora-
tors to work together remotely and asynchronously, with relatively less
reliance on face-to-face interactions.  But learning how to cope with the

limitations of technologically mediated interactions thus becomes essen-
tial.  For example, if team members communicate by e-mail, they may

well lose some ability to communicate clearly and unambiguously; at the
very least, they may be forced to articulate things explicitly that a face-to-
face interaction would not require.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness257.Communicate to other audiences.In conveying information to others, it is often necessary to use tech-nology.  This may involve the use of images or processes as well as words.

Effective communication requires familiarity with and understanding of
the pros and cons of various means of communication, because the inter-
vening technology may change the nature of the communication.  For

example, it is much more difficult to provide driving directions to a given
location by using the telephone than by gesturing and pointing to a map.But a deeper aspect of communication with other audiences is thenature of that communication, independent of media.  For example, com-

municating problem statements or project outcomes to customers, inter-
ested individuals, and others requires an understanding of audience needs

and background knowledge.  An effective communication to experts

might involve translating informal needs into formal requirements, for
example, moving from a Òwish listÓ expressed during a lunchtime con-
versation to a more formal tasking to a work team.  These formal require-

ments form the basis for discussing whether or not a project performs
correctly, and therefore underlie the ability to test and debug.  Without

communication that carries nuance and detail, it is impossible to know
whether a project component is being built correctly.A related dimension of communication with other audiences is docu-mentation.  Documentation is almost always a component of informing

an ÒoutsiderÓ audience about the nature of a system, such as an office
system, a manufacturing system, or an information technology system.
Documentation makes content more explicit and provides many opportu-
nities for someone to think through the structure of a project.  The devel-

opment of documentation can be regarded as a process of devising the
minimum set of information and instructions needed for an unknown task
to be performed with a specific tool by a non-expert.8.Expect the unexpected.Even when a technological system works as intended to solve a prob-lem as it was originally stated, its use may still have unexpected conse-
quences, because the system is embedded in a larger social and techno-
logical context that may not have been properly anticipated.  In some

instances, these unexpected consequences may even overshadow the in-
tended outcome (i.e., the solving of the original problem).  Users should

understand that such consequences are not uncommon and work to miti-
gate or exploit them as appropriate.Unforeseen benefits or drawbacks may result when a technology de-ployed for one purpose is used for other purposes.  For example:
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY¥One of the original ÒprimaryÓ purposes of the ARPANET (the pre-
decessor to the Internet) was to facilitate the use of computers many miles
away from oneÕs local desktop; as users learned how to use the ARPANET,
they found that it was most useful for its e-mail capabilities.¥Making Web browsers in school libraries available to all studentsis intended to give students easy access to the rich information content of
the Internet.  But open access may unintentionally expose students to child

molesters, hate speech, and pornography.In other cases, unexpected side effects may occur because a techno-logical system is deployed on a much larger scale than originally expected.
For example:¥Introducing computers into schools on a large scale means thatmany teachers must be trained to use them effectively.3¥Introducing information technology into businesses on a large scaleoften results in unexpected recurring expenditures to keep hardware and
software investments current with evolving applications.4  Small applica-
tions of information technology can be funded on a shoestring (e.g., be-
cause problems can be solved in a Òquick and dirtyÓ manner).  But on a
large scale, maintenance, support, documentation, and training become
big sources of expense.Finally, technological systems may be designed for a particular inten-sity of usage, but may display unexpected behavior or may result in unex-
pected consequences when the actual intensity of usage is higher.  For

example:¥Acquisition of a cellular telephone Òfor emergency use onlyÓ for a
low monthly payment often results in first-time bills that are much larger
than expected, because the user finds the convenience of the cellular tele-
phone irresistible.3See, for example, Panel on Educational Technology.  1997.  
Report to the President on theUse of Technology to Strengthen K-12 Education in the United States, PresidentÕs Committee ofAdvisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), Washington, D.C., March, Chapter 5.4Such experiences in the private sector are often reported in the trade press.  See, for
example, M. Lynne Markus and Robert I. Benjamin. 1997. ÒAre You Gambling on a MagicBullet?Ó,  Computerworld, October 20; Clayton M Christensen.  1997.  
ÒFatal Attraction:  The
Dangers of Too Much Technology,Ó Computerworld, June 16; Vaughan Merlyn and SheilaSmith.  1997.  ÒBe Careful What You Wish For: Managing TechnologyÕs Unintended Conse-quences,Ó Computerworld, January 20.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness27¥A server designed for a particular load may crash when subject totoo many requests for service arriving at the same time, as often happens
when access is sought to a popular Web site.59.Anticipate changing technologies.While no one can predict accurately the future course of technology,technology inevitably changes.   FITness entails the capability to adapt to
new technology efficiently and how to learn a new language or system,
building on what is already known about older, perhaps similar technolo-
gies and facilities.  For example, new versions of technology and tools will

almost certainly appear, and they may offer benefits over older versions
(e.g., the new version may be faster or offer more features).  At the same

time, additional functionality often comes at a cost (e.g., the need to up-
grade system resources such as memory, or the need to learn the new set
of features).  Users thus must be prepared to weigh whether the benefits

of the inevitable new version outweigh its costs.  Decisions as to when or
whether to upgrade, which tool to use, and how many features to learn
are examples of such adaptation.10.Think about information technology abstractly.A person who effectively determines how to apply information tech-nology to his or her needs will think about information technology
abstractly.  For example, she will reflect on her use of information tech-

nology, identifying characteristics and commonalities that cut across tech-
nological experiences.  She will transfer the principles of technological

solutions from one setting to another.  She will recognize technological

analogies, and use them to become adept with new technology quickly.
She will have high expectations for technological solutions, and she will
find work-arounds when technology falls short.A second dimension of thinking abstractly about information tech-nology is to consider what aspects of information technology affect a
policy issue.  For example, a person engaged in such thought will try to

determine if and how the technology makes previous policy solutions in-
adequate.  He or she will think deeply about proposed metaphors, such as

assertions that putting up a Web page is equivalent to publishing.5William Stallings.  1996.  
Data and Computer Communications, 5th Edition, Prentice-Hall,
New York.  See also Keynote Systems, Inc.  1998.  
ÒTop 10 Discoveries About the Internet,Óand ÒHow Fast Is the Internet?Ó Available online at, respectively, <http://www.keynote.
com/measures/top10.html> and <http://www.keynote.com/measures/howfast.html>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY2.5INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CONCEPTS
6If information technology were unchanging, then most people wouldfind it unnecessary to learn information technology concepts.  The infor-

mation technology skills could be taught once and for all, and the concep-
tual foundation underlying information technology would be of interest
only to specialists.  But information technology changes daily and often

dramatically, rendering present-day skills obsolete but also offering new
opportunities to solve personally relevant problems.  How can one pre-

pare for this inevitable change?  How can one quickly upgrade one
Õs skillsto exploit new opportunities?The answer lies in understanding a few of the basic ideas and con-cepts underpinning information technology.  These concepts are approxi-

mately independent of particular technology or applications, though they
are instantiated in different ways in different technologies and applica-
tions.  In particular, the new and improved information technology of the

future will also depend on these concepts, and an understanding of the
principles on which information technology rests will continue to enable
a person to acquire information technology skills more easily.  And, be-

cause these concepts are fundamental, they are far more enduring than
information technology skills that are tied to specific technologies.The topics given in the following list touch on ideas of computation,communication, and information that are deep and intellectually challeng-
ing.  Although any of the topics could be the basis of years of graduate

study for a specialist, the basic ideas are straightforward and accessible,
having been regularly taught to nonspecialists for years.  Note also that

the time and effort required to teach and learn each concept may vary
widely.The concepts presented below reflect the committeeÕs judgmentsabout the most important conceptual foundations of information technol-
ogy contributing to FITness.  There is no intended order.
6The discussion in this section identifies various information technology concepts in aform that approximates that of a catalog description of a course.  A full explanation of the
concepts would be appropriate for a textbook, but not for a report attempting to outline abasic framework for understanding information technology.  Some of these concepts may

not be familiar to non-specialists, a point that previews a pedagogical approach discussed inChapter 4 involving the joint teaching efforts of information technology specialists and do-main experts.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness291.ComputersKey aspects of a stored-program computer, including:¥The program as a sequence of steps,¥The process of program interpretation,¥The memory as a repository for program and data (including no-tions of memory hierarchy and associated ideas of permanence/volatil-
ity), and¥Overall organization, including relationship to peripheral devices(e.g., I/O devices).The appropriate emphasis is not necessarily a specific electronic real-ization such as a particular computer, but rather the idea of a computa-
tional task as a discrete sequence of steps, the deterministic interpretation
of instructions, instruction sequencing and control flow, and the distinc-
tion between name and value.  Computers do what the program tells them

to do given particular input, and if a computer exhibits a particular capa-
bility, it is because someone figured out how to break the task into a se-
quence of basic steps, i.e., how to program it.2.Information systemsThe general structural features of an information system, including,among others, the hardware and software components, people and pro-
cesses, interfaces (both technology interfaces and human-computer inter-
faces), databases, transactions, consistency, availability, persistent stor-
age, archiving, audit trails, security and privacy and their technological
underpinnings.Most knowledge workers in the labor force interact with one or moreinformation systems, becoming knowledgeable about their characteristics
and idiosyncrasies.  Understanding the abstract structure of such systems

prepares students for employment, enhances job mobility, enables work-
ers to adapt to new systems more quickly, and helps them to exploit more
fully the facilities of a given system.3.NetworksKey attributes and aspects of information networks, including theirphysical structure (messages, packets, switching, routing, addressing, con-
gestion, local area networks (LANs), wide area networks (WANs), band-
width, latency, point-to-point communication, multicast, broadcast,
Ethernet, mobility), and logical structure (client/server, interfaces, lay-
ered protocols, standards, network services).Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYComputers are generally much more useful when connected to eachother and to the Internet.  The goal is to understand how computers can

be connected to each other and to networks, and how information is
routed between computers.   The appropriate emphasis is how the param-

eters of communication, such as latency and bandwidth, affect the respon-
siveness of a network from a userÕs point of view and how they mightlimit oneÕs ability to work.4.Digital representation of informationThe general concept of information encoding in binary form.  Differ-
ent information encodings: ASCII, digital sound, images, and video/mov-
ies.  Topics such as precision, conversion and interoperability (e.g., of file
formats), resolution, fidelity, transformation, compression, and encryp-
tion are related, as is standardization of representations to support com-
munication.The appropriate emphasis is the notion that information that is pro-cessed by computers and communication systems is represented by bits
(i.e., binary digits).  Such a representation is a uniform way for computers

and communication systems to store and transmit all information; infor-
mation can be synthesized without a master analog source simply by cre-
ating the bits and so can be used to produce everything from Toy Storyanimations to forged e-mail; symbolic information in machine-readable
form is more easily searchable than physical information.5.Information organizationThe general concepts of information organization, including forms,structure, classification and indexing, searching and retrieving, assessing
information quality, authoring and presentation, and citation.  Search en-

gines for text, images, video, audio.Information in computers, databases, libraries, and elsewhere mustbe structured to be accessible and useful.  How the data should be orga-

nized and indexed depends critically on how users will describe the infor-
mation sought (and vice versa), and how completely that description can
be specified.  In addition to locating and structuring information, it is im-

portant to be able to judge the quality (accuracy, authoritativeness, and so
forth) of information both stored and retrieved.   Section 3.2 provides some

additional discussion.6.Modeling and abstractionThe general methods and techniques for representing real-world phe-nomena as computer models, first in appropriate forms such as systemsBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness31of equations, graphs, and relationships, and then in appropriate program-ming objects such as arrays or lists or procedures.  Topics include con-

tinuous and discrete models, discrete time, events, randomization, and
convergence, as well as the use of abstraction to hide irrelevant detail.Computers can be made to play chess, predict the weather, and simu-late the crash of a sports car by abstracting real-world phenomena and
manipulating those abstractions using transformations that duplicate or
approximate the real-world processes.  One goal is understanding the re-
lationship between reality and its representation, including notions of
approximation, validity, and limitations; i.e., not all aspects of the real
world are modeled in any one program, and a model is not reality.7.Algorithmic thinking and programmingThe general concepts of algorithmic thinking, including functionaldecomposition, repetition (iteration and/or recursion), basic data organi-
zations (record, array, list), generalization and parameterization, algo-
rithm vs. program, top-down design, and refinement.  Note also that some

types of algorithmic thinking do not necessarily require the use or un-
derstanding of sophisticated mathematics.  The role of programming,

which is a specific instantiation of algorithmic thinking, is discussed in
Chapter 3.Algorithmic thinking is key to understanding many aspects of infor-mation technology. Specifically, it is essential to comprehending how and
why information technology systems work as they do.  To troubleshoot or

debug a problem in an information technology system, application, or
operation, it is essential to have some expectation of what the proper be-
havior should be, and how it might fail to be realized.  Further, algorith-

mic thinking is key to applying information technology to other person-
ally relevant situations.8.UniversalityThe Òuniversality of computersÓ is one of the fundamental facts of
information technology discovered by computing pioneers A.M. Turing
and Alonzo Church in the 1930s, before practical computers were cre-
ated.7   Shorn of its theoretical formalism and expressed informally, uni-
versality says that any computational task can be performed by any com-
puter.  The statement has several implications:
7Alonzo Church.  1936.  
ÒAn Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory,Ó Ameri-can Journal of Mathematics, 58:345-363; Alan M. Turing. 1936.  ÒOn Computable Numbers,with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem,Ó Proceedings of the London MathematicalSociety, Ser. 2, 42:230-265, 43:544-546.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY¥No computational task is so complex that it cannot be decomposedinto instructions suitable for the most basic computer.¥The instruction repertoire of a computer is largely unimportant interms of giving it power since any missing instruction types can be pro-
grammed using the instructions the machine does have.¥Computers differ by how quickly they solve a problem, notwhether they can solve the problem.¥Programs, which direct the instruction-following components of acomputer to realize a computation, are the key.Universality distinguishes computers from other types of machines(Box 2.2).9.Limitations of information technologyThe general notions of complexity, growth rates, scale, tractability,decidability, and state explosion combine to express some of the limita-
tions of information technology.  Tangible connections should be made to

applications, such as text search, sorting, scheduling, and debugging.Computers possess no intuition, creativity, imagination, or magic.
Though extraordinary in their scope and application, information tech-
nology systems cannot do everything.  Some tasks, such as calculating the

closing price for a given stock on the NASDAQ exchange, are not solvable
by computer.  Other tasks, such as that of placing objects into a container
so as to maximize the number that can be stored within it (e.g., optimally
filling boxcars, shipping containers, moving vans, or space shuttles), can
be solved only for small problems but not for large ones or those of prac-
tical importance.8  Some tasks are so easily solved that it hardly matters
which solution is used.  And, because the programs that run on comput-

ers are designed by human beings, they reflect the assumptions that their
designers build into them, assumptions that may be inappropriate or
wrong.  Thus, for example, a computer simulation of some 
ÒrealÓ phe-
nomenon may or may not accurately reflect the underlying reality (and a
naŁve user may be unable to tell the difference between a generally truesimulation and one that is fundamentally misleading).  Assessing what
8In the case of the maximization problem above (often known as the ÒknapsackÓ prob-
lem), the proper arrangement can be determined by exhaustively trying all arrangements
and orientations of the objects.  But this calculation cannot be performed in any reasonable
length of time when many objects can be placed into the container.  Yet the penalty of not
being able to find the maximizing arrangement can be high, as when shipping two contain-
ers rather than one or launching the Space Shuttle twice rather than once. When the problemis large enough that the maximizing arrangement cannot be practically computed, it is nec-essary to use Ònearly maximalÓ arrangements that can be more easily determined.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness33Box 2.2  On Universality
ÑIn Principle and in PracticeThe universality property of computers is a theoretical result.  Is it true in
practice?   The answer is yes, definitely, but there are complicating practi-
cal issues that can obscure the truth of this fact.How can a computer without connection to a printer perform the com-
putation, Òprint the reportÓ?  Of course, it cannot.  But, the computer can
without change perform the task, given a printer and the necessary soft-
ware to format the report and drive the printer.  Similarly, a computer

embedded in an automobileÕs carburetor cannot print a report either, be-cause, first, it does not have the proper input/output devices and, second,its software is permanently set to the task of mixing fuel.  But the computer,

i.e., the central processing unit, is not a limitation in these or other cases.Indeed, it is the universality of computers that explains why they are soubiquitous in modern America:  a computer chip with a program stored in

read-only memory (ROM) is more convenient to design, cheaper to build,
more reliable, and easier to maintain than specialized circuitry for control-ling appliances, automobile subsystems, and other mechanical devices, as
well as electronics like cell phones and Global Positioning System (GPS)
devices.Further, the observation that applications like word processing requiredifferent software to run on a Macintosh versus a PC seems to contradict
the above claims and imply that the instruction set does matter.  In a nar-
row sense it does, since the Mac cannot directly execute the binary encod-
ing of a program specialized to the PC and vice versa.  This is because the
Mac and the PC use different microprocessor chips and the binary files forsoftware applications are customized for each type of microprocessor.  But
those two different binary encodings can be created from a single source

program by a translator (compiler) that specializes the computation to each
instruction set.  The two machines are literally running the same source
program, i.e., performing the same word processing computation.  And

there is an indirect sense in which any PC software can run on a Mac andvice versa.  A program can be written for one machine to emulate the
instruction set of the other machine, allowing it to execute the actual bi-
nary encoding used by the other machine.  Being indirect, this would be
slower than a customized version, but it truly illustrates universality.information technology can be appliedÑand when it should be appliedÑis essential in todayÕs information age.10.Societal impact of information and information technologyThe technical basis for social concerns about privacy, intellectual prop-
erty, ownership, security, weak/strong encryption, inferences about per-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYsonal characteristics based on electronic behavior such as monitoring Websites visited, Ònetiquette,Ó Òspamming,Ó and free speech in the Internet
environment.Understanding social issues strongly connected to information tech-nology goes beyond FITness to general principles of good citizenship.

Policy issues that relate to information technology, including privacy, en-
cryption, copyright, and related concerns, are increasingly common to-
day, and informed citizens must have a basis for understanding the sig-
nificance of those issues and for making reasoned judgments about them.Information technology connects to the world at large in many ways,and characteristics of the technology have implications for everyday is-
sues.   Consider, for example, intellectual property.  Copyright is accom-

panied by a well-established body of law, but now that the Web makes
images and documents available to a huge audience, it has become much
more important for Web users to understand that the ability to see an
image on the Web does not automatically imply that the image can be
copied or reused.Numerous other issues are apparent today on which many non-tech-nologists are asked to make judgments.  Is the Internet just another form

of publication, and therefore subject to the same First Amendment and
copyright protections that newspapers enjoy?  Is encryption a potential

weapon that needs to be kept out of foreign hands?  Why are standards

important, and how do we promote the use of standards without permit-
ting unregulated monopolies to stifle innovation?  Does inviting techno-

logically skilled workers from other countries create or destroy jobs?  How

do we encourage children to achieve the highest levels of technological
competence?  Does information technology cause job displacement and/

or upskilling?  How is it possible to promote social equity regarding ac-

cess to information technology?DiscussionThese fundamental concepts represent major ideas underpinning in-formation technology.  The claim that FITness demands an understand-

ing of these concepts is most frequently challenged by an analogy:  If most

people can drive without understanding how an automobile works, why
should anyone need to know how a computer works?The weakness in this analogy is embodied in the difference betweenthe two kinds of machines.  Automobiles perform essentially one task,

transporting people and things from one location to another, and are inca-
pable of other physical tasks, say, mixing concrete.  Any computer can

perform any information processing taskÑthis is the concept of univer-sality.  It is not only a principle; it is a fact used every day.  When one
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness35wants to manage a household budget, one doesnÕt buy a new computerfor budgeting.  Rather, one buys and installs software to add budgeting to

the computerÕs other capabilities.  Not being specialized like other ma-
chines that directly affect the physical world, computers may well affect
our lives more than these other machines have, including automobiles.
Knowing the conceptual foundations, then, is essential to understanding
this impactÑwhat information technology can do, what it cannot do, whatrisks computers and access to information bring, and so on.  Armed with
such knowledge, individuals can make informed choices ranging from
personal decisions (like taking precautions against computer viruses) to
matters of public policy such as protecting privacy interests.An equally important motivation for learning information technol-ogy concepts is that they provide foundational knowledge to be used
when acquiring and applying the intellectual capabilities.  To perform the

reasoning and thinking activities embodied in the capabilities, it is neces-
sary to have some understanding of the range of possibilities.  Further-

more, understanding these concepts enables an individual to be more ver-
satile and more creative in his or her use of information technology tools.Finally, Box 2.3 points out that even in a world in which the publicÕsexposure to information technology is through specialized information
appliances rather than desktop computers or through technologies that
adapt to user needs and knowledge, the fundamental concepts of infor-
mation technology will still be useful in understanding how to use such
devices effectively.2.6INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SKILLS
Skills such as managing a personal computer, using word processing,network browsers, mail, and spreadsheet software, or understanding an
operating system are what are most usually subsumed under the label of
Òcomputer literacy.ÓBecause information technology skills are closely tied to todayÕs ap-plications, the set of necessary skills can be expected to change at about
the same rate that commercial information technology changes, i.e., quite
rapidly.   (Note, for example, that a list of skills developed five years ago

would not have mentioned the Web or the Internet.)  Changes in the spe-
cific interests and needs of the individual involved also have a significant
effect on what skills are (or become) necessary.  Over the course of a life-

time, individuals who use information technology must regularly evalu-
ate their skills and determine which new skills they need for their work-
place or personal success.  FITness entails a continuing acquisition of new

skills and adaptation of a set of skills to a changing environment.The list of skills below is appropriate for todayÕs technologies (circaBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox 2.3FITness, Personal Computers, InformationAppliances, and Adaptive TechnologyToday, desktop computers are a primary platform through which indi-
viduals interact with information technology.  But whether this proposition
will remain true in the future is an open question.  Some reports suggest

that information appliancesÑsingle-purpose devices that manipulate in-formationÑmay become more common and ubiquitous in the future.  In-
deed, those making this prediction argue that information appliances can
be made so easy to use that no knowledge of information technology willbe necessary to operate them.Predictions of the future technology environment are notoriously uncer-tain.  It is likely that today
Õs desktop computers (or their equivalents) willcontinue to be used by information workers.  But the intellectual frame-
work outlined in this chapter for FITness will continue to have applicability
even to individuals dealing with information appliances.  Of course, the
specific skills needed will be different.  But the basic concepts and intellec-
tual capabilities of FITness will continue to be relevant.  For example:
¥An algorithm of some sort will be driving the operation of an infor-
mation appliance.  Understanding the general characteristics of algorithms
will help the user to understand the limitations of a given device.  For

example, a navigation system for a car may provide the 
ÒbestÓ route from
Point A to B; the user may find it useful to know whether 
ÒbestÓ refers to the
most scenic route or the shortest route or the fastest route.¥Input to an information appliance is likely to remain Òbrittle,Ó in the
sense that the device will respond to the input that the user actually pro-vides, not the input that the user intended to provide.  This is a conse-
quence of several concepts, including the digital representation of informa-
tion and the nature of computational devices and information systems.1999) and focuses on what one would need to know to buy a personalcomputer, set it up, use the principal software that comes with it, sub-
scribe to an Internet service provider, and use its services.  These items

and other similar ones emerged from a question posed to attendees at the
committeeÕs January 1998 workshop about what an information technol-ogy-literate person should know.This list of skills extends in one important way the content of  Òcom-puter literacyÓ courses that teach individuals how to use specific software
packages.  It is true that students need to use specific software and hard-

ware to acquire skills with information technology.  But the skills involved

in the committeeÕs list are generic skills, rather than the specific skillsBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness37needed to operate a particular vendorÕs product.  For example, 
ÒwordprocessingÓ refers to the use of functionality common to most or all word
processors, rather than the specific commands, key-bindings, or dialog
boxes of one vendorÕs software.  Acquiring these skills includes under-
standing what similarities and differences to expect between different
products for the same task.TodayÕs set of ten essential skills includes:1.Setting up a personal computerA person who uses computers should be able to connect the parts of a¥A wireless information appliance that facilitates interaction with large
amounts of data will require a local database for a fast response.  The
navigation system described above, for example, will in general not re-
ceive maps through the air, but rather will require maps Òpre-storedÓ in
some way that is local to the device.¥Identifying and correcting faults will always be necessary for the userto understand how he or she used the device improperly.
Furthermore, a knowledge of the basic concepts of FITness will enablea person to move more freely among information appliances.   For ex-

ample, a user will need to know to look for a way to correct mistaken
input.None of this is to argue the impossibility of operating an informationappliance by the memorized application of a particular set of keystrokesÑwhich today enables some individuals to obtain something useful from a
computer.   But gaining the full value from either a computer or an infor-

mation appliance will require the full intellectual range of FITness.In a similar vein, it can be argued that information technology shouldbeÑand someday will beÑdesigned to minimize what the individual mustknow in order to use it.  For example, some information technology appli-cations attempt to adapt to a particular userÕs style and needs.  Other appli-
cations attempt to conceal their internal operation to reduce the burden on
the user.Such technological adaptations to the relatively naŁve user are unques-tionably helpful.  But they do not
Ñindeed, cannotÑeliminate the need forFITness.  For example, it is hard to imagine that a complex application has

no operating faults in it, and thus users will always have to cope with thingsthat donÕt work.  All of the rationales articulated above for FITness in the
context of information appliances equally apply to well-engineered and
user-adaptive information technology applications.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYpersonal computer and its major peripherals (e.g., a printer).  This entailsknowing about the physical appearance of cables and ports, as well as
having some understanding of how to configure the computer (e.g., know-
ing that most computers provide a way to set the system clock, or how to
select a screen saver and why one may need to use a screen saver).2.Using basic operating system featuresTypical of todayÕs operating system use is the ability to install newsoftware, delete unwanted software, and invoke applications.  There are

many other skills that could reasonably be included in this category, such
as the ability to find out from the operating system whether there is suffi-
cient disk space.3.Using a word processor to create a text documentToday, minimal skills in this area include the ability to select fonts,paginate, organize, and edit documents.  Integration of image and other

data is becoming essential.  In the near future, requirements in this area

will likely include the creation of Web pages using specialized authoring
tools.4.Using a graphics and/or artwork package to create illustrations, slides, orother image-based expressions of ideasToday, this skill involves the ability to use the current generation ofpresentation software and graphics packages.5.Connecting a computer to a networkToday, this process can be as simple as wiring the computer to a tele-phone jack and subscribing to an Internet service provider, although as
more powerful communications options become available, this process
may become more complex.6.Using the Internet to find information and resourcesToday, locating information on the Internet involves the use of brows-ers and search engines.  The use of search engines and browsers requires

an understanding of oneÕs needs and how they relate to what is availableand what can be found readily, as well as the ability to specify queries and
evaluate the results.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTELLECTUAL FRAMEWORK OF FITness397.Using a computer to communicate with othersToday, electronic mail is a primary mode of computer-based commu-nication. Variants and improvements, as well as entirely new modes of
communication, are expected in the future.8.Using a spreadsheet to model simple processes or financial tablesThis skill includes the ability to use standard spreadsheet systemsand/or specialized packages (e.g., tax preparation software).9.Using a database system to set up and access useful informationToday, SQL-based systems9 are becoming ubiquitous in the work-
place, and personal information managers are becoming increasingly com-

mon.  In the future, different approaches, perhaps Web-oriented, may be-

come the prevalent mode.10.Using instructional materials to learn how to use new applications orfeaturesThis skill involves using online help files and reading and understand-ing printed manuals.  One aspect of this process is obtaining details or

features of systems one already comprehends; a second aspect is using
the tutorial to grasp the essential models and ideas underlying a new sys-
tem.2.7FITness IN PERSPECTIVE
The intellectual content of FITness is rich and deep.  But the depth
and richness of this content are determined by the nature of information
technology.  Although different individuals need different degrees of fa-

miliarity with the different elements of FITness, a good understanding of
and facility with all of the skills, concepts, and capabilities of FITness are
necessary for individuals to exploit the full power of information technol-
ogy across a range of different applications.Nevertheless, such depth and richness raise the question of the extentto which it is reasonable to expect that the content of FITness is accessible
to a wide range of the citizenry.  For perspective on this question, it is

useful to consider the National Council of Teachers of MathematicsÕ9 SQL is an acronym for Structured Query Language, a common language used in interac-
tions with databases.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY(NCTM) standards for mathematics education and the National ResearchCouncilÕs standards for science education.  As described in Appendix B,
such organizations focus on the mathematical and scientific education of
all students, rather than a special few with previously demonstrated apti-
tude for mathematics or science.  The organizations that produced these

standards for mathematics and science education make the case that the
intellectual content articulated in the standards is rich, deep, and most
importantly not Òdumbed down.Ó  These organizations believe that learn-
ing about science and mathematics is valuable not just for future scientists
and mathematicians, but also for a very wide range of the citizenry.The essentials of FITness are not for the most part dependent onknowledge of sophisticated mathematics.  Indeed, the capabilities and

concepts, though not the skills, are intellectually accessible even without
computers per se.  For example, the concept of an algorithm can be ex-

pressed and conveyed in an entirely qualitative and non-mathematical
manner even to a 4th grader by discussing the rules of a game or follow-
ing a recipe in the kitchen.  Thus, the committee believes that the intellec-

tual content of FITness is no less accessible to citizens than the mathemat-
ics and science contained within the NCTM and NRC standards.A second issue is the following:  by design, FITness is a body of knowl-
edge and understanding that enables individuals to use information tech-
nology effectively in a variety of different contexts.  But does being FIT

mean that one will never need to rely on an information technology ex-
pert?  Put differently, does an individual
Õs consultation of an informationtechnology expert imply a lack of FITness for that individual?There is certainly some level of FITness at which an individual willnot need to rely on an expert to fix an information technology problem or
to exploit a new opportunity offered by information technology.   But

even someone who is FIT enough to not have to rely on an expert may
find it advantageous to do so anyway.  For example, a highly FIT indi-

vidual may simply decide that it is not worth his or her time to fix a prob-
lem, even if he or she could do so.  Furthermore, even if an individual

with more basic levels of FITness may still need to consult with an infor-
mation techology expert to solve a technology problem or to describe a
technology solution, that basic understanding and knowledge will help
him or her to interact constructively with the expert (e.g., to recognize
that a problem is indeed solvable; to explain the problem or solution re-
quirements more precisely; or to understand, implement, or dispute an
approach that the expert proposes).Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLATERAL ISSUES41413Collateral IssuesChapter 2 outlines an intellectual framework for FITness.  But the spe-
cifics of the committeeÕs articulation inevitably lead to concerns about two
related issues.  First, the role of programming as an essential element of

understanding information technology is an issue that has been long de-
bated in the computer science community.  And, because the issue may

seem like an esoteric diversion for the non-specialist, some words of ex-
planation are appropriate.  Second, for many years the library science com-

munity has promulgated the notion of information literacy.  Because in-

formation literacy and fluency with information technology share certain
elements, an explicit comparison between the two is warranted.3.1THE ROLE OF PROGRAMMING
Algorithmic thinking is a valuable ability for many educated people,yet programmingÑthe act of expressing an algorithm in a specific form to
solve a problemÑis widely seen as the purview of the specialist.  Algo-

rithmic thinking and programming were listed together as a concept in
Chapter 2, because they are very closely related forms of the same phe-
nomenon.  They are an implied constituent of many of the skills, concepts,

and capabilities that embody the intellectual framework of FITness.  This
central role of programming coupled with the perception that it is the
domain of experts mandates a careful explanation of what programming
is and why it is so critical to FITness.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY3.1.1What Is Programming?
Many activities have been called programming, but not all of themmeet the definition appropriate for FITness.  For example, setting a video
cassette recorder to tape an upcoming TV show is not programming, de-
spite the fact that it has become a cultural icon for a technological task.
Nor is scheduling the fall TV series programming as used here.Programming, for the purposes of this report, is defined as the con-struction of a specification (sequence of instructions or program) for solv-
ing a problem by an agent other than the programmer.  The action entails

decomposing the problem into a sequence of steps and specifying them
sufficiently precisely, unambiguously, and primitively that the interpret-
ing agent, usually a computer, can effectively realize the intended solu-
tion.Computer programming in a standard programming language meetsthis definition, of course, but programming arises in many other cases in
which the agent is a human and the language is English.  Giving direc-

tions to soccer players to find a particular field in a city, especially one not
identifiable by numeric street/avenue coordinates, constitutes program-
ming by this definition.  A player is the agent interpreting or executing

the instructions.  Recipes with precise quantities of ingredients and pre-

cisely described preparation and cooking steps are programs executed by
cooks.  Toy manufactures write programs, called assembly instructions,

for parents to follow, and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) writes the
program for Òdeductible IRA contributionsÓ that taxpayers follow.  (No
comment is offered about the comprehensibility of such programs to an
individual human being.)Setting the VCR does not constitute programming by the foregoingdefinition, because only start/stop times, i.e., data, are being given.  The

data is input to a hard-wired program in the VCR.  (This is parameter

specification in technical terminology.)  The situation does not call for the

user to identify any sequence of steps.  Using a phone menu is another

instance of data presentation, though setting up the phone menu may
constitute programming.  One
Õs ability to set a VCR, however, does ben-efit from using and understanding some of the FITness concepts and ca-
pabilities, e.g., dealing with unintended consequences, illustrating the
point that components of FITness can translate to other technical settings.Critical to the programming enterprise is specification that meets theconditions ÒpreciselyÓ and 
Òprimitively.Ó¥ÒPreciseÓ specifications are essential to provide assurance that the
agent can determine which actions are to be performed and in what order,
so that the intended result is achieved.  Avoiding ambiguity is obviously
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLATERAL ISSUES43crucial, but even seemingly unambiguous commands can fail.  For ex-
ample, Òturn rightÓ fails if the soccer players can approach the intersec-
tion from either the east or the west, so Òturn northÓ is preferred.  Simi-
larly, ÒbeatÓ and 
Òfold inÓ are not synonyms for 
ÒstirÓ when combining
ingredients, so successful recipes use precise terminology selected with
great care.  An important non-technology advantage of programming

knowledge is that the need for precision can promote precision in every-
day communication.¥ÒPrimitiveÓ specifications are essential to provide assurance that
the steps to be performed are within the operational repertoire of the ex-
ecuting agent.  The programmer may understand the task as 
Òpi times Rsquared,Ó but if the executing agent doesn
Õt know what ÒsquaredÓ means
or how to accomplish it, then the programmer must express the task in
more primitive terms, perhaps revising it to Òpi times R times R.Ó  For
many taxpayers, the word ÒqualifyingÓ in the IRS
Õs instruction phraseÒsubtract qualifying contributionsÓ would likely fail the test for primi-
tiveness, because they would not readily understand what the term
means.Although programming can be as simple as giving a few commandsÑpreheat oven to 350 degrees, combine dry ingredients, stir in eggs, press
into greased loaf pan, bake for 20 minutesÑmost solutions require theuse of conditional instructions and repetition of groups of instructions.Conditional instructions are those that may or may not be performed,depending on the input to the program.  This means that for different

inputs, different sub-sequences of instructions will be performed.  For

example, in Box 3.1, the conditional instructions are presented for
determining what happens in a baseball game when a batter walks.  Pro-

gramming with conditional instructions allows for solutions that can

respond to different situations, leading to potentially more complex com-
putations.  Thus, one sequence of instructions is executed if there is a

runner on first base, and a different sequence is executed if there is not.Repeated instruction execution is a second essential programmingconstruct, since it allows a program, for example, to process any number
of data items rather than just a fixed number.    Repetition is usually ac-

complished by enclosing processing instructions in a loop that repeats the
processing until the data items are exhausted.  Determining when the loop

is completed requires a conditional test.  Box 3.2 illustrates the use of it-

eration to calculate a batting average.FITness-level programming experience implies facility with condi-tional instructions and repetition constructs.   Though there are many

types of instructions used by trained programmers, most are built on theBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox 3.1Conditional Instructions for a WalkThe sentence shown in (a) is a specification in English of how the batter
and runners advance when a batter walks in baseball.  The indentations
group the true and false alternatives of each conditional phrase.  Though
the solution in (a) is entirely satisfactory, a programmer would notice the
redundancy of this direct solution and might reorganize it as shown in (b).The (b) solution tests for the presence of a runner on base and resolves thatcase, rather than treating the absence and presence of runners as separate
cases.  Notice that in program (b) a semicolon is used to separate consecu-
tive statements, and parentheses have been added to assist in understand-ing the programmerÕs intent.Solution (a)If no runner is on 1st base then the batter goes to 1st baseotherwise there is a runner on 1st base, soif no runner is on 2nd base then the runner on 1st basegoes to 2nd base and the batter goes to 1st baseotherwise there are runners on 1st and 2nd, soif no runner is on 3rd base then the runner on 2nd basegoes to 3rd, the runner on 1st goes to 2nd base
and the batter goes to 1st baseotherwise the bases are loaded, sothe runner on 3rd goes home, the runner on
2nd goes to 3rd, the runner on 1st goes to2nd, and the batter goes to 1st.Solution (b)If there is a runner on 1st base then,(if there is a runner on 2nd base then,    (if there is a runner on 3rd base then
    the runner on 3rd goes home);
    the runner on 2nd goes to 3rd);
the runner on 1st goes to 2nd);the batter goes to 1st.principles of conditional and/or repeated execution.  In addition to expe-
rience with conditional and repetition constructs, FITness requires experi-
ence with at least two other fundamental programming ideas:  functional

decomposition and functional abstraction.  These are the powerful mecha-

nisms used by programmers to solve large problems (functional decom-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLATERAL ISSUES45position) and to reuse their earlier programming efforts (functional ab-straction).Finally, it is necessary to address the question of what programminglanguage should be used to teach programming.  This question has ab-

sorbed much energy of computer scientists, but the committee believes
that while FITness does imply a basic programming ability, that ability
need not be acquired in using a conventional programming language.  For

example, certain spreadsheet operations and advanced HTML program-
ming for Web pages, among others, demand an understanding of enough
programming concepts that they can provide this basic programming ex-
perience.  Such applications will often yield more personally relevant op-

portunities to learn programming than programming in a conventional
programming language.1Box 3.2 Using Repeated Instruction Execution to Compute
DiMaggioÕs 1950 Batting AverageFiguring a batting average requires that the hits and times at bat for eachgame be accumulated, so a loop is used to consider the outcome of eachgame.  The processing instructions are conditional on whether DiMaggio

played in the game.  The 
ÒgameÓ is the data value that is changing with
each iteration of the loop.  Notice that this program assumes DiMaggio
batted in at least one game in 1950.Let the count_of_the_number_of_hits begin at 0.Let the total_times_at_bat begin at 0.
For each game of the 1950 season beginning with the first,     if DiMaggio played in the game then
  add DiMaggio
Õs hits in this game to count_of_the_number_of_hits;  add DiMaggio
Õs times at bat in this game to total_times_at_bat;DiMaggioÕs batting average is number_of_hits / total_times_at_bat.1And, programming has advanced significantly in recent years.  Readers who may have
been familiar with programming in the past, but have not stayed current, might be sur-
prised to see how great has been the progress.  Achievements such as object-oriented pro-
gramming and program development environments have combined with graphical userinterfaces and browsers to change a personÕs contact with programming in two significantways.  Furthermore, programming has been greatly simplified because of convenient access
to a large reservoir of software.  New scripting languages such as PERL, Java, and VBScriptallow nonprofessionals to write modest programs that solve their problems.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThis is not to say that the study of a conventional programming lan-guage cannot be sufficiently interesting, exciting, and rewarding for some
students.  But it is important to emphasize that being an accomplished

programmer in a conventional programming language, e.g., C or Fortran
or Java, is not sufficient by itself for FITness.  Recognizing the centrality of

programming, some traditional Òinformation technology literacyÓ cur-
ricula have focused almost exclusively on programming in a conventional
programming language.  But programming cuts across the FITness spec-

trum, being essential to some aspects and nearly irrelevant to others.3.1.2The Importance of Programming Knowledge
The foregoing section outlines basic programming principles that areas fundamental to algorithmic thinking as multiplication and division are
to mathematical thinking.  Indeed, the parallel with mathematics is worth

pursuing somewhat further.At one time, arithmetic was considered the realm of specialistsÑreckonersÑwho were considered to have spiritual or magical powers.2Now, everyone learns arithmetic, calculators free us from the tedium ofthe actual symbol manipulation, and computers perform trillions of arith-
metic operations per second.  Educated people in industrialized societies

give arithmetic little thoughtÑit is an essential of modern life, a tool intheir world of quantities.Analogously, programming, the medium of algorithmic thinking, hastraditionally been the realm of specialists.  But, as is evident from the

discussion above, programming principles are comprehensible and ac-
cessible.  Universal knowledge of these principles is fundamental to an

information society.  To apply and exploit information processing tech-

nology that creates, manipulates, searches, and displays information, the
population must be able to think algorithmically.  As with arithmetic, the

point is evident to those who think algorithmically, though it may be less
obvious to those who do not yet do so.How programming knowledge and experience can benefit one in aninformation society is made more explicit in the following three reasons
for learning these concepts:1.Exploiting information technology systems.  Many prepackaged appli-
cations can be customized, extended, or enhanced using basic program-2See, for example, Carl C. Boyer and Uta C. Merzbach, 1991, A History of Mathematics, John
Wiley and Sons, New York, or Eric Temple Bell, 1991,  The Magic of Numbers, Dover Publica-tions, New York.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLATERAL ISSUES47ming concepts.  Serious use of spreadsheets requires programming, as
does creating a sophisticated Web page.  Furthermore, while not every

personally relevant application will be available as prepackaged software,

a person with a basic knowledge of programming may be able to ÒscriptÓa solution using some of the large number of software building blocks
now available commercially.  Construction of complex systems from com-

mercial software using macros, scripting facilities, shell commands, or
other compositional tools is one way for non-specialists to use informa-
tion technology in a personally relevant way.Such activities constitute programmingÑdeveloping a series of stepsfor an agent to solve a problemÑwhere the Òprimitive operationsÓ can be
huge, e.g., whole database searches.  In essence, this type of programming

gives the non-specialist user the power to exploit tools fully and to trans-
form computing resources so that they more completely meet their needs.2.Gaining knowledge assumed for capabilities.  Some of the capabilities
that are at the heart of FITness rely explicitly or implicitly on program-
ming knowledge.  Thus, even if one does not expect to write programs,

fully applying the capabilities requires some degree of familiarity with
programming.  For example, problems arise routinely in computing, even

for the most casual computer user, so troubleshooting or ÒdebuggingÓ (a
capability listed in Chapter 2) is needed.  Yet, figuring out what device,

system, or application is failing, and how, presumes at least rudimentary

knowledge of how it is constructed and supposed to work.  Rebooting the

computer, restarting the application, or ÒjigglingÓ a connection may ulti-
mately be necessary to solve a problem, but the need for such actions (and
the likelihood that they may not solve the problem) can be reduced by
understanding the algorithmic nature of the device or system and hence
its possible failure modes.  Other capabilities that assume programming

principles are those related to sustained reasoning and managing com-
plexity.3.Application to non-information technology problems.  Since program-
ming concepts arise in situations not related to information technology,
formal instruction in information technology-related programming can
be directly related to such problems.  For example, returning to the situa-

tion of giving directions to a soccer field, a person who understands
programming would likely provide directions that are independent of ori-
entation, include ÒsentinelsÓ of the form, 
ÒIf you pass a church, youÕvegone too far,Ó and are unambiguous, preferring 
Òat the third lightÓ rather
than Òafter three lights.Ó  It hardly justifies studying programming, but itis a benefit.  An example from an unexpected quarter:  English professors
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYare authenticating ChaucerÕs tales using programs designed for testingDNA similarity that the professors modified to compare literary texts.3In addition, the continual use of abstract thinking in programmingcan guide and discipline oneÕs approach to problems in a way that hasvalue well beyond the information technology-programming setting.  In

essence, programming becomes a laboratory for discussing and develop-
ing valuable life skills, as well as one element of the foundation for learn-
ing about other subjects.For example, one difference between an algorithm and a program isthat the algorithm embodies the basic structural features of the computa-
tion independently of the details of implementation, whereas a program
commits to a specific set of details to solve a particular problem.  Under-

standing this interrelationship is basic programming, but the principle
applies throughout life, as the giving-directions example above suggests.
One observes that a solution technique (corresponding to the algorithm)
can be used in different problem situations (corresponding to the pro-
grams).  Inversely, one expects that a successful problem solution embod-

ies a more general process that is independent of the situational specifics.
These observations are well-known life experience that most people actu-
ally acquire in daily life.  But, these observations could be taught in the

classroom, since programming provides both a concrete context for dis-
cussing the more general point, and a multitude of instances.  This is an

exciting possibility.  Of course, there is no substitute for experience, but

the ability to think abstractly, and to understand oneÕs experience usingabstractions, can be benefits that arise from an understanding of abstrac-
tion in programming.3.2THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
INFORMATION LITERACY AND FITness4ÒInformation literacyÓ is a term long used by the library science com-
munity to denote a competence to find, evaluate, and make use of infor-3See Adrian C. Barbrook, Christopher J. Howe, Norman Blake, and Peter Robinson.  1998.
ÒThe Phylogeny of The Canterbury Tales,Ó Nature, August 27.  Based on their adaptation andapplication of computerized techniques used by biologists to reconstruct evolutionary treesof different species from their DNA, the authors conclude that a number of neglected manu-
scripts of The Canterbury Tales are close descendants of ChaucerÕs original version, whilemany manuscripts often used by scholars are actually more distant relatives.4This section is largely adapted (by permission) from Clifford Lynch, director, Coalitionfor Networked Information (CNI), ÒInformation Literacy and Information Technology Lit-eracy:  New Components in the Curriculum for a Digital Culture,
Ó position paper submitted
to the Committee on Information Technology Literacy, February 1998.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLATERAL ISSUES49mation appropriately.  Information literacy and FITness are interrelated
but quite distinct.  Information literacy focuses on content and communi-

cation:  it encompasses authoring, information finding and organization,

research, and information analysis, assessment, and evaluation.  Content

can take many forms:  text, images, video, computer simulations, and

multimedia interactive works.  Content can also serve many purposes:

news, art, entertainment, education, research and scholarship, advertis-
ing, politics, commerce, and documents and records that structure activi-
ties of everyday business and personal life.  Information literacy subsumes

but goes far beyond the traditional textual literacy that has been consid-
ered part of a basic education (the ability to read, write, and critically
analyze various forms of primarily textual literary works or personal and
business documents).  By contrast, FITness focuses on a set of intellectual
capabilities, conceptual knowledge, and contemporary skills associated
with information technology.Both information literacy and FITness are essential for individuals touse information technology effectively.   Today, the acquisition and shap-

ing of information are increasingly mediated by information technology.
Information technology shapes the channels of publication, access, and
dissemination of information.  The nature of increasingly common digital

documents raises new issues in the activities and practices of analysis,
assessment, evaluation, and criticism.   Much of today
Õs information tech-nology and supporting infrastructure is intended to enable communica-
tion, information finding, information access, and information delivery.As it relates to FITness, information literacy implies that the skills andintellectual capabilities usually associated with traditional textual lit-
eracyÑauthoring and critical and analytic reading (including the assess-ment of purpose, bias, accuracy, and quality)Ñmust be extended to thefull range of visual (image and video) and multimedia communication
genres. This includes an appreciation of interactive media, and also a rec-
ognition of the fluid nature of many digital forms, plus an understanding
of the growing ability to use computers to edit or even fabricate what
have traditionally been viewed as factual records of events (such as im-
ages).Furthermore, as computer-based searching becomes increasingly cen-tral to information finding and research, FITness will require an under-
standing of how searching systems work, and of the interplay between
indexing techniques, descriptive practices and organizational systems
(cataloging, abstracting, indexing, rating), searching, and information ac-
cessibility, visibility, and impact.  One important point is the limitations

of both digital information resources (much material will not be available
in digital form for the foreseeable future) and also of various searching
techniques.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFITness also involves an understanding of information resources andhow they are mapped into technological and economic structures, and
how these resources interrelate.  In essence, individuals need to form a

conceptual map of information space.  For example, they need to be

guided in developing mental models of the relationships among docu-
ments on the Internet and in proprietary databases, library collections,
and the like as a basis for learning to evaluate what information sources
are likely to be most appropriate for their various information needs.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS51514Implementation Considerations4.1IMPLEMENTATION IN PERSPECTIVE
Chapters 2 and 3 describe an intellectual framework for FITness.   But
while the committee believes that the framework of FITness is generally
relevant to a very broad range of the citizenry, implementational issues
are very different for every segment of the population that might benefit
from FITness.  As noted in the preface, issues of committee expertise and
budget imposed some practical constraints, and the committee ultimately
decided to restrict the implementational focus of the report to the higher-education community with which it was most familiarÑthe four-year col-

lege or university graduate.  Box 4.1 offers a few comments on FITness

and K-12 education.A focus on college graduates is pragmatic as a first place to beginefforts to promote FITness:¥Efforts to promote FITness may be easier to implement in colleges
and universities at first, compared to K-12 schools or settings outside edu-
cational institutions.  A multitude of college-level models exist for pro-

moting FITness, as described below.  Furthermore, colleges and universi-

ties generally enjoy greater autonomy in changing curricula, as compared
to K-12 schools (or school districts).  And, they tend to have more comput-

ing infrastructure than K-12 schools and a greater ability to invest in more
infrastructure.¥K-12 teachers are themselves schooled in colleges and universities.
In the long run, FITness efforts that reach university graduates are an
important enabler for efforts to promote such fluency among K-12 stu-
dents.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox 4.1K-12 and FITnessAlthough the implementational focus of this report is primarily collegeand university education, a few comments about K-12 and FITness are
appropriate.First, the committee has described FITness as a continuum.  The notionof a continuum is quite consistent with a powerful pedagogical approach
in which an individual learns or covers the ÒsameÓ material repeatedly, butfrom increasingly sophisticated perspectives that build on what has previ-

ously been learned.  Thus, what a fourth grader learns in developing FITness
is consistent with what he or she will learn in eighth grade, but in eighthgrade the individual can bring to bear on his or her FITness efforts a broader
range of experience and interests, as well as greater maturity, intellectualsophistication, and ability to abstract.Second, what students can or should learn in college naturally dependson what they have learned prior to college.  As efforts to promote FITness
begin to take hold in the K-12 domain, colleges and universities will beable to make increasingly stronger assumptions about the level of prepara-
tion that entering students bring to such courses, in the form of information
technology concepts and skills learned in secondary school or at home.Indeed, it may be that over time, some degree of FITness will become
prerequisite knowledge required on entrance to college, like knowledge of
algebra or a foreign language.Third, the committee hopes that although it has produced a report thatcommunicates most successfully to college and university faculty in disci-
plines other than those that traditionally make great use of informationtechnology, the report will prove useful as a point of departure for the otheraudiences it would eventually wish to influence.  It may well be that grade-

appropriate efforts promoting FITness will be necessary (though not suffi-cient) for the success of efforts of K-12 educators to integrate informationtechnology into K-12 education.  Many of the issues faced in colleges and
universities are similar to those faced in K-12 education as well.  These
include decisions about allocation of scarce technological resources, re-placement cycles for machines, disposition of outmoded technology, rapid
redesign of courses to incorporate new technological tools, and reassess-
ment of instructional priorities based on technological innovation.  In tack-
ling the relatively simpler problems of content and pedagogy, the commit-
tee hopes that its work will provide an intellectually sound foundation upon
which these other audiences can build their efforts.Fourth, educational standards that focus on the acquisition of specificskills or recitation of specific concepts promote learning in isolation with-out any realizable connection to anything of interest to most individuals.Standards related to information technology revised to better reflect the
integration of intellectual capabilities, fundamental concepts, and contem-porary skills described in this report suggest a more holistic considerationbased on the use of portfolios and other similar techniques.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS53¥Future job growth is expected to be largest in those occupationsrequiring education beyond high school.  Many of these jobs can be char-
acterized as jobs for Òknowledge workers,Ó a very broad category of em-
ployment that is more likely to require the use of information technol-
ogy.1A final reason for emphasizing college and university efforts is to pro-mote equity.  In an ideal world, all students would have access to the

technological resources necessary to support their personal and profes-
sional interests.  But in reality, technological advances frequently leave

behind individuals with few opportunities, resources, wealth, or access to
public facilities.2  Colleges and universities provide important opportuni-
ties for such individuals, and such opportunities can be used to break
down barriers to education, knowledge, and power.   Conscious efforts to

attack disparities in preparation among incoming students may well be
necessary to promote a goal of all students graduating more FIT.Enhancing undergraduate education for FITness will not be easy.  U.S.
undergraduate education is challenged as never before.  Access to knowl-

edge has become a requirement for many decent jobs, while at the same
time, students, parents, administrators, and public officials look with dis-
may at the prospect of longer and more expensive courses of study re-
quired for a four-year baccalaureate degree.   Solving the problem with

ever-more narrow disciplines whose graduates know more and more
about less and less is unsatisfactory.   Such segmentation poorly serves a

world where career changes are frequent and cross-disciplinary commu-
nication is needed to solve systemic problems.The committee has considered the challenge of undergraduate educa-tion in two ways.  First, its definition of FITness is parsimonious, broad,

and flexible, with only ten requirements each in the three types of knowl-
edge: capabilities, concepts, and skills.  How the importance and context
1See, for example, George T. Silvestri.  1997.  
ÒOccupational Employment Projections to2006,Ó Monthly Labor Review, 120(11).2For example, a report by the National Telecommunications and Information Administra-tion (NTIA) found, based on census data, that while as a whole the United States hasachieved a significant increase in the last several years (i.e., between 1994 and 1997) in itsownership of computers and modems and its use of e-mail, the growth favors certain groups
over others, and furthermore the gap between these groups is increasing over time.  For
example, those living in central cities and rural areas lag behind the national average forcomputer ownership and online access.  Income levels, race, and educational levels greatly

affect penetration levels.  Nationally, the 
Òleast connectedÓ groups are the rural poor, rural
and central city minorities, young households, and female-headed households.  See NTIA.
1998.  Falling Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide,  Washington, D.C.  Available
online from <http://ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/net2/falling.htm>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYfor each of these 30 requirements are tailored to the career and intellectualinterests of individual students is the focus of this chapter.  Second, it

recognizes the practical issues of introducing new content into under-
graduate curricula that are already packed.4.2A PROJECT-BASED APPROACH TO DEVELOPING FITness
Although the content of FITness is presented in Chapter 2 as a list ofitems, such a characterization does not imply that lecturing about them is
the optimal form of instruction.  FITness is fundamentally integrative,

requiring the coordination of information and skills with respect to mul-
tiple dimensions of a problem and the need for making overall judgments
and decisions taking all such information into account.  For this reason,

the committee believes the best way to develop FITness is through project-
based education.  Projects weave together the skills, concepts, and capa-

bilities of FITness to achieve a tangible result.  In a project, specific infor-

mation technologies will be used, motivating students to become skillful
with such things as databases, e-mail, and presentation software.  Under-

standing the range of alternatives and implementing the solution will rely
on or motivate learning the underlying concepts.Projects of appropriate scale and scope inherently involve multipleiterations that provide opportunities for instructional checkpoints or in-
terventions.  And, an appropriately scoped project will be sufficiently

complex that intellectual integration is necessary to complete it.  (Appen-
dix A provides some illustrative projects.)An appropriately scoped project demands collaborative efforts.Project-based collaborative efforts are pedagogically valuable for several
reasons.  First, developing true expertise in any area requires the indi-

vidual involved to assume a variety of different roles
Ñcreator, critic, part-ner, supporter, and so onÑand a collaborative group effort is a naturalsetting in which to exercise these roles.  Furthermore, learning to special-
ize and to deliver oneÕs special information to a group is an importantdimension of developing expertise, and so project-based learning helps
teach students the character and nature of varied roles as well as how to
play the role of a specialist.  Second, a project requiring multiple collabo-

rators can be large and complex enough to raise important intellectual
and strategic issues that simply do not arise when problems are artifi-
cially delimited to be completely doable by a single individual.  Third,

students benefit from hearing explanations formulated by peers as well as
experts.33The literature on collaborative learning is extensive.  See, for example, Gavriel Salomon
(editor). 1993.  Distributed Cognitions: Psychological and Educational Considerations: Learning inBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS55A project-based approach is consistent with many different instruc-tional models:¥Instruction as transmission of information.  In this model, lectures,
books, and other materials transmit the information that students need to
learn.¥Instruction as active learning.  This model suggests that students
learn best by actively engaging the material through asking questions,
answering questions, pushing buttons, doing experiments, or using tutor-
ing programs.¥Instruction through discovery learning.  In discovery learning, stu-
dents learn with little direct guidance on the theory that students who
ÒdiscoverÓ solutions on their own will be more likely to remember and
master the competency and be able to apply that competency in like situ-
ations.  Students who are spoon-fed will frequently not develop the cog-

nitive maps associated with real mastery.Each of these models can support project-based learning, though inpractice no one approach suffices for a successful project.   Effective

courses need support and scaffolding so individuals can test their under-
standing against expectations regularly and obtain feedback on their
weaknesses.No single project bestows FITness, but a series of well-chosen projectscan provide a foundation for the lifelong journey toward FITness.   By

working on a number of projects, students will have opportunities to use
similar principles of technological solutions in different settings, to recog-
nize technological analogies, to develop reasonable expectations for tech-
nological solutions, and to find work-arounds when technology falls short.
A series of projects can provide sufficient breadth and diversity of experi-
ence that students can realistically Òlearn the restÓ on their own, thus pro-
viding the intellectual foundation for self-directed, lifelong learning that
can occur in many non-classroom settings.4DoingÑSocial, Cognitive, and Computational Perspectives, Cambridge University Press, NewYork.  A piece by Roy Pea, 
ÒPractices of Distributed Intelligence and Designs for Education,Óin this volume is particularly compelling.4While lifelong efforts to develop and maintain FITness depend most importantly on anadequate intellectual foundation, other elements are important as well.  For example, stu-
dents often lose access upon graduation to the information technology infrastructure they
used to develop FITness.   They may regain some level of access when they take new jobs,
but the new information technology infrastructure may well not be as sophisticated as thatleft behind, disadvantaging them in subsequent efforts to maintain FITness.  Some universi-

ties now offer graduates access to some basic facilities, such as Òe-mail for lifeÓ; these stepsmove in the right direction.  Of course, individuals must do their part as well, such as ob-
taining access to a computer that provides them with access to the infrastructure.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYUndertaking projects in complex problem domains provides a natu-ral context in which FITness can be developed.   For effective pedagogy,

problem domains must be personally relevant so that the learner has rea-
son to revisit and redefine his or her understanding of information tech-
nology.  Individuals must use information technology in a domain they

understand in order to develop FITness, but as long as that domain is
relevant to the individual, it does not matter which domain is involved.Finally, the description of capabilities, concepts, and skills describedin Chapter 2 naturally raises for many educators the question of how
much time is needed for each capability, concept, and skill in a time-lim-
ited curriculum for students to promote FITness.  However, because

FITness is a continuum, a specific educational context is needed to answer
this question concretely.  A course promoting FITness for history majors

may well have a different weighting of topics than a course promoting
FITness for engineers.  A mini-course taught in an 
Òindependent activitiesperiodÓ designed for first-year students without designated majors is cer-
tain to be structured differently than a two-semester course for graduat-
ing seniors.  Such matters are best handled by those who know the re-

source constraints of time and the availability of computing resources, as
well as the competing needs, how the knowledge and skills are likely to
be applied, and the value of deeper understanding to other student objec-
tives.The treatment of the three components of FITnessÑskills, concepts,and capabilitiesÑmay be approached differently.   Students can learn
word processing through the need to prepare and submit essays, spread-
sheets or databases through the need to manipulate data in science
courses, and so on.  Many students will develop some of these skills prior

to college, but even those who do not will have considerable motivation
to learn them.  College students have many non-curricular opportunities

to develop current information technology skills, such as reading self-in-
struction books, learning from friends, or taking college or university
workshops and non-credit courses taught by non-faculty professionals,
e.g., computing center professionals and librarians.The fundamental concepts are somewhat harder to integrate into stan-dard curricula.  However, as instructors develop and structure their

courses to use information technology for enhanced pedagogical effec-
tiveness, it will be increasingly possible to take advantage of the opportu-
nities thereby provided for discussing the fundamental concepts and the
application of these concepts in terms that are relevant to the disciplinary
content of those courses.  For example, art students study images, and

often these images are images on a computer screen.    But understanding

the fidelity of these images to the originals requires an understanding of
how images can be digitally represented.  A business course might use
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS57computer simulations to demonstrate business processes.  But under-
standing the limitations of a simulation requires understanding how pro-
cesses can be modeled and the nature and scope of their limitations.The capabilities also warrant being taught as part of disciplinary ordepartmental instructional programs.  Indeed, these capabilities contrib-

ute both to FITness and to developing analytical skills that are necessary
for success in multiple disciplines.  The mode of instruction is primarily

through projects that serve the purposes of the domain yet offer students
the opportunity to learn and/or exercise the ten capabilities.4.3INFUSING FITness INTO THE UNIVERSITY
Many, if not most, colleges and universities understand that informa-tion technology will play an increasingly large role on their campuses.5Indeed, some are requiring that all matriculating students have a personal
computer for use throughout their college careers.  Some courses are be-

ing restructured and some new curricula are being developed to take ad-
vantage of new pedagogical opportunities offered by information tech-
nology.Students who are successful in these courses must have skills ad-
equate to support their use of the technology, and most institutions and
courses provide some opportunitiesÑwhether in for-credit courses ornotÑfor students to learn these skills.  But the fundamental concepts and
intellectual capabilities do not seem to be essential in these courses in any
meaningful way.  The challenge for colleges and universities is then how

to build on the existing infrastructure of hardware, support services, and
technology-adapted curricula and courses to support FITness.One common reaction to calls for proficiency in X is to promulgaterequired courses on X.  For example, in response to concerns about the
writing ability of students, many universities require all students to enroll
in (or place out of) a writing course.   Only rarely have calls for new,

universal courses of this type had a significant impact on curricula.  Nev-

ertheless, one first step toward FITness is a single college course, open to
all students.  No one course can fully realize the power and breadth of

FITness, but it can provide a solid foundation upon which an individual
can build further knowledge independently.  With such a foundation in

place, pedagogical efforts involving information technology should be
easier and more efficient to undertake in subsequent courses.This college-wide course would require students to complete a series5See, for example, ÒComputers Across Campus,Ó Communications of the ACM, January1998, pp. 22-25.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYof projects as a medium for acquiring the FITness capabilities and simul-taneously to develop their understanding of the concepts and skills of
FITness.  It would be laboratory-intensive and ideally would draw

projects from subject disciplines in which the student had some expertise
or interest, whether or not those disciplines were technical.  Thus, disci-

plines from engineering to economics or art history would be fair game.If such a course were added to the undergraduate curriculum, whatmight it replace?  The answer to this question will vary from one institu-

tion to the next, and there are a number of alternative strategies.  For

instance, many colleges and universities now offer a conventional com-
puter literacy course for nonmajors, taught by the computer science fac-
ulty.  It usually covers many of the topics listed as skills and concepts

under FITness.  In some cases, it also covers some of the capabilities by

way of a programming laboratory component.  This course could be con-
verted, or updated, so that students who complete it are more FIT.A better approach to FITness draws on the idea that information tech-nology is pervasive.  That is, when properly integrated, FITness will ben-
efit the study of any subject, much as the ability to write well benefits
students of any subject.  By analogy to efforts that promote 
Òwriting in themajor field of study,Ó universities might consider offering FITness courses
within a home discipline that are team-taught with a faculty member from
the home discipline (who would provide the disciplinary context) and a
faculty member from computer science (who would provide the concep-
tual foundations for information technology).6  For instance, a FITness
course team-taught by a computer scientist and an economist might in-
volve projects in which students would apply algorithmic problem-solv-
ing skills to the development and exercising of economic models using
appropriate modeling software.  Science and engineering majors might

benefit from a more thorough study of computer modeling, while hu-
manities majors might benefit from a more thorough study of locating
and evaluating information.  Box 4.2 provides some examples of disci-

plinary courses that help to promote some aspects of FITness.Over time, a series of these initiatives can help an institution educategraduates with a considerable measure of FITness, regardless of their
major field of study.  In the long run, faculty in various subject areas

would offer courses that allow students to develop further their mastery
of the concepts, skills, and capabilities of FITness in the context of prob-
lems drawn from their own fields; such courses would build on the foun-6Because the concepts of information technology may be harder to teach in the context ofother subject material (especially non-technical subject material), pairing a computer scien-
tist with a faculty member in a home discipline may be particularly advantageous for expli-cating the fundamental concepts of information technology in a context that is relevant tothe home discipline.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS59dations of FITness established in earlier years.   Experience in establishing
departmentally based efforts to fulfill global university-wide require-
ments (e.g., in areas such as expository writing) provides some confidence
that departments can be successful in supporting university-wide goals to
promote FITness.Even apart from discipline-oriented courses, other instructional ven-ues offer opportunities to develop FITness.   Most institutions acknowl-

edge that information technology will play an increasingly important role
on their campuses.  Thus, with information technology an increasing pres-

ence on campuses, most course designers make decisions (even if only
implicitly) about what role information technology will play in their
courses, e.g., whether students can communicate with the instructor elec-
tronically, are allowed to submit handwritten rather than typed papers,
or are able to access the syllabus or homework assignments online.   In

addition, the institution itself provides many opportunities for using tech-
nologyÑcourse registration, class participation (e.g., through chat rooms),tutoring, application for financial aid, homework submission, databases
of campus event information, and library research are among the possi-
bilities.Lest the integration of FITness across the curriculum appear too
simple, the committee reminds the reader that a successful implementa-
tion of FITness instruction requires serious rethinking of the curriculum,
just as campus-wide efforts to improve the writing abilities of under-
graduates have involved such rethinking.  The greatest successes in these

latter efforts have been achieved not through a mandated requirement
that all students complete the same writing course, but rather through the
integration of writing into the fabric of courses taken by disciplinary
majors.Although  Box 4.2 provides examples of individual courses that incor-
porate elements of FITness, projects that involve information technology
in some essential way are still rare in non-technical courses.  Universities

need to concern themselves with the FITness of students who cross disci-
pline boundaries and with the extent to which each discipline is meeting
the goals of universal FITness.7  The broad university-wide challenge is
less about those disciplines where technology is stereotypically included
(e.g., engineering) than those where technology is stereotypically rel-7The difficulties of promulgating large-scale change across an entire curriculum are welldocumented.  For example, many analysts believe that a faculty reward system that actively
discourages junior faculty from developing innovative courses (because such work takestime away from research and publishing efforts) is a major impediment to change (see, for
example, National Research Council, 1999,  Information Technology and the Transformation ofUndergraduate Education,  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.).  But these issues arebeyond the scope of this report.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox 4.2Multiple Routes for Developing Aspects of FitnessFITness can be developed in a wide variety of venues.  Consider the
following courses:¥Students in the social sciences and humanities and in the profes-
sional schools other than engineering at Berkeley can take an introductory
interdepartmental course on information technology that deals with theconceptual foundations of computing and information technology, thestructure and function of computing systems, elements of programming,
and applications programs.  Course examples are drawn mainly from word
processing, database management, electronic spreadsheets, graphics andsimulation, and telecommunication.¥Sociology students at Bowdoin College can take a social researchcourse that provides firsthand experience with the specific proceduresthrough which social science knowledge is developed.  The course em-

phasizes the interaction between theory and research, and includes fieldand laboratory exercises that involve observation, interviewing, use of
available data (e.g., historical documents, statistical archives, computer-
ized data banks, cultural artifacts), sampling, coding, use of computers,and elementary data analysis and interpretation.¥Students at Stanford University can take a variety of short, for-creditcourses on the basics of computing.  Subjects include word processing,

spreadsheets, using UNIX, using the World Wide Web, and using univer-sity resources.  Additional subjects include Web authoring tools, program-
ming in specific languages such as Java or C++, problem solving with
Mathematica, and security and privacy issues.¥Public policy students at Johns Hopkins University can take a courseon the tools and techniques of policy implementation, including selecting
strategies, weighing alternatives, and planning for contingencies; preparingbudgets, which are the heart of public programs, and developing schedulesegated to a minor role or no role at all (e.g., the humanities8).  Thus, it is
not sufficient for individual instructors to revisit their course content or
approach.  As with the efforts to promote writing, campus-wide collabo-

ration is needed to develop appropriate goals for FITness and to deter-
mine how departments will contribute to those goals, and in any event,8See, for example, American Council of Learned Societies.  1998.  Occasional Paper No. 41,
ÒComputing and the Humanities: Summary of a Roundtable Meeting.Ó  Available online
from <http://www.acls.org/op41-toc.htm>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS61that ensure that plans are realized; recruiting and keeping a winning staff;and making a cogent and persuasive presentation.  Students are expected

to use technology to carry out the assignments, including the use ofPowerPoint for their presentations and spreadsheets for their budgets.  A
portion of the course is specifically devoted to developing and managing
data systems.¥Students at Carnegie Mellon University design and implement a his-tory database to answer complex questions in history.  They frequently

draw on the Great American History Machine (a historical geographical
database) to carry out their more limited database designs.1¥Students in introductory economics courses at a number of differentinstitutes use Excel or STELLA to create a model of an economic problemor historical event and demonstrate the factors contributing to the outcome.Students typically predict what they think an appropriate model will be
and then refine it when they find out that it is not adequate or complete.¥Students design artistic animations using complex three-dimensionalmodeling tools in some courses at the University of Illinois.  Students in

these courses typically have majors in art, art history, and computer graph-ics.  Often joint projects involve individuals interested in becoming artists
and individuals with expertise in computer science.¥In physiology courses, for example at the University of California,students use STELLA and related tools to design models of human systems,
such as the renal system. Undergraduate students each devise models for
parts of the renal system and then connect them to represent the entire

human renal system.1See, for example, John Modell and David Miller.  1998.  
ÒTeaching United StatesHistory with the Great American History Machine,Ó Historical Methods, 21(3):121-134.the process through which FITness can become a part of the regular cur-riculum must be evolutionary.Faculty development is an essential dimension of campus-widepreparation to promote FITness.   That is, to offer courses that seriously

integrate appropriate information technology concepts, skills, and capa-
bilities, instructors themselves will need to learn and utilize effectively
the appropriate technologies as they become available for teaching and
research in their respective disciplines.  For instance, many fields within

the social sciences are beginning to use computational-modeling softwareBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYto help exercise and explain the principles of various social science phe-nomena, such as population growth or the interactions between various
elements of the economy.  Nevertheless, universal faculty FITness is not a

prerequisite for universal student FITness, and not every course in a dis-
cipline needs to have a FITness component.Currently, the level of FITness among college and university facultyis uneven, both among the disciplines and within any single discipline.
For faculty who accept the idea that FITness is both fundamental to their
studentsÕ mastery of their discipline and to their academic careers, sup-
port for faculty and curriculum development is necessary to help them
become more FIT.  Initially, such support might be external (e.g., pro-

vided by foundations), but over time, the institutions themselves must be
willing to make the necessary investment on an ongoing basis.  Evolution
Box 4.3Imperatives for Universities in Adopting Information Technologyfor Instructional PurposesImproving Teaching and Learning¥Develop a coordinated, cross-departmental organization to advancethe institutionÕs goals in instructional technology.¥Equip more classrooms with basic and advanced information infra-structure.¥Provide better and more extensive training and support services inpedagogy and multimedia technology.¥Expand the availability of software site licenses, including better toolsfor building instructional materials.¥Create new, flexible multimedia learning environments.Supporting Students¥Develop programs to ensure universal individual student access to(ownership of) network-enabled computers.¥Provide basic universal competency training in the use of online in-formation resources for all students who do not yet have it.¥Provide more extensive and readily available help-desk facilities forstudents and faculty.¥Expand and modernize drop-in facilities with a mix of multimediadevelopment capabilities, docking stations, printers, advanced software,and so on, with consulting support.¥Enhance the capabilities of universal e-mail and provide voice mail.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS63¥Provide facilities for universal Web publishing for students and stu-dent organizations, and consistent home pages for all courses.¥Develop capabilities to demonstrate, and to lend where appropriate,advanced tools and unique resources to students.¥Improve online student access to enrollment, financial, and advisinginformation.Improving Access to Library Resources¥Expand the availability of digital resources such as subscriptions tojournals, digitized museum collections, and others.
¥Provide electronic course reserves and enhanced digital referencematerials.¥Expand and modernize workstations for access to information re-sources throughout the library.Improving Network Infrastructure¥Expand the bandwidth of the campus digital network, the backboneand nervous system of the electronic dimension of the university.
¥Complete network connectivity to all residential living facilities.¥Provide affordable off-campus access to the institution
Õs network andthe Internet.¥Expand video delivery capabilities throughout the campus.SOURCE: Adapted from ÒImproving Instructional Technology at the University ofCalifornia, Berkeley,Ó Campus Computing and Communications Policy Board, Sub-
committee on Instructional Technology, October 18, 1996.  Available online at
<http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~cccpb-it/ITReport10-18-96.html>.will also play a role in faculty development, in the sense that as new fac-ulty are hired they will bring to the institution new expectations for infor-
mation technology support, both in their research and in their teaching.Curricular change will unfold in a context of broad integration of in-formation technology into most aspects of a university operation and func-
tion in which instructors and administrators deploy the technology to sup-
port such possibilities (and associated infrastructure, such as adequate
bandwidth for student usage) and learn how best to use that technology.
For most students, the effectiveness with which they can use the
universityÕs information infrastructure will to a great extent determinethe value of their educational experience.  Box 4.3 describes some institu-
tional imperatives for enhancing instructional use of information technol-
ogy that will also support FITness.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A6767APPENDIXAIllustrative Projects
The example projects in this appendix are described with differentlevels of detail and different emphases, as one would expect from projects
conceptualized by individuals from different disciplines.  These diverse

projects are intended to demonstrate that projects dealing with different
domain areas can all support efforts to develop fluency with information
technology (FITness).A.1DEVELOPING A BUSINESS PLAN
FOR A COMPUTER STOREModule Placement:  A course in business administration, computer sci-
ence, applied mathematicsTask:  Develop a business plan for a computer software and hardware
store in a mall.  To carry out this project, students should do the follow-

ing:¥Decide on products to sell,
¥Develop a pricing strategy,

¥Consider staffing issues,

¥Devise a marketing approach,

¥Create an inventory policy,

¥Design the store, and

¥Make a presentation to the bank and mall representatives.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYAll of this should be discussed in the business plan.Delivery:  A CD-ROM or Web site providing a project scenario electroni-callyBackground:  A shopping mall would like to fill a commercial opening
with a computer store.  Teams of four should apply for the space by creat-

ing a business plan that could be used to apply for a bank loan.  The bank,

which has financed most of the mall, will select the applicants who present
the best business plan.  The store
Õs emphasis will be on selling to first-time buyers looking for a computer for their home or for a very small
business.Project Add-ons:  Students could also consider possible changes to their
product line as new technologies become available.Pedagogy:  Students will work in teams of four.  The project will extend
over a period of approximately eight to ten weeks, with the final week
devoted to student reflection on lessons learned and possible applications
to other business ventures.  Students will use technology in the design

process:  e.g., word-processing and presentation software, e-mail, the

World Wide Web, spreadsheets, and even computer-aided design and
manufacturing tools to design the store.  Milestones should be established

for each task of the project.A.2DESIGNING AN HIV-TRACKING SYSTEM
FOR A HOSPITALModule Placement:  A course in computer science, health administration,
or biology (immunology, epidemiology)Task:  Design an information system to track HIV infections for a commu-
nity hospital and its outreach clinics.  The project should identify neces-

sary:¥HardwareÐÐequipment to run the system;¥SoftwareÐÐtracking expenditures, patient information;¥PeopleÐÐstaffing requirements; and¥ProcessesÐÐimplementation schedule, staff training sessions, writ-ten report, and oral presentation.Delivery:  A CD-ROM or Web site providing a project scenario electroni-callyBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A69Background:  The community hospital is running education, prevention,
and treatment programs for HIV (and maybe other sexually transmitted
diseases).  The community health director wants to evaluate the three pro-

grams continuously so that he/she can make them more cost-effective
while reducing the incidence of HIV in the community.  Decisions include

allocation of financial and staff resources among and within the three pro-
grams.  A variety of individuals express concern about various aspects of

the different programs, including issues of equity, confidentiality, and
Òfamily valuesÓ (education and sexual activity).  Students should be given
data on community size, current case loads, and so on.  StudentsÕ writtenreport should include a budget, staffing requirements, and implementa-
tion schedule, including specifications for staff training.  Students should

also make a presentation to the hospital board; ideally the latter would
include representatives from a local hospital, a school of public health,
and a private computer science firm.Project Add-ons:  Students should research and recommend security and
privacy measures for the program.Pedagogy:  Students will use technology in the design process:  e.g., word-
processing and presentation software, e-mail, the World Wide Web,
spreadsheets, system design (flow chart) software, and databases. Mile-
stones should be established for each task of the project.A.3DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING
A CLIENT MANAGER DATABASEModule Placement:  A course in business, management, non-profit ad-
ministrationTask:  Complete a simple yet useful database that has been started byteaching assistants.  The work will focus on the user interface aspect of the

system.  Design the final product to be a visually attractive database that a

bank could use to keep track of clients and their accounts.The user of the system should be able to:¥View a clientÕs entire record,¥View all clients in list form,¥Find and view the bankÕs top clients,¥Sort based on multiple criteria, and¥Print mailing labels for all of the clients or for a user-defined sub-set.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYDelivery:  A client manager database
Background:  Databases are a useful way of storing related information.
They simplify organization and retrieval of the data and become more
powerful and useful as data sets grow larger.  With the rapid growth of

information and the proliferation of the Internet, databases will become
an even more important part of day-to-day life.  One of the main parts of

this assignment will be to create an attractive, consistent, and intuitive
user interface.  An example of a successful user interface should be pro-

vided to students.  Besides designing the user interface, students will also

be doing other database tasks, such as designing layouts, creating fields,
writing simple scripts, and working with queries and sorts.Teaching assistants should begin the project and provide a databaseshell, which includes the following information:¥Some of the fields, preconfigured, that the database relies on;¥Both fully completed layouts and partially completed ones to getstudents started;¥Script stubs, so that students need only complete the meaningfulpart of the scripts;¥Buttons that have already been linked to their associated scripts;and¥A rich user interface that includes buttons, icons, and backgroundcolors, and that serves to integrate the layouts in the database.The shell should be designed to allow students to focus on the mean-ingful and important aspects of the assignment.Each record will store the:
¥ClientÕs name,¥ClientÕs address,¥Several means of contact with the client,¥Assets in several different accounts, and¥Free-form notes.Data entry will be facilitated by pop-up menus.Students are responsible for:
¥Creating some additional fields,¥Updating two existing layouts and creating an entirely new one,Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A71¥Filling in several scripts that facilitate movement between differentparts of the database,¥Providing a simple sorting facility for the user, and¥Entering some sample data (to help test the assignment).Project Add-ons:  There is significant opportunity for extra credit in this
assignment.  For example, try implementing one or more of the following

features:¥Set up a mail merge that uses information from records in the data-base.¥Write other useful and more complicated scripts.¥Incorporate multimedia (such as pictures, video).Pedagogy:  This project seeks to familiarize students with databases
through design and implementation that emphasize designing a quality
user interface and learning to program in a simple scripting language.A.4DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING A
SPREADSHEET-BASED HOME BUDGETModule Placement:  A course in computer science, library science, liberal
artsTask:  Create a home budget that a typical family could use to track theirincome and expenditures over the course of a year.  To accomplish this

task, create a system of linked spreadsheets in Microsoft Excel that will
help organize and process this information.Delivery:  A spreadsheet-based home budget software program
Background:  The system should consist of a single workbook and must
have the following properties and features:¥Tracking for six classes of expenses; examples include food, hous-ing, automobile expenses, movie rentals, and so on.¥Income tracking, including monthly, weekly, or biweekly salary,taxes, and miscellaneous income.  A summary of this data should be pro-

vided as well.¥Tracking for multiple bank accounts, with the ability to note ac-count transactions (withdrawals and deposits).  The balance for each ac-

count should compute automatically depending on the transactions, in-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcluding a simple interest calculation, so that the user only needs to enter astarting balance to begin using the account tracking system.¥Summary of total expenses and income, by month.  This should
also include a graphical representation of the summary, and a three-
dimensional graph that displays all expenses, by month (note that there
should be three separate axes).Students are free to determine a design for the spreadsheets.  There is
no Òone right wayÓ to do it.  The workbook should be logically organized
and well formatted to give it a consistent and attractive appearance.  Stu-
dents should become familiar with spreadsheet conceptsÑthrough lec-tures, manuals, or online tutorials and help.  (Teaching assistants could

develop an Excel tutorial.)Students should consider sketching the system design on paper be-fore beginning to develop it electronically.  Such a design should include

how to divide the information into separate spreadsheets, how to link
data from separate sheets, and what graphs to provide to help the user
analyze the underlying data.  Students should also concentrate on the

work of calculating and linking the data before tackling the formatting
and visual appeal of the spreadsheet. This approach encourages focusing
on getting the basic structure of the system correct.Project Add-ons:  Extra credit should be offered for integrating advanced
Excel features, such as pivot tables or Visual Basic for Applications, into
the home budget.Pedagogy:  This project prepares students to apply spreadsheet concepts
to a practical situation, to design an attractive and easy-to-use system of
spreadsheets, to organize and present related information, both graphi-
cally and textually, and to gain familiarity with a spreadsheet application
(Microsoft Excel).A.5NETWORK-BASED INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL AND PRESENTATIONModule Placement:  A course in information technology, library science,
liberal artsTask:  Use network facilities on the World Wide Web to present and findinformation.  Use a word processor to document the results.
Delivery:  Home page and essayBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A73Background:  
Home PageÐÐThe home page must consist of one page.  Part
of the assignment is learning to design attractive Web pages using HTML,
so students should pay attention to the aesthetics of their page.  The as-

signment also includes learning how to use a document scanner, how to
convert graphics to different file formats, and how to use a text editor to
produce HTML.   Students can feel free to organize the information cre-

atively; however, the page must contain the elements below:¥Some type of list, with several items;¥Several links to other sites on the Web;¥A scanned-in photo of the student;¥A graphic retrieved off the Web;¥A Òmail toÓ form that lets visitors send a message, question, or any
other information to the home page creator; and¥Table(s) to format the above content; specifically, a table should beused to format the fields and submit and reset buttons of the form.Treasure HuntÐÐStudents should answer the questions below using theInternet and a variety of search engines.  They will also use 
ÒnewsgroupsÓto find particular newsgroups and individual postings.  Answers to the

treasure hunt should be handed in as part of the networks essay.  Students

should provide both the answers and the sites on which the information
was found.¥To whom did Jerry Garcia leave his guitars?¥What is Donald DuckÕs middle name?¥What environmental bill did President Clinton sign during a radioaddress in the fall of 1996?¥On what newsgroups should individuals . . .Ñdiscuss the merits of HTML tables and frames?Ñtalk about yesterdayÕs funny comic strip?Ñask a question about algebra homework?¥On a designated class newsgroup, find the special treasure huntposting made by a particular student (e.g., Mike) and consider his/her
posting.¥Find information from another Web site that could contribute tothe thread of the studentÕs posting.Networks EssayÐÐStudents should provide concise yet complete answersto a number of questions that focus on inter-computer communication,
the Internet, and the hardware and protocols involved in networks today.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThe essay should be written in Microsoft Word and should use styles toseparate the answers to the background questions into logical sections.¥Describe the architecture of the Internet.  As part of the answer,
explain how a remote Web page is sent to your computer over the Internet,

starting with you entering a Uniform Resource Locator (URL)  in a

browser and ending with your browser receiving the page.¥Identify and explain two obstacles to the further growth of theInternet and/or technologies relating to the Internet.¥Discuss how local area networks (LANs) are used in business andoffice settings.  How does a LAN communicate with outside networks?
Pedagogy:  This project requires students to write and design structured
documents using HTML, to learn how to effectively use search engines to
find information on the Internet, to become familiar with several Internet-
related applications, including browsers, newsgroup readers, and graph-
ics applications, and to learn about the Internet, protocols, and general
networking concepts.A.6CREATING AND USING A MULTIMEDIA
HYPERLINKED PRESENTATION1Module Placement:  A course in graphic arts, business, or non-profit ad-
ministrationTask:  Plan a multimedia presentation by writing a text description of the
topics and points to communicate, using pictures, sound, interactive con-
tent, animation, QuickTime movies, and related materials.  (It is essential
that the presentation feature interactive or active content.)  Select specific
points from the text description where media would improve the commu-
nication potential of the presentation.  Discuss with peers and select crite-

ria to decide which medium and how many related representations are
appropriate for each talking point.   Design the links between the media

types in order to implement the communication plan.   Make links be-

tween different forms of media, and make sure that the interactive con-
tent is accessible to the intended audience.  Seek criticism and guidance

from experts.   Try the presentation out with a pilot audience, and analyze

the strengths and limitations of the presentation.   Refine the presentation

based on feedback from users and from experts.1 Project jointly conceived and developed with the following individuals:  Michael Clancy,
Eyi Chen, Tamar Posner, Lani Horn, Andrew Begel, Ricky Tang, and Phillip Bell.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A75Delivery:  A multimedia hyperlinked presentationBackground:  
The creation of effective presentations involves many stepsoutlined above in the task.  For this group project, it will be necessary to:
¥Design a shared file system or e-mail attachment system to agreeon tools or conversion mechanisms for the various media types and to
worry about incompatibilities.¥Select tools and an environment for the multimedia presentation toensure ease of use among the target audience.  Be sure to consider plat-

form incompatibilities, the capabilities of users, projection opportunities
and venues in which the presentation might be used, and options if the
first plan is unsuccessful.¥Determine the forms of help necessary in order to implement theplan on the platform selected and seek help from experts to make sure the
plan is successful.   Seek help as the plan gets developed to ensure it works

effectively.¥Locate and select appropriate multimedia content, test it with us-ers, and incorporate it into the presentation.Pedagogy:  Students will become familiar with considering and usingmultimedia to enhance a verbal presentation to an audience, to balance
the multimedia and other mechanisms for presentations, to analyze what
the audience learned from the presentation, and to consider modifications

to meet the audienceÕs needs more effectively.A.7SOCIOLOGY OF DISEASE
2Module Placement:  A project for a biology or public health class
Task:  Students are asked to imagine that they or a family member have
been diagnosed with a life-threatening disease.  Students should plan a

course of action to find out information to answer a set of questions, and
in teams of two or three, research the disease and write a paper address-
ing each issue.  Use the search engines on the Web to gather information.
Critically examine the sources of this information, and consider challenges
to its validity.  Coordinate the search with teammates via e-mail to avoid

collecting redundant information, and review or critique each other
Õs con-2Project jointly conceived and developed with the following individuals:  Michael Clancy,
Eyi Chen, Tamar Posner, Lani Horn, Andrew Begel, Ricky Tang, and Phillip Bell.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYjectures.  Post papers on the class Web site, and solicit expert and peer
commentary.Delivery:  Organized desription/listing of electronic resources on a vari-
ety of diseases in laymenÕs languageBackground:  The project essays should consider the following points:
¥What are the alternative treatments that are effective for this dis-ease?  How do the treatments address the specific symptoms of the dis-

ease?  What are the short-term and long-term consequences of the treat-

ments?¥What social support systems are necessary to wage a successfulbattle against this disease?  When have social support systems succeeded,

and which ones?  What social supports are right for this situation?
¥What changes in lifestyle and diet are necessary for accommodat-ing the symptoms and the condition of this life-threatening disease?  How

can these changes best be implemented and made effective?¥What other issues related to the disease are important, such as en-vironmental factors, transmission, and discrimination?  How can these be

dealt with?Pedagogy:  Students will work in teams.  The project will be carried out
over an extended period, perhaps eight to ten weeks, with the final week
devoted to student reflection on lessons learned.  This project enhances

researching skills and synthesis of complex information, as well as effec-
tive electronic presentation of complex data.A.8HOME PAGE DESIGN PROJECT
3Module Placement:  A project for a high school computer science, English,
physical science, or social science class, or an after-school activityTask:  This project requires students to design a home page for their
school.  The purpose of the home page is to provide information for par-

ents researching information on the school, as well as children interested
in finding out more about the school.Delivery:  A home page for a precollege school
3Project jointly conceived and developed with the following individuals:  Michael Clancy,
Eyi Chen, Tamar Posner, Lani Horn, Andrew Begel, Ricky Tang, and Phillip Bell.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A77Background:  Initially, all students should work together to conceptualize
the design of the site, including the main page, as well as what categories,
topics, and links it should have (such as ÒAcademicsÓ and 
ÒAthleticsÓ).  In
designing the site, students should search for Web-based tips, sugges-
tions, and resources and also review other pages with appealing designs.Students should then separate into groups of two to four to design aparticular page on each link/topic.  (Each page could include several other

links.)  Consulting home page exemplars should be encouraged.
The student groups should write the pages in HTML.  Periodically,
the entire class should meet to discuss the overall site design, share tips
and examples, and discuss questions such as how to achieve consistency
and the need for coherence among the different pages.  These general

discussions would also be a good forum in which to consider new or dif-
ferent technologies (e.g., different browser versions, multimedia options,
user needs).  Students could also test each other
Õs pages and make sugges-tions.  When test versions of all pages exist, students could demonstrate

the site publicly and ask other students and community members to test
the pages and offer comments.Pedagogy:  The Web pages would be made available to the general Web
community, and groups such as parents and students would be told about
the appropriate address.  Comments should be solicited so that new ideas

could be incorporated into the existing page.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY78APPENDIXBRelated Work
Judging by the scale of effort involved, many interested parties em-brace the idea that knowledge of and familiarity with information tech-
nology are important to citizens.  A considerable amount of work has

focused on the development of educational standards to which various
populations (e.g., high school students, teachers, all citizens) should be
held accountable; these include standards for mathematics, science, and
technology education and have been designed by various organizations.
In some cases, model curricula have been developed, as well as a host of
college-level courses that focus on literacy about information technology.
Vocational schools and community colleges have developed programs
that impart job-related technology skills, and a variety of continuing-edu-
cation enterprises (both in-house and ÒoutsourcedÓ) have been sponsored
by companies for their employees.This appendix addresses the evolving philosophy, standards, cur-ricula, and other venues in which such educational effortsÑfor non-spe-
cialistsÑhave developed an identity and/or a significant implementation
in the modern world.B.1STANDARDS
Perhaps the earliest type of educational standard was a behavioralone, based on the notion that a student will behave in accord with a speci-
fied standard, and that the purpose of education is to induce students to
behave in such a manner.  Many workplace-based skill standards reflect a

similar behaviorist philosophy of psychology and education.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B79Standards for content reflect a Òknowledge-tellingÓ philosophy of
education and are the most prevalent.  In this view, a student is a 
ÒblankslateÓ onto which the appropriate knowledge can be written.  Instructionis intended to convey knowledge from teacher (or textbook) to student,
and the ability to answer specific questions is the sine qua non of the
educated student.Cognitive standards reflect a more constructivist philosophy of edu-cation: the student constructs knowledge for himself or herself, perhaps
guided or coached by a teacher.  In doing so, the student is able to provide

an appropriate context for new knowledge and is thus able to take Òown-ershipÓ of that knowledge in a much more secure manner.  (Much of what
this report describes as intellectual capabilities is also rooted in a
constructivist view of education.)Standards are often tied to assessments rather than to instructionalprograms.   Because the most common assessments emphasize a skill de-

velopment or a Òknowledge-tellingÓ approach to instruction, instruction
that putatively implements cognitive standards may in practice be quite
far from constructivist instruction.  Although a given set of educational

standards does not necessarily imply a form of instruction, the form of
instruction really does have an impact on their implementation.The start of the modern era of educational standards can be said todate from the publication of  A Nation at Risk in 1983,
1  which stated, 
ÒTheeducational foundations of our society are presently eroded by a rising
tide of mediocrity that threatens our very future as a nation and a
people. . . .Ó  This report is often credited with identifying the inadequatemathematics and science preparation of U.S. students.  Since its publica-

tion, efforts have followed to establish both academic and vocational
(industry) standards.In the vocational and industrial arena, Workforce 2000 predicted in1987 that a shortage of skilled workers would, unless checked, constrain
AmericaÕs economic growth.2   In 1990, 
AmericaÕs Choice: High Skills or LowWages, explicitly called for setting academic and occupational skill stan-dards.3   Otherwise, the report warned, a majority of workers would con-
tinue to see their real wages decline.  In 1991, the U.S. Department of
1National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983.  A Nation at Risk:  The Imperativefor Educational Reform, Department of Education, Washington, D.C., p. 65.2William B. Johnston and Arnold Packer, with contributions by Matthew P. Jaffe.  1987.
Workforce 2000:  Work and Workers for the Twenty-First Century, Hudson Institute, Indianapo-lis, Ind., and Department of Labor, Washington, D.C., p. 117.3Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce.  1990.  
AmericaÕs Choice:  High Skill
or Low Wages,  National Center on Education and the Economy, Rochester, N.Y.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYLaborÕs SecretaryÕs Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS)issued What Work Requires of Schools, which established a language fordiscussing standards to ensure appropriate preparation in schools for the
workplace, whether school ended with high school graduation or with
completion of a Ph.D program.4The National Skills Standards Board (NSSB) was created in 1994 bythe National Skills Standards Act of 1994 to help voluntary industry orga-
nizations set standards for 12 industries and 4 cross-cutting occupations
that will cover the entire economy.  Even before NSSB was created, the

U.S. Department of Labor and the Department of Education had awarded
contracts to a number of groups to develop standards for such diverse
areas as the retail industry, metal working, computer-aided design and
computer-aided manufacture, hospitality and tourism, and even indus-
trial launderers.The final judgment on the NSSB effort is years away, because thereare as yet no assessments for most of the jobs in most of the 16 areas that
the NSSB has identified.  However, some industries have begun to pub-

lish standards for selected jobsÑusually at the entry levelÑin theirspheres.  The NSSB strategy involves individuals having Òcore + oneÓ cer-tificates.  The core would be common to the entire private sector and

would likely resemble the workplace know-how defined by the SCANS
commission.In the academic arena, the National Council of Teachers of Mathemat-ics (NCTM) produced the first set of national mathematics content stan-
dards for K-12 education, Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for SchoolMathematics, released in 1989.5  (NCTM also produced 
Professional Stan-dards for Teaching Mathematics (1991)6and Assessment Standards for SchoolMathematics (1995).7)  Also in 1989, the American Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science, through its Project 2061 program, published Sciencefor All Americans,8 which defined scientific literacy for all high school
graduates.  In 1993, Project 2061 issued a content-oriented document,
4Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1989.  What Work Requires of Schools:A SCANS Report for America 2000,  Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.
5Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1989
.  Curriculum and Evaluation Stan-
dards for School Mathematics, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va.
6Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1991.  
Professional Standards for Teach-ing Mathematics, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va.
7Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1991.  
Assessment Standards for SchoolMathematics, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va.8American Association for the Advancement of Science.  1989.  
Science for All Americans:  A
Project 2061 Report on Literacy Goals in Science, Mathematics, and Technology,  American Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B81Benchmarks for Science Literacy.9    The National Research Council deliber-ated on appropriate science content for precollege education and issued
National Science Education Standards in 1996.10  Continuing the new era of
reform, the International Technology Education Association will publish
technology standards for K-12 education in 1999.Furthermore, states have been establishing their own academic stan-dards for high school graduation, although there is still great confusion
over what makes for an adequate standard.  The American Federation of

Teachers, the Council for Basic Education, and the Fordham Foundation
have attempted to rate state efforts, although an Education Week analysisfound large disparities in the letter grades assigned by these organiza-
tions.11  For example, more than half the states received marks in math-
ematics that varied by at least two letter grades across the three organiza-
tionsÕ reports.   In English/language arts, such variability was found in 19
states.  Finally, a quite recent analysis found that there is a long way to go

before Òstandards-based reformÓ becomes a reality in the nation
Õsschools.12In general, the academic standards described above differ from theresults of past efforts at education reform in two important ways.  First,

they emphasize the goals of literacy and broad inclusion, rather than con-
centrating on an intellectually elite subpopulation.  Second, they identify

an important role for whole communities (rather than just teachers); ev-
eryone plays some part in assisting educators to meet the standards.  For

example, in National Science Education Standards, business and industryare asked to collaborate with school personnel to initiate interesting, high-
quality programs that support the standards.13  Legislators and public
officials are asked to strive for policies and funding priorities that support
the goals of the standards.As envisioned by their authoring bodies, the standards present con-tentÑnot curriculumÑto facilitate coordination, consistency, and coher-ence of mathematics, science, and technology education in the United
States.  They are designed to encourage a consistent set of educational

outcomes that develop studentsÕ critical thinking skills, scientific reason-
9American Association for the Advancement of Science.  1993.  Benchmarks for Science Lit-eracy,  Oxford University Press, New York.
10National Research Council.  1996.  
National Science Education Standards, National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C.11Lynn Olson. 1998.  Education Week, April 15.
12Mark Tucker and Judy Codding.  1998. 
 Standards for Our Schools
,  Jossey-Bass Publish-
ers, San Francisco, Calif.13National Research Council. 1996.  National Science Education Standards, National Acad-emy Press, Washington D.C.,  p. 245.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYing, creative problem solving, and judicious analysisÑqualities identifiedby various constituencies as critical to the nationÕs ability to meet the sci-entific and technological demands of the 21st century and remain com-
petitive in an increasingly global economy.Although the distinction does provide a good point of departure forunderstanding standards, the line between academic and vocational/

industrial standards is somewhat blurred.  For example, the SCANS

approach was supported by the Department of Labor, but leaned in the
direction of academic standards.Other government agencies have not been silent, and other standardshave been developed.  The National Institute for Literacy has an ongoing
project, Equip for the Future (EFF), which has recently published draft
literacy content standards for three realms:  work, citizenship, and

parenting.  This work follows on earlier efforts such as the Educational

Testing ServicesÕ International Adult Literacy Survey, which was based
on a three-part structure of prose, document, and quantitative literacy.
The EFF framework describes for each of three roles (work, citizenship,
and parenting) four purposes: access to information, a voice in individu-
alsÕ own lives, ability to take action, and a bridge to the future (learning to
learn).  For all of these the EFF defined 12 common activities (such as

management of resources).  It then defined 17 generative skills (such as

interpersonal skills) and knowledge domains (such as systems) that sup-
port the common activities.  In many ways, the EFF framework can be

seen as an elaboration on the SCANS approach.A wide range of standards at the industry, federal, and the state levelhave begun to evolve and help define the scope and meaning of informa-
tion technology literacy and related concepts.  The subsections below iden-

tify some of the most salient standards as they relate to the committeeÕsidea of fluency with information technology (FITness).B.1.1National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards
In its 1989 report, Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Math-ematics, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) definedmathematical literacy as the combination of five interrelated goals for stu-
dents:141.Learn to value mathematics,

2.Become confident in their ability to do mathematics,
14Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1989.  
Curriculum and EvaluationStandards for School Mathematics, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va.,p. 5.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B833.Become mathematical problem solvers,
4.Learn to communicate mathematically, and

5.Learn to reason mathematically.
The NCTM standards are intended to provide a coherent frameworkfor ensuring Òthat all students have an opportunity to become mathemati-cally literate, are capable of extending their learning, [and] have an equal
opportunity to learn.Ó15   Importantly, the rationale for these standards is
couched in terms of the mathematical literacy needed to function in an
information and technological society.  For example, the report states that

Òtechnology has dramatically changed the nature of the physical, life, andsocial sciences; business; industry; and government . . . .  Information is

the new capital and the new material, and communication is the new
means of production. . . . The impact of this technological shift has be-
come an economic reality.  Today, the pace of economic change is being

accelerated by continued innovation in communications and computer
technology.Ó16Finally, the NCTM standards are envisioned as a living document; aworking group is now revising the initial set of standards (Box B.1 gives
an example from the current NCTM curriculum), and an updated version
is expected in the year 2000.B.1.2Standards for Science Education
The standards set forth in the National Research CouncilÕs NationalScience Education Standards were developed Òto provide criteria to judgeprogress toward a national vision of learning and teaching science in a
system that promotes excellence. . . .
Ó17  Approximately four years of
deliberations and the combined work of thousands of educators, scien-
tists, science educators, and other experts nationwide produced a com-
prehensive vision of effective science education.  The associated standards
15Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1989
.  Curriculum and Evaluation
Standards for School Mathematics, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va.,p. 5.16Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1989.  
Curriculum and EvaluationStandards for School Mathematics,  National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va.,p. 3.17National Research Council. 1996.  National Science Education Standards, National Acad-emy Press, Washington D.C., p. 12.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox B.1Sample NCTM Curriculum StandardÑFunctionsIn grades 9-12, the mathematics curriculum should include the contin-
ued study of functions so that all students canÑ¥model real-world phenomena with a variety of functions;
¥represent and analyze relationships using tables, verbal rules, equa-
tions, and graphs;¥translate among tabular, symbolic, and graphical representations of
functions;¥recognize that a variety of problem situations can be modeled by the
same type of function;¥analyze the effects of parameter changes on the graphs of functions;
and so that, in addition, college-intending students canÑ¥understand operations on, and the general properties and behavior
of, classes of functions. . . .. . . The function concept also is important because it is a mathematicalrepresentation of many input-output situations found in the real world,including those that recently have arisen as a result of technologicaladvances. . . .Since functional relationships are encountered so frequently, the studyof functions should begin with a sampling of those that exist in the stu-
dentsÕ world.  Students should have the opportunity to appreciate the per-
vasiveness of functions through activities such as describing real-world re-lationships that can be depicted by graphs, reading and interpreting graphs,
and sketching graphs of data in which the value of one variable dependson the value of another.SOURCE: Excerpted from Commission on Standards for School Mathematics.  1989
.Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics,  National Council ofTeachers of Mathematics, Reston, Va., pp. 154-155.outline the content of what students need to know, understand, and beable to do to be scientifically literate at all grade levels.   In addition, they
address pedagogy, professional development, assessment, individual
school programs, and public policy at various levels.  The standards are

intended to guide local educational administrators and educators in for-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B85mulating curricula, staff development activities, and assessment pro-grams.National Science Education Standards reflects the conviction that science
understanding and ability will Òenhance the capability of all students tohold meaningful and productive jobs in the future,Ó in a business com-
munity that needs workers who can Òlearn, reason, think creatively, makedecisions, and solve problems.Ó18An example of the NRCÕs science education content standards is pro-vided in Box B.2.B.1.3Technology for All Americans Project
Historically, the United States has neglected technology education inits academic repertoire, relegating the understanding of technologyÑthestudy of the human-made worldÑto vocational education.19   In Euro-
pean countries such as Germany, trade schools have long prepared chil-
dren of workers for entry into the workforce.20  Now, standards for tech-
nology education are being created by the International Technology
Education Association (ITEA), and they will serve as the basis for promot-
ing technological literacy in grades K-12.  A document produced in the

first phase of the project, Technology for All Americans: A Rationale and Struc-ture for the Study of Technology, defines the need for standards for technol-ogy education and shows how technology can be studied.21  This phase
has also sought to build consensus on issues concerning technology edu-
cation.Phase II of the project will develop standards for technology educa-tion at all grade levels, K-12.  The standards will focus on what students

need to know and be able to do in order to be technologically literate.  The

standards document will identify appropriate content for technology edu-

cation in a comprehensive but flexible format that local administrators
and educators can adapt to fit their particular academic curriculum.The goal of technology standards is to foster technology-literate stu-dents.  ITEA defines technology literacy as 
Ò. . . knowing how to use,manage, and understand technology.Ó22  One purpose of these standards
18National Research Council. 1996.  National Science Education Standards, National Acad-emy Press, Washington D.C., p. 12.19International Technology Education Association.  1996.  Technology for All Americans:  ARationale and Structure for the Study of Technology,  International Technology Education Asso-
ciation, Reston, Va.20Thomas Alexander. 1918.  The Prussian Elementary Schools, Macmillan, New York.21Technology for All Americans:  A Rationale and Structure for the Study of Technology
, 1996.22Technology for All Americans:  A Rationale and Structure for the Study of Technology
, 1996,Chapter 2, p. 9.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox B.2Sample Science Education StandardCONTENT STANDARD B [Physical Science]:  As a result of their activities
in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of¥Structure of atoms¥Structure and properties of matter¥Chemical reactions¥Motions and forces¥Conservation of energy and increase in disorder¥Interactions of energy and matterDEVELOPING STUDENT UNDERSTANDING
High-school students develop the ability to relate the macroscopic prop-erties of substances that they study in grades K-8 to the microscopic struc-ture of substances. This development in understanding requires students tomove among three domains of thoughtÑthe macroscopic world of observ-able phenomena, the microscopic world of molecules, atoms, and sub-atomic particles, and the symbolic and mathematical world of chemicalformulas, equations, and symbols. . . .On the basis of their experiences with energy transfers in the middle
grades, high-school students can investigate energy transfers quantitativelyby measuring variables such as temperature change and kinetic energy.Laboratory investigations and descriptions of other experiments can help
students understand the evidence that leads to the conclusion that energyis conserved. Although the operational distinction between temperatureand heat can be fairly well understood after careful instruction, research
with high-school students indicates that the idea that heat is the energy ofis to strengthen educatorsÕ recognition of technology as a dynamic, trans-
forming force that schools must prepare students and citizens to manage
effectively, given its increasingly central role in U.S. economic, social, and
political systems.  In equipping students with technology literacy, a stan-
dards-based curriculum prepares graduates to become Òvested membersof our technologically based society, contributing members of our
workforce, and cognizant members of our democracy.Ó23The ITEAÕs Technology for All Americans standards are expected to bereleased in 2000.23Technology for All Americans:  A Rationale and Structure for the Study of Technology
, 1996,Chapter 1, p. 3.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B87B.1.4National Educational Technology Standards Project
The International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) has pro-duced a set of guidelines for technology skills in pre-K through 12th grade
education, the National Educational Technology Standards for Students(NETS).24  The primary goal of the NETS project has been Òto developnational standards for the educational uses of technology. . . to guide edu-
cational leaders in recognizing and addressing the essential conditionsrandom motion and vibrating molecules is difficult for students to under-
stand.GUIDE TO THE CONTENT STANDARD

Fundamental concepts and principles that underlie this standard include. . .  Conservation of Energy and the Increase in Disorder.
¥The total energy of the universe is constant. Energy can be trans-ferred by collisions in chemical and nuclear reactions, by light waves and
other radiation, and in many other ways. However, it can never be de-stroyed. As these transfers occur, the matter involved becomes steadily lessordered.¥All energy can be considered to be either kinetic energy, which isthe energy of motion; potential energy, which depends on relative posi-tion; or energy contained by a field, such as electromagnetic waves.¥Heat consists of random motion and the vibrations of atoms, mol-
ecules, and ions. The higher the temperature, the greater the atomic ormolecular motion.¥Everything tends to become less organized and less orderly over time.Thus, in all energy transfers, the overall effect is that the energy is spreadout uniformly. Examples are the transfer of energy from hotter to cooler

objects by conduction, radiation, or convection and the warming of our
surroundings when we burn fuels.
SOURCE: Excerpted from National Research Council. 1996.  
ÒContent Standards:  9-
12,Ó in 
National Science Education Standards, National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C., pp. 176-178.24International Society for Technology in Education.  1988
.  National Educational Technol-
ogy Standards for Students, International Society for Technology in Education, Eugene, Ore.Available online at <http:// cnets.iste.org/>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYfor effective use of technology to support PreK-12 education.Ó  The
premise for these guidelines is the belief that the U.S. educational system
must begin the complex task of integrating technology within a sound
educational system to prepare students for the opportunities and rigors of
the technologically rich 21st century.The technology foundation standards for students are divided intosix broad categories:1.Basic operations and concepts (students demonstrate a sound un-
derstanding of the nature and operation of technology systems and are
proficient in the use of technology).2.Social, ethical, and human issues (students understand the ethical,
cultural, and societal issues related to technology; practice responsible use
of technology systems, information, and software; and develop positive
attitudes toward technology uses that support lifelong learning, collabo-
ration, personal pursuits, and productivity).3.Technology productivity tools (students use technology tools to
enhance learning, increase productivity, promote creativity, and use pro-
ductivity tools to collaborate in constructing technology-enhanced mod-
els, preparing publications, and producing other creative works).4.Technology communications tools (students use telecommunica-
tions to collaborate, publish, interact with peers, experts, and other audi-
ences, and use a variety of media and formats to communicate informa-
tion and ideas effectively to multiple audiences).5.Technology research tools (students use technology to locate,
evaluate, and collect information from a variety of sources; use technol-
ogy tools to process data and report results; and evaluate and select new
information resources and technological innovations based on their
appropriateness to specific tasks).6.Technology problem-solving and decision-making tools (students
use technology resources for solving problems and making informed de-
cisions, and employ technology in the development of strategies for solv-
ing problems in the real world).To assist teachers, ISTE has also created a general set of profiles thatdescribe technology literate students at key developmental points in their
pre-college education.  These profiles provide performance indicators de-

scribing the technology competence students should exhibit upon comple-
tion of the various grade ranges (see Box B.3, for example).Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B89Box B.3Sample Profile for Technology Literate Students (Grades 9-12)Students will:1.Identify capabilities and limitations of contemporary and emerging
technology resources and assess the potential of these systems and services
to address personal, lifelong learning, and workplace needs. (2)12.Make informed choices among technology systems, resources, and
services. (1,2)3.Analyze advantages and disadvantages of widespread use of and re-
liance on technology in the workplace and in society as a whole. (2)4.Demonstrate and advocate for legal and ethical behaviors among
peers, family, and community regarding the use of technology and infor-mation. (2)5.Use technology tools and resources for managing and  communicat-
ing personal/professional information (e.g., finances, schedules, addresses,purchases, correspondence).  (3, 4)
6.Evaluate technology-based options, including distance and distrib-
uted education, for lifelong learning.  (5)
7.Routinely and efficiently use online information resources to meet
needs for collaboration, research, publications, communications, and pro-
ductivity. (4, 5, 6)8.Select and apply technology tools for research, information analysis,
problem-solving, and decision-making in content learning. (4, 5)9.Investigate and apply expert systems, intelligent agents, and simula-
tions in real-world situations. (3, 5, 6)10.Collaborate with peers, experts, and others to contribute to a con-
tent-related knowledge base by using technology to compile, synthesize,
produce, and disseminate information, models, and other creative works.(4, 5, 6)SOURCE:  This material is taken from the 
ÒProfiles for StudentsÓ section of a Web
page provided by the International Society for Technology in Education.  Available
online at <http://cnets.iste.org/>.1Numbers in parentheses following each performance indicator refer to the stan-dards category to which the performance is linked.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYB.1.5The SecretaryÕs Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills
In 1992, the Department of LaborÕs SecretaryÕs Commission onAchieving Necessary Skills (SCANS) released Learning a Living: A Blue-print for High Performance,25 which identified the skills needed by Ameri-cans to join the growing high-skill workforce.  As described in the report,

the commissionÕs fundamental purpose was Òto encourage a high-perfor-mance economy characterized by high-skill, high-wage employmentÓ(p. xiii).The commission addressed its messages to three stakeholders.Schools were asked to expand their mission to include the diverse roles
students will eventually play in their communities and workplaces.
Teachers were encouraged to adopt an interdisciplinary and global teach-
ing approach, including making connections to instill a broader perspec-
tive.  Employers were urged to improve the organization of work and the

development of human resources, with greater consideration for the com-
munity and the country as well as the company.The conclusions and recommendationsÑaimed at Òreinventingschool,Ó Òfostering work-based learning,Ó Òreorganizing the workplace,Óand Òrestructuring assessmentÓÑare grounded in five workplace compe-tencies and three foundational skills that the commission proposed as a
national blueprint by which to judge competence in necessary high-tech-
nology skills.  The competencies, skills, and personal qualities were iden-

tified as fundamental requirements for building a workforce prepared to
lead advancements and participate effectively in the information age.
These goals were advocated for all students. Box B.4 describes how the SCANS competencies and FITness capa-
bilities relate to each other.B.1.6State Standards for Technology Literacy
Some states, such as New York and Maine, have begun to developstandards for K-12 technology education.  The Maine standards tend to

treat technology literacy as a supporting skill within the sciences, as sug-
gested by the subject area heading Òscience and technology,Ó rather than
as a separate subject area.2625SecretaryÕs Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills.  1992.  
Learning a Living: A Blue-print for High Performance, Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.26Maine Department of Education.  1996.  
ÒState of Maine Learning Results,Ó Draft, Maine
Department of Education, Augusta, Maine, December.  Available online at <HtmlResAnchor
http://www.state.me.us/education/lres.htm>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B91The New York State standards (revised in March 1996) reflect a moreconstructivist view, focusing on technology competency so that students
will be able to apply technological knowledge and skills to design, con-
struct, use, and evaluate products and systems to satisfy human and envi-
ronmental needs.27  Although they are more elaborate than the Maine
standards, the New York standards also fit within a collection of stan-
dards that address scientific and technological literacy.  Each standard

identifies content for appropriate learning and requirements at the el-
ementary, intermediate, and high school levels.New York StateÕs technology standards encompass seven differentareas of investigation and education as described below:¥Engineering design: Modeling and optimization are used in an itera-
tive process to develop technological solutions to problems within given
constraints.¥Tools, resources, and technological processes:  Technological tools, ma-
terials, and other resources should be selected on the basis of safety, cost,
availability, appropriateness, and environmental impact; technological
processes change energy, information, and material resources into more
useful forms.¥Computers:  As tools for design, modeling, information processing,communication, and system control, computers have greatly increased
human productivity and knowledge.¥Technological systems:  Systems are designed to achieve specific re-
sults and produce outputs, such as products, structures, services, energy,
or other systems.¥History and evolution of technology:  Technology has been the driving
force in the evolution of society from an agricultural to an industrial to an
information base.¥Impact of technology:  Technology can have positive and negative
impacts on individuals, society, and the environment, and humans have
the capability and responsibility to constrain or promote technological
development.¥Management of technology:  Project management is essential to en-
suring that technological endeavors are profitable and that products and
systems are of high quality and built safely, on schedule, and within bud-
get.The standards for students range from using materials in the elemen-27New York State Department of Education. 1996.  Learning Standards for Mathematics,Science, and Technology, revised edition, Albany, New York.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYtary grades to understanding and considering the societal impacts of theadopted technologies as a commencement requirement.  Box B.5 provides

some examples of standards that must be met upon graduation from high
school.B.1.7Information Technology Skill Standards
28The National Science Foundation (NSF) is funding a number of ef-forts to develop standards for information technology skills.  Bellevue
Box B.4The SCANS Framework and FITnessA particularly important viewpoint is presented in the SCANS reportproduced in 1992 by the Secretary of LaborÕs Commission on AchievingNecessary Skills to promote the development of a skilled workforce.1  In
addition to being the driver for a number of efforts (ranging from programs
for literacy to standards for the retail industry and the information technol-ogy industry), the SCANS report described competencies that provided an
important point of departure for the approach to FITness described in Chap-
ter 2 of this report.  The SCANS workplace competencies include the
following:1.Planning and resource allocation (budgets, schedules, space, and
staff);2.Information (acquire, evaluate, interpret, organize, communicate);3.Interpersonal skills (work in teams, negotiate, teach, lead, serve cus-tomers, work with diversity);4.Technology (select, use, and troubleshoot);5.Systems (understand, monitor, and design).The intellectual framework laid out in this report and the SCANS report
have much in common.  In particular, the SCANS competencies are ex-
pressed in the context of sustained collaborative project activity, using tech-nology.  The correspondence between the FITness capabilities and the

SCANS competencies is shown in Table B.1 below.1SecretaryÕs Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills.  1992.  
Learning a Living: ABlueprint for High Performance, Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.28This description is adapted from a Web page on information technology skill standardsprovided by the Northwest Center for Emerging Technologies at Bellevue Community Col-lege in Bellevue, Washington.  The page can be found at <HtmlResAnchor http://
nwcet.bcc.ctc.edu/skills/intro/intro.htm>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B93Community College in Bellevue, Washington, is the host for the North-west Center for Emerging Technologies (NWCET).  In addition to its five-

year NSF funding, the center has received support from Boeing and from
Microsoft.  To support the needs of industry, NWCET has defined stan-

dards for eight information technology positions (career clusters):  data-

base administration associate, information systems operator/analyst, in-
teractive digital media specialist, network specialist, programmer/
analyst, software engineer, technical support representative, and techni-
cal writer.  (Box B.6  provides further discussion and details.)   Although it

began at a different starting point, NWCET has come to many of the same
conclusions as this and the SCANS report.Determined and validated through an extensive survey process, thesestandards were developed to establish agreed-upon, industry-identifiedTABLE B.1A Comparison of FITness Capabilities and SCANS Work-
place CompetenciesFITness CapabilitiesSCANS Competencies
1.Engage in sustained reasoningPedagogical strategy
2.Manage complexitySystems (Monitor)
3.Manage problems in faultySystems (Design)
solutions4.Test a solutionSystems (Design)
8.Expect the unexpectedSystems (Understand, monitor)

9.Anticipate changing technologiesSystems (Understand, monitor)
10.Think about informationSystems (Understand)
technology abstractly6.CollaborateInterpersonal Skills
5.Organize and navigateInformation (Organize,
information structures evaluate)
7.Communicate to other audiencesInformation (Communicate)
 The SCANS competencies are as 
ÒdeepÓ and intellectually demanding
as the FITness capabilities.  For example, the Information competency in-
cludes the ability to write coherent and persuasive prose as well as effec-tively use a word processor.  Moreover, the SCANS competencies have

been found to apply to domains other than employment.  An understand-
ing of economics and the federal budget is as important to the averagecitizen as understanding copyright and encryption.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBox B.5Sample Criteria from New York State Technology Standards:High School LevelTo demonstrate technology competency in the seven areas described inthe main text, students should be able to do the following in each area
(only selected items are provided):¥Engineering design:  Initiate an investigation, identify needs and op-portunities for technological invention and innovation, generate creativesolution ideas, break ideas into the significant functional elements, andexplore possible refinements.¥Tools, resources and technological processes:  Explain trade-offs, and
describe and model methods to control processes and monitor system out-
puts.¥Computer technology:  Understand basic computer architecture and
describe the function of computer subsystems and peripheral devices; se-lect a computer system that meets personal needs; attach a modem to a

computer system and telephone line, set up and use communications soft-
ware, connect to various online networks, including the Internet, and ac-cess needed information using e-mail, telnet, gopher, ftp, and Web
searches.¥Technological systems:  Explain why making trade-offs among char-
acteristics, such as safety, function, cost, ease of operation, quality of post-
purchase support, and environmental impact, is necessary when selectingsystems for specific purposes; explain how complex technological systems
involve the confluence of numerous other systems.¥History and evolution of technology:  Explain how technological in-
ventions have caused global growth and interdependence, stimulated eco-nomic competitiveness, created new jobs, and made other jobs obsolete.
¥Impacts of technology:  Explain that although technological effects
are complex and difficult to predict accurately, humans can control thedevelopment and implementation of technology; explain how computers

and automation have changed the nature of work.¥Management of technology:  Use computer-based scheduling and
project tracking tools; discuss the role of technology in successful U.S.
businesses; help to manage a group to gain understanding of the manage-ment of dynamics.SOURCE: Adapted from New York State Department of Education. 1996.  LearningStandards for Mathematics, Science, and Technology, revised edition, Albany, NewYork, pp. 50-53.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B95Box B.6An Example of the NWCET StandardsThe technology standards of the Northwest Center for Emerging Tech-nologies (NWCET) are tied to specific types of jobs.  For example, a pro-
grammer analyst (also known as a systems analyst, an applications analyst,an applications engineer, an operating systems programmer/analyst, an

operating systems engineer, or a test engineer) is said to analyze, design,develop, test, implement, and maintain computer applications systems tomeet functional objectives of a business.   His or her job functions include

analysis, design, development, testing, implementation, project manage-ment, and task management.To establish a context, the standards provide a thumbnail job descrip-tion:As a Programmer or Analyst, you design and update the software that runsthe computer. . . . Often, youÕll participate in design meetings where youhelp determine the best way to approach a problem or implement a de-sired feature for the new version of the software. Because of the complex-ity of the software and because parts of the software interconnect, this can
take quite some time, depending on the magnitude of the change. Youmost likely will also be responsible for writing the specifications and keep-ing the specifications current for your part of the software.YouÕll code the changes, and then test and debug the software, which maytake a year or more of intense and focused work, including evenings and
weekends. The challenge, of course, is to keep the software as lean aspossible, while making it robust, powerful, and expandable. In most cases,the Programmer, Analyst, or Engineer must also ensure backwards com-
patibility with application software written for previous versions of thesoftware. Periodically, the software team compiles the code. This softwarebuild is tested, and you correct any problems which fall into your area of
the code.The core of the standards is a description of the primary tasks and func-tions involved in this scenario.  These tasks and functions are selected from
longer ÒmasterÓ lists of tasks and functions on the basis of their applicabil-ity to the scenario provided.  For example, the scenario described above
calls for the following:¥Analysis (gather data to identify customer requirements; interpret andevaluate requirements; define scope of work to meet customer require-ments; develop high-level systems and functional specifications; develop
alternatives),¥Design (develop detailed design specifications; develop entity rela-tionships; prepare and conduct design review), and¥Project management (evaluate project requirements; report onproject status).SOURCE: Adapted from material found online at <http://nwcet.bcc.ctc.edu/skills/example/paf.htm>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYknowledge, skills, and abilities required to succeed in the workplace, thusproviding benchmarks of skill and performance attainment that are be-
havioral and measurable.  Without such information, employers do not

know whom to hire or how to evaluate employees, employees and new
entrants to the workforce do not know what is expected of them, and
educators do not know how to prepare students for the challenges of the
workplace.   Industry-identified skill standards also serve as a vehicle for
companies to communicate their expectations for worker performance.
Skill standards provide a common framework for communication of
workplace expectations between business, education, workers, students,
and government.B.2PHILOSOPHY
One influential author who has explored the potential of informationtechnology as a tool for reconceptualizing the educational process is
Seymour Papert.29  As noted in Chapter 1, Papert believes that a deep
understanding of programming can result in many significant educational
benefits in many domains of discourse, including those unrelated to com-
puters and information technology per se.  However, he also expresses

concern about the education communityÕs conventional response to thecall for increased integration of computer technology into the school by
creating computer labs and a formal learning sequence comparable to that
of other elective business courses.  While 
ÒassimilatingÓ computers into
the traditional system is a natural first step, Papert asserts that the com-
puter cannot be a transforming tool within the rigid constraints of tradi-
tional school structure.  Instead, he believes that students can experience

the genuine power of computers to transform their educational under-
standing, and ultimately develop new ways of thinking, only through a
more fluid, freer environment of exploration.  For this to occur, comput-

ers must be integrated throughout the curriculum, including leaving room
to revise and reform the curriculum.  This objective must be pursued by

teachers who are comfortable with computers and with a creative and
unrestricted structure, and who are supported by a like-minded educa-
tional community.A complementary view regarding information technology literacy isoffered in the report Digital Literacy: Survival Skills for the Information Age(BiT3M partners, under the auspices of SRI Consulting), which was com-
missioned to address how to create a digitally literate workforce.  The
29Seymour A. Papert.  1999.  
Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas, SecondEdition, Basic Books, New York.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B97report defines digital literacy as Òthe ability to communicate successfullyusing digitally encoded information in any medium or formatÓ (p. 1), and
it states that to survive and prosper in the information age, people must
learn new skills and knowledge to become digitally literate.  Those who

do will be empowered to use the digital medium effectively; those who
do not will be increasingly excluded.The report describes literacy as cumulative, without a definitive set ofsymbols and images to master.  Rather, literacy is a competency
Ñan abil-ity to produce a useful resultÑrequiring a combination of knowledge,skills, and attitude.  The three broad categories defined to cover users
Õdiffering needs for digital literacy are technical, informational, and cul-
tural.  Developing digital literacy requires a combination of formal in-

struction, self-instruction, trial and error, peer discussion, and a com-
puterÕs online help facility.  The report concludes that, although
technology is destined to become more powerful and applications easier
to use, the informational and cultural qualities of digital literacy are be-
coming increasingly important but also more difficult to master.  These

qualities depend on having the skills and knowledge Òto ensure that [tech-nology reflects] our values and assumptions or, at least, that we under-
stand [technology]Ó (p. 11).
B.3MODEL CURRICULA AND COURSES
B.3.1ACM Model High School Computer Science Curriculum
The ACM (originally the Association for Computing Machinery) pro-duced recommendations for college-level computer science curricula in
1968, 1978, and 1991.  In 1989, the Pre-College Committee of the Educa-

tion Board of the ACM addressed the need for a high school computer
science curriculum standard.  Aimed at 10th grade, the ACM 
ÒModel HighSchool Computer Science CurriculumÓ was originally published in 1993.
30It proposed that computer science education should be required for allhigh school students, similar to the curriculum requirements for the natu-
ral sciences:  ÒThe study of computer science is composed of basic univer-sal concepts that transcend the technology and that comprise an essential
part of a high school education.  It is these concepts that enable the stu-

dent to understand and participate effectively in our modern world.Ó  The
recommended topics and areas listed below are based on this premise.30Task Force of the Pre-College Committee of the Education Board of the ACM.  1993.
ÒModel High School Computer Science Curriculum,Ó  Communications of the ACM, 36(5):87-90.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYInformed by the ACM computing curriculum for colleges and univer-sities, the ACM model curriculum for high school computer science iden-
tifies the following core topics:¥Algorithms;¥Programming languages;¥Operating systems and user support;¥Computer architecture;¥Social, ethical, and professional context; and¥Computer applications.Core content is specified in all topics except computer applications,for which it is recommended that applications in the following areas be
included:¥Computer aided design/computer aided manufacturing;¥Computer speech, music synthesis, and art;¥Database systems;¥Electronic mail and bulletin boards;¥Multimedia and presentation graphics;¥Scientific analysis (e.g., Mathematica, Mathlab), spreadsheets, anddata analysis;¥Word processing and desktop publishing.Other Òadditional topicsÓ were also recommended to illustrate thecurrent state of the art in the computer science discipline itself.  Examples

include the following:¥Artificial intelligence, e.g., games, expert systems, robotics, knowl-edge representations;¥Computational science, e.g., scientific visualization, modeling;¥Graphics, e.g., image generation, two- and three-dimensional ani-mation;¥Simulation and virtual reality;¥Software engineering, e.g., system development, software devel-opment cycle, modeling, and diagramming.Secondary schools have not embraced computer science as an essen-tial discipline for all students, and so the ACM model high school curricu-
lum has not been widely implemented.  Instead, students with a special

gift or interest in computer science can, in some high schools, take an
Advanced Placement course in computer science.  This type of curricu-
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B99lum, however, is far more specialized (focused on programming) thanthat which would meet the FITness needs of high school students.B.3.2College-level Courses
For many years, college computer science programs have offeredcourses for non-majors.  These courses have evolved rapidly as technol-

ogy has evolved.  Some years ago, they concentrated on teaching students

basic skills with word processing, spreadsheets, and presentation graph-
ics.  Today, many of these courses provide experience with Web page

design and use of the Internet for communication.  Overall, however, these

courses have had a rather limited vision, one of providing basic techno-
logical skills to students who might use them in their own major field of
study.More recently, some colleges and universities have added a specificcomputer literacy requirement for graduation.  This requirement is de-

fined in various ways, depending on the kinds and amount of faculty
resources that can be dedicated to these courses.  For example, students at

Marist College fulfill its computer literacy requirement by completing any

one of a variety of 1-credit courses taught by faculty in different disci-
plines.31  Other institutions of higher education, like Wake Forest Univer-
sity, are engaged in vigorous faculty development projects that will help
individual faculty members learn to integrate the use of technology into
existing courses across the curriculum.32  Still others, like Bowdoin Col-
lege, take a more laissez-faire approach, expecting that their faculty and
students will, by one means or another, become computer literate without
any special efforts as they progress through their course work.Most colleges and universities now provide a full range of computingand networking resources,33 expecting that their students will use tech-
nology effectively in their various courses of study.  Overall, many be-

lieve34 that we have entered the era of ubiquitous computing on college
campuses, an era in which computers are commonplace and inexpensive,
and are effectively deployed to serve the needs of all students and faculty.The content of specific computer literacy courses for non-computerscience majors varies widely among colleges.  Many of these courses are
31See <http://vm.marist.edu:80/~courinfo/descriptions/csis.html>.32See, for example, < http://www.wfu.edu/CELI>.33See <http://www.bowdoin.edu/cwis/admissions/resources/electronic.html>, forexample.34Mark Weiser.  1998.  
ÒThe Future of Ubiquitous Computing on Campus,Ó Communica-tions of the ACM,  41(January):41-42.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYlimited to teaching a collection of skills with modern software packages,and thus do not embrace the idea of FITness as it is described in the main
body of this report.   However, there are some exceptions.  At Duke Uni-

versity, the computer literacy course focuses on the theme Òwhat comput-ers can do and what they canÕt do, now and in the future.Ó35   It assumes
no prior computing experience, and in a single semester introduces stu-
dents to the fundamentals of programming, hardware and software, and
the limits of computation. At Brown University, the computer literacy
course ÒConcepts and Challenges of Computer ScienceÓ introduces stu-
dents to programming and other problem-solving tools, as well as a wide
range of topics that relate computing to daily life.36  Sample assignmentsin this course include home budgets, client database management, and
writing a Java script to play the game tic-tac-toe.  At both Duke and

Brown, the computer literacy courses are hands-on laboratory-based

courses with a high level of interaction among students and instructors.Vocational and technical colleges also offer a wide range of coursesthat contribute to information technology literacy.  For instance, the Uni-

versity of Maine at Augusta offers a two-year degree program in com-
puter and information systems.  The core curriculum covers various areas

of technology, including computer systems, networking, databases,
administration of computing facilities, applications programming, and
working with the World Wide Web.  It emphasizes hands-on learning and

practical applications of information systems.37B.4OTHER APPROACHES TO
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LITERACYSkills with and knowledge about information technology may also begained through various informal channels.  For instance, dozens of teen-

agers and community leaders have benefited from the U.S. West
FoundationÕs New Technology Academy, which uses children as teachersof computer technology.  This program is hoping to spread the word that

even in the poorest communities, kids with their uninhibited curiosity
and wealth of time to Òfiddle and exploreÓ may very well be the nation
Õsmost natural teachers and maintainers of technology.  Programs that use

young computer ÒwhizzesÓ as 
Òcomputer-maintenance technicians,35Alan W. Biermann.  1994.  
ÒComputer Science for the Many,Ó Computer, 27(February):62-73.36See, for example, <http://www.cs.brown.edu/courses/cs002>.37See <http://www.uma.maine.edu/academics/uacadcisbrochure.html>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B101troubleshooters and one-on-one tutors for fellow students, teachers andeven school principalsÓ are popping up across the nation.
38B.4.1ACM Code of Ethics
The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is designed as aguide for computer professionals.39  The code is very pragmatic and nec-essarily has an information technology literacy component.  Moreover, it

reflects the expectation that ACM members not only remain technically
competent themselves but also contribute to the technical education of
others.  Although the code has little information about specific techno-

logical competencies, it does require that members conduct their lives in a
way that respects the copyright, privacy, and other ethical aspects of tech-
nology and digital information that they encounter in their work.B.4.2On- and Off-the-Job Training
The skills for learning about e-mail, voice mail, Ònetiquette,Ó and the
impact of electronic communication on an organization are often taught
in-house.  The advantage is that curricula can be customized to the par-

ticular needs of the organization.  For example, Kinko
Õs information tech-nology training needs are satisfied by extensive on-the-job training and a
2-hour course that teaches the basics of files, disk storage, hierarchies,
directories, removable media, and networks, in a Windows or Macintosh
environment.A number of private companies, such as CompUSA (http://www.compusa.com) and New Horizons (http://www.newhorizons.com), of-
fer information technology training courses for the employees of large
organizations and individuals.  For example, CompUSA 
Òoffers com-puter training for the corporate client as well as the general public. It
specializes in the programs that people use at home and in the office.
Classes are generally offered six days a week and twice a week during
the evenings.  There are over 150 CompUSA Training Centers located

nationwide with several new Training SuperCenter Plus sites opening in
greater metropolitan areas.  The new centers specialize in Novell soft-

ware, project management software, Visual Basic, Lotus Notes, and
Microsoft Access.Ó38Elizabeth Heilman Brook.  1998.  
ÒWhiz Kids Are Given a Chance to Teach Their Stuff,ÓNew York Times, April 23.  Available online at <HtmlResAnchor http://www.nytimes.com/
library/tech/98/04/circuits/articles/23kids.html>.39For more information, see <http://www.acm.org/constitution/code.html>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY102APPENDIXCIndividuals Who Briefed the CommitteeAugust 19-20, 1997John C. Cherniavsky, Office of Cross-Disciplinary Activities, CISEDirectorate, National Science FoundationPeter J. Denning, Computer Science Department, George MasonUniversityNancy Devino, Committee on Undergraduate Science Education,National Research CouncilBarry W. Johnson, Department of Electrical Engineering, University ofVirginiaPam B. Newberry, Technology for All Americans ProjectGreg Pearson, National Academy of Engineering
Harold Pratt, Division on K-12 Policy and Practice, National ResearchCouncilWilliam A. Wulf, National Academy of EngineeringApril 3-4, 1998Andrea diSessa, Graduate School of Education, University of California,BerkeleyMark Guzdial, Graphics Visualization and Usability Center,College of Computing, Georgia Institute of TechnologyYasmin Kafai, Psychological Studies in Education, University ofCalifornia, Los AngelesNancy Butler Songer, University of MichiganBeing Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D103103APPENDIXDWorkshop Participants and
Questions Posted on the InternetD.1PARTICIPANTS IN THE JANUARY 1997 WORKSHOP
Robert B. Allen, BellcoreRobert H. Anderson, RAND
Ronald E. Anderson, University of Minnesota
Robert M. Ballard, North Carolina Central University
Alan W. Biermann, Duke University
Tony Brewer, Pivot Partners
Peter P. Chen, Louisiana State University
Martin Dickey, University of Washington
Linda S. Dobb, Bowling Green State University
Michael B. Eisenberg, Syracuse University and ERIC Clearinghouse onInformation and TechnologyZorana Ercegovac, University of California, Los Angeles
Susan Gerhart, Applied Formal Methods, Inc. and ROI Joint Venture
Stephen A.B. Gilbert, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Connie Hendrix, San Francisco Unified School District
Charles F. Kelemen, Swarthmore College
Allen Klinger, University of California, Los Angeles
Susan Landau, University of Massachusetts
Larry Long, Long and AssociatesNote: Pointers to many of the position papers presented by these participants can be found
online at <http://www2.nas.edu/cstbweb>.Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYEllen Meltzer, University of California, BerkeleyDavid G. Messerschmitt, University of California, Berkeley
Jeanine Meyer, Pace University
Paul Nielson, Manitoba Library Association
Jim Perry, KinkoÕs Inc.
Viera K. Proulx, Northeastern University
Richard S. Rosenberg, University of British Columbia
Linda Loos Scarth, Mount Mercy College
Greg W. Scragg, State University of New York at Geneseo
Mary Shaw, Carnegie Mellon University
Ralph D. Westfall, University of Southern California
Marsha Cook Woodbury, University of Illinois, Urbana-ChampaignD.2QUESTIONS ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
LITERACY POSTED ON THE  INTERNET
D.2.1Questions for Computer and Communications
Scientists and Engineers1.  For purposes of this discussion, the committee provisionally distin-
guishes in a loose and informal way between fundamental concepts, ap-
plications of fundamental concepts, and engineering and design principles
used in applying concepts.  To illustrate, a concept might be Òinstruction

interpretation.Ó  An application of that concept might be ÒJava byte-code

interpretation.Ó  An engineering principle might be Òdesign under con-

straintÓ (e.g., designing a Java interpreter under the constraint of limited
memory or bandwidth).1a.  What are the fundamental concepts of information technology
that an educated adult should know? (Interpret information technology
broadly to include computing and communications.)  For each concept:
¥Describe it;
¥Identify the age or educational level at which you believe it should
first be introduced; and¥Explain how it might be introduced.
1b.  What are the essential applications of the fundamental concepts?
¥Describe it;
¥Identify the age or educational level at which you believe it should
first be introduced; and¥Explain how it might be introduced.
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D1051c.  What are the essential engineering and/or design principles rel-
evant to information technology?¥Describe it;¥Identify the age or educational level at which you believe it shouldfirst be introduced; and¥Explain how it might be introduced.2.How do you expect the essential concepts, applications, and engineer-
ing/design principles described in your answers to change over time (as
information technology evolves)?  How should the pedagogical process

deal with such changes?  How can/should individuals be taught to learn
about how to use new and never-before-seen computational artifacts (e.g.,
new applications, services, hardware devices, software packages)?3.How should concepts and skills be balanced in information technol-
ogy literacy?  How do/should concepts and skills complement each other

in information technology literacy?  How do they compete with each

other?  In other words, how and to what extent is there a trade-off in

learning about concepts versus skills?  (For purposes of this discussion,

the committee regards a ÒskillÓ as facility with a specific computational
tool or artifact such as a spreadsheet.)4.How can individuals best learn the limitations of information tech-
nology?  How can they learn to make informed personal/social/policy

decisions about issues that involve information technology?D.2.2Questions for Employers and Labor Professionals
1.What information technology skills and knowledge will workers need
to do their jobs in the early 21st century?  Please indicate whether the

perspective from which you are answering this question is that of manu-
facturing or services, and provide separate answers for entry-level, mid-
level, technical-level, and executive-level positions.  (For purposes of this
discussion, a ÒskillÓ is 
Òfacility with a specific computational tool or arti-fact such as a spreadsheet.
Ó  ÒKnowledgeÓ might be something like
Òknowledge of programming,Ó though not necessarily knowledge of a
specific programming language.)  An example of an entry-level skill might

be Òdata input and use of the Internet.Ó  Skills required in mid-level posi-
tions might include word processing, database, and spreadsheet skills.
An executive-level skill might be the use of teleconferencing.  (These ex-

amples are intended only as possible illustrations.)Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY2.The generic competencies underlying the workplace of the 21st cen-
tury are generally thought to include project planning, budgeting and
scheduling, using/communicating/organizing information, understand-
ing/monitoring systems, and interpersonal skills.  In your view, how

should workers use computers and telecommunications technology in
these five domains?  (For example, today a person involved in planning

might use spreadsheets, project planners, and flow charts.  A person using

and organizing information might use word processor or presentation
software.  A person exercising interpersonal skills might use decision sup-

port software.)3.What is the mix of general and specific knowledge of information
technology that you expect to seek in new entry-level hires?  More specifi-

cally:¥What artifacts do you need them to know about?¥What ability to use new information technology do you expect orneed them to have?¥Should these individuals acquire such knowledge and skills fromin-house employer training, informal education, or in some other venue?
Why?4.What learning or educational experiences would best prepare the
employees most likely to be hired?  What would enable them to cope with

future technological changes and information technology tools with which
they have no previous experience?D.2.3Literacy Project:  Questions for K-12 and
Post-Secondary Educators1.What should information technology (IT)-literate individuals be pre-
pared to do in the future?   What sorts of lifelong personal, career, and

policy decisions should such individuals be prepared to make?   Why?

(By ÒIT literacy,Ó we mean not only an IT-literate person
Õs ability to effec-tively use computers and other information technology tools, but also his
or her understanding of how such technology works, and the role of such
technology in society.)2.What should all high school graduates/students know about infor-
mation technology to achieve information technology literacy?  Please

describe each element of this knowledge (e.g., how to troubleshoot a soft-Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D107ware problem or how to make an informed decision about a public policydecision that involves information technology) and briefly say why you
believe this is important.  For each element, suggest what about it you

believe should be taught at what grade levels.3.What learning experiences do students need to achieve the techno-
logical literacy described in answer to question 2?  (
ÒLearning experi-encesÓ can include both in-school and out-of-school activities.)  Please be
specific, using examples from your own teaching if possible.4.What technological environment (computers, networks, software, re-
sources, etc.) do pre-college teachers need to teach technological literacy?
What is the minimum technological environment needed today?  What is

the ideal technological environment needed today?  Why?  Please describe

the relationship of the elements you provided in Question 2 to the nature
of this environment.  (For example, what kinds of computers or connec-

tions to the Internet are minimally adequate?)D.2.4Questions for Librarians
1.In an online information community, what should every citizen know
about information technology in order to make effective use of the capa-
bilities it enables?  Please describe each element of this knowledge (e.g.,

how to perform an Internet search, how to understand its results) and
briefly say why you believe this is important.  For each element, suggest

what about it you believe should be taught at what grade levels.2.Two particularly important examples of new capabilities are those of
information searching and information presentation.  What are the basic

principles that guide an effective search or presentation?  At what level

should these principles be taught?  How should people learn about the

limitations of searches and presentations?3.What learning experiences do students need to obtain the skills and
knowledge described in answer to Questions 1 and 2?  (Learning experi-

ences can include both in-school and out-of-school activities.)  Please be

specific, using examples from your own teaching if possible.4.What technological environment (computers, networks, software, re-
sources, etc.) is needed to support the learning experiences described in
Question 3?Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYD.2.5Questions for Commercial and Business Information
Technologists (e.g., MIS Support, Chief Information Officers)1.What will every worker need to know about information technology
in order to make effective use of the capabilities it enables?  It might be

useful to distinguish between information technology skills (i.e., Òfacilitywith a specific computational tool or artifact such as a spreadsheetÓ) andknowledge (i.e., Òknowledge of programming,Ó though not necessarily
knowledge of a specific programming language).  Please describe each

element of this required knowledge and these required skills.2.The generic competencies underlying the workplace of the 21st cen-
tury are generally thought to include project planning, budgeting and
scheduling, using/communicating/organizing information, understand-
ing/monitoring systems, and interpersonal skills.  In your view, how

should workers use computers and telecommunications technology in
these five domains?  (For example, today a person involved in planning

might use spreadsheets, project planners, and flow charts.  A person us-

ing and organizing information might use word processor or presenta-
tion software.  A person exercising interpersonal skills might use decision

support software.)3.What is the mix of general and specific knowledge of information
technology that you expect to see in new employees?  More specifically:
¥What specific artifacts (e.g., spreadsheets, word processors) do youneed them to know about?¥What ability to use new information technology do you expect orneed them to have?¥What conceptual knowledge is essential?How does your answer change with the employeeÕs seniority in theorganization?  Should these individuals acquire such knowledge and

skills from in-house employer training, in formal or informal education,
or in some other venue?  Why?
4.What learning or educational experiences would enable the employ-
ees you support to cope with future technological changes and informa-
tion technology tools with which they have no previous experience?Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E109109APPENDIXEMembers of the CommitteeLawrence Snyder, Chair, has been a professor of computer science and
engineering at the University of Washington since 1983, following faculty
appointments at Purdue University and Yale University.  He has been a

visiting scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard Uni-
versity (1987-1988), and a visiting professor at Sydney University, Sydney,
Australia (1994-1995).  Dr. Snyder received his Ph.D. from Carnegie

Mellon University in computer science (1973) and a B.A. from the Univer-
sity of Iowa in mathematics and economics (1968).  Dr. Snyder has served

on the Computer Research AssociationÕs board of directors and on nu-

merous advisory panels formulating future research directions in VLSI
technology and parallel computation.  He is co-founder and general chair

of the ACMÕs Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures.  He

chaired the CSTBÕs study on academic careers of experimental computer
science and engineering; he also serves on the NRCÕs Army Research
Laboratory Technical Assessment Board.  Dr. Snyder is a fellow of the

IEEE and a fellow of the ACM.Alfred V. Aho is associate research vice president, Communications Sci-
ences Research, at Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies.  From 1995 to

1997, he was a professor in and chair of the Computer Science Depart-
ment at Columbia University, and from 1991 to 1995 he was the general
manager of the Information Sciences and Technologies Research Labora-
tory at Bellcore.  Prior to holding these appointments, he was director of

the Computing Science Research Center at Bell Laboratories from 1987 to
1991.  He joined Bell Laboratories in 1967 as a member of the technical
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYstaff in the Computing Techniques Research Department, and in 1980 hewas appointed head of the Computing Principles Research Department.
Dr. Aho received a B.A.Sc. (engineering physics, 1963) from the Univer-
sity of Toronto and a Ph.D. (electrical engineering/computer science,
1967) from Princeton University.  Dr. AhoÕs personal research is centeredon data networking, multimedia information systems, database systems
and query languages, programming languages and their compilers, algo-
rithms, and the theory of computing.  He has published more than 60

technical papers and ten widely used textbooks in these areas.  He is a co-

inventor of the AWK programming language and other UNIX system
tools.  Dr. Aho is a fellow of the ACM, the American Association for the

Advancement of Science, Bell Laboratories, and the IEEE.  He is a former

chair of the ACMÕs SIGACT and a former member of the Computer Sci-ence and Telecommunications Board.Marcia C. Linn is professor of development and cognition and of educa-tion in mathematics, science, and technology in the Graduate School of
Education at the University of California, Berkeley.  A fellow of the Ameri-

can Association for the Advancement of Science, she researches the teach-
ing and learning of science and technology, gender equity, and the design
of technological learning environments.  In 1998, the Council of Scientific
Society Presidents selected her for its first award in educational research.
From 1995-1996 she was a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences.  In 1994, the National Association for Research in

Science Teaching presented her with its Award for Lifelong Distinguished
Contributions to Science Education.  The American Educational Research

Association bestowed on her the Willystine Goodsell Award in 1991 and
the Women EducatorÕs Research Award in 1982.  Twice she has won the
Outstanding Paper Award of the Journal of Research in Science Teaching(1975 and 1983).  She has served on the board of the American Association

for the Advancement of Science, the Graduate Record Examination Board
of the Educational Testing Service, and the McDonnell Foundation Cog-
nitive Studies in Education Practice board.  Her publications include 
Com-puters, Teachers, Peers Ð Science Learning Partners, with Sherry Hsi(Lawrence Erlbaum & Associates, in press); ÒKey to the Information High-wayÓ in 
Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery (1996);ÒThe Tyranny of the Mean: Gender and ExpectationsÓ in 
Notices of theAmerican Mathematical Society (1994); Designing Pascal Solutions, with M.C.Clancy (W.H. Freeman, 1992); and 
ÒThe Case for Case Studies in Program-ming Instruction,Ó with M.C. Clancy in 
Communications of the Associationfor Computing Machinery (1992).Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E111Arnold H. Packer is a senior fellow at the Institute for Policy Studies at
Johns Hopkins University and recently served as executive director of the
U.S. Labor Department SecretaryÕs Commission on Achieving NecessarySkills (SCANS).  He is currently chair of the SCANS/2000 Center.  Dr.

Packer has extensive experience in the fields of restructuring U.S. educa-
tion and policymaking and is co-author of Workforce 2000, a publicationthat has influenced the national conversation about human resource edu-
cation.  He has worked extensively with distinguished representatives

from business, labor, education, and government to define the skills
needed by all high school graduates to succeed in the workplace.  Dr.

Packer previously served as the assistant secretary for Policy, Evaluation,
and Research at the U.S. Department of Labor, where he formulated the
administrationÕs approach to work-based welfare reform and to retrain-ing workers dislocated by economic change.  His most recent book is

School-to-Work:  Reinventing the Learning Enterprise
.Allen B. Tucker is professor of computer science at Bowdoin College; hehas held similar positions at Colgate University and Georgetown Univer-
sity.  He served for 16 years as department chair in these institutions and
2 years as associate dean of the faculty.  He held the John D. and Catherine

T. MacArthur Chair in Computer Science while at Colgate from 1983 to
1988.  Professor Tucker earned a B.A. in mathematics from Wesleyan Uni-

versity in 1963 and an M.S. and Ph.D. in computer science from North-
western University in 1970.  He is the author or co-author of several books

and articles in the areas of programming languages, natural language pro-
cessing, and computer science education.  He has also served as a consult-

ant to several colleges, universities, and other public and private institu-
tions, in several areas of computer science curriculum, software design,
programming languages, and natural language processing application.  A

fellow of the ACM, Professor Tucker co-chaired the ACM/IEEE-CS Joint
Curriculum Task Force that developed ÒCurricula 1991,Ó for which he
received the ACMÕs Outstanding Contribution Award and shared theIEEEÕs Meritorious Service Award.  Most recently, he served as Editor-in-
Chief of the 2600-page CRC Handbook of Computer Science and Engineering(CRC Press, 1997), a comprehensive professional handbook that covers
the entire discipline.  He is a member of the ACM, the IEEE Computer

Society, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, and the Liberal
Arts Computer Science (LACS) Consortium.Jeffrey Ullman has been a professor at Stanford University since 1979.
He has also served as a visiting professor at the University of California,
Berkeley, and as an Einstein Fellow at the Hebrew University in Jerusa-
lem.  Dr. Ullman is a member of several professional organizations and
Being Fluent with Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112BEING FLUENT WITH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYhas functioned as the chair at numerous symposiums including the ACMSymposium on Principles of Programming Languages and the Technion
International Symposium on Machines and Computations.  Dr. Ullman

has served on the National Science Foundation Panel on Computer Sci-
ence and was the chair of the Examination Committee for the CS GRE.
Dr. Ullman is the author and co-author of more than ten books and of
several journal articles.  He received his B.S. in engineering mathematics

from Columbia University in 1963 and his Ph.D. in electrical engineering
from Princeton University in 1966.Andries van Dam is Thomas J. Watson, Jr., University Professor of Tech-nology and Education and professor of computer science at Brown Uni-
versity, and was one of the Computer Science DepartmentÕs founders andits first chair, from 1979 to 1985.  His research has concerned computer

graphics, text processing, and hypermedia systems.  He has been working

for more than 30 years on systems for creating and reading electronic

books for use in teaching and research.  The current project in this re-

search, Exploratories, addresses the educational challenges implicit in a
rapidly changing, Web-based environment.  An exploratory is a com-

puter-based combination of an exploratorium and a laboratory that em-
beds in a hypermedia environment a multifaceted interactive microworld
that models objects, phenomena, and concepts.  In addition, he has been

concerned with teaching object-oriented programming and design, in-
cluding elementary design patterns, in an introductory computer science
course.  Professor van Dam received the B.S. degree with honors from

Swarthmore College in 1960 and the M.S. and Ph.D. from the University
of Pennsylvania in 1963 and 1966, respectively.  He co-founded ACM

SIGGRAPH, has been on the editorial board and served as editor of sev-
eral computer graphics journals, and is on the technical advisory board of
several startups and of Microsoft Research.  His honors include these:

1974, the Society for Information DisplayÕs Special Recognition Award;1984, the IEEE Centennial Medal; 1988, the State of Rhode Island
GovernorÕs Science and Technology Award; 1990, the National ComputerGraphics AssociationÕs Academic Award; 1991, SIGGRAPHÕs Steven A.Coons Award; 1994, the Karl V. Karlstrom Outstanding Educator Award,
the IEEE Fellow Award, and the ACM Fellow Award; 1996, elected to the
National Academy of Engineering; 1999, IEEE James H. Mulligan, Jr. Edu-
cation Medal.