DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/763Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: TheUser's View88 pages | 8.5 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-03888-1 | DOI 10.17226/763Panel on Information Technology and the Conduct of Research, National Academy ofSciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of MedicineInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology and theConduct of ResearchThe User's View
REPORT OF THE PANEL ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE CONDUCT
OF RESEARCH
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCESNATIONAL ACADEMY OF ENGINEERING
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, ENGINEERING, AND PUBLIC POLICY
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWASHINGTON, D.C. 1989iInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC
 20418The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) is a private, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars in scientific and engi
neeringresearch, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and their use for the general welfare. Under the authority of 
its congressional
charter of 1863, the Academy has a working mandate that calls upon it to advise the federal government on scientific and techni
cal matters.
The Academy carries out this mandate primarily through the National Research Council, which it jointly administers with the Nat
ionalAcademy of Engineering and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Frank Press is President of the NAS.
The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) was established in 1964, under the charter of the NAS, as a parallel organization of 
distin-guished engineers, autonomous in its administration and in the selection of members, sharing with the NAS its responsibilities 
for advisingthe federal government. Dr. Robert M. White is President of the NAE.
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) was chartered in 1970 by the NAS to enlist distinguished members of appropriate professions in 
theexamination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. In this, the Institute acts under both the Academy's 1863
 congressional
charter responsibility to be an adviser to the federal government and its own initiative in identifying issues of medical care,
 research, and edu-
cation. Dr. Samuel O. Thier is President of the IOM.
The Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy is a joint committee of the National Academy of Sciences, the National
Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. It includes members of the councils of all three bodies.
This study received support from the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Bure
au of
Standards and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the Department of Commerce, the National Library of Medicine, 
and theNational Science Foundation. Opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the
 Panel on
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research of the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, and do not nece
ssarilyreflect the views of the sponsors.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Panel on Information Technology and the Conduct of Research (U.S.)
Information technology and the conduct of research.

Bibliography: p.

Includes index.
1. Information technologyŠScientific applications. 2. ResearchŠTechnological innovations. I. Title.
Q180.55.I45P36 1989 001.4'2 88-28903
ISBN 0-309-03888-X
Copyright © 1989 by the National Academy of Sciences
No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic
 record-
ing, nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise copied for public or private use, without written pe
rmission from the
publisher, except for the purposes of official use by the United States Government.

Printed in the United States of America
Cover Photograph:
Temperature field in January at a depth of 225 meters, from a global model of the oceanic general circulation. Deep reds repres
ent tempera-
tures of 24°C and deep blues are -2°C. Picture courtesy of Michael Cox. Reproduced from ﬁComputer modeling in physical oceanogr
aphyfrom the global circulation to turbulence,ﬂ William R. Holland and James C. McWilliams. Physics Today, vol. 40, no. 10, p. 52.
iiInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Panel on Information Technology and the Conduct of Research
DONALD N. LANGENBERG (
Chair), Chancellor, University of Illinois at Chicago
W. RICHARDS ADRION, Chair, Computer and Information Science Department, University of Massachusetts,
AmherstJOSEPH BALLAM, Professor, Department of Physics, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford, California

BRUCE G. BUCHANAN, Professor and Co-Director, Center for Parallel, Distributed, and Intelligent Systems,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM J. EMERY, Professor, Department of Aerospace Engineering Science, University of Colorado,
BoulderDAVID A. HODGES, Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of
California, Berkeley
DAVID A. HOFFMAN, Professor, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts,
AmherstF. THOMAS JUSTER, Professor of Economics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

SARA B. KIESLER, Professor, Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
KENNETH M. KING, President, EDUCOM, Princeton, New Jersey

ROBERT LANGRIDGE, Professor, Schools of Pharmacy and Medicine, University of California, San Francisco

NINA W. MATHESON, Director, William H. Welch Medical Library, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MarylandDAVID A. PENSAK, Corporate Advisor, Computing Technology, E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Co.,
Wilmington, Delaware
ALLAN H. WEIS, Vice President, Data Systems Division, IBM Enterprise Systems, White Plains, New York
iiiInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.StaffJOHN R. B. CLEMENT, 
Study DirectorAUDREY PENDERGAST, Staff OfficerANN K. FINKBEINER, 
WriterNISHA GOVINDANI, 
SecretaryJOAN ROOD, SecretaryivInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy
CORNELIUS J. PINGS (Chairman), Provost, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California

GILBERT S. OMENN, Dean, School of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington(former Chairman*)H. NORMAN ABRAMSON, Executive Vice-President, Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas

ALBERT M. CLOGSTON, Member, Center for Materials Science, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los
Alamos, New Mexico
PHILIP M. CONDIT, Executive Vice-President, Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Washington

EMILIO Q. DADDARIO, Washington, D.C.

GERALD P. DINNEEN,
* Vice President, Science and Technology, Honeywell Incorporated, Minneapolis,
MinnesotaALFRED P. FISHMAN, William Maul Measey Professor of Medicine, and Director, Cardiovascular-Pulmonary
Division, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
RALPH E. GOMORY, Senior Vice-President for Science and Technology, IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York

ZVI GRILICHES,* Nathaniel Ropes Professor of Political Economy, Department of Economics, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
ARTHUR KELMAN, Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation Senior Research Professor of Plant Pathology
and Bacteriology, Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
FRANCIS E. LOW, Institute Professor, Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts
* Term expired June 30, 1988.
vInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JOHN D. ROBERTS,
* Institute Professor of Chemistry, Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California
KENNETH J. RYAN, Kate Macy Ladd Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Harvard Medical School; and
Chairman, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,

MassachusettsHERBERT A. SIMON, Richard King Mellon University Professor, Department of Computer Science and
Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Ex OfficioFRANK PRESS, President, National Academy of Sciences
ROBERT M. WHITE, President, National Academy of Engineering

SAMUEL O. THIER, President, Institute of Medicine
StaffALLAN R. HOFFMAN, 
Executive DirectorMYRON F. UMAN, 
Associate Executive Director
BARBARA A. CANDLAND, 
Administrative Coordinator
CATHY D. WILLIAMS, 
Administrative Secretary
viInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceThe ever-present urge to categorize our fellow humans leads in this computer age to the categories
ﬁcomputer literate
ﬂ and 
ﬁcomputer illiterate.
ﬂ It might seem obvious that scientists and engineers, particularly
those engaged in research, must all be computer literate. After all, such people work with numbers and data, and
isn't that what computers are all about? Yet the most superficial survey of researchers will reveal a wide range of

capabilities in the use of information technology (computers plus telecommunications) in research. It will also

reveal endemic frustration and dissatisfaction.
Why? Is not the work of those researchers whose subject is information technology itself yielding a steady
stream of new capabilities for their colleagues in other fields? Yes it is, and some of the new capabilities can
truly be called revolutionary. Are not researchers in many fields continually finding new ways to apply
information technology to do old things faster, better, and cheaper, and to do new things which just yesterday

were beyond the realm of possibility? Yes, that is so. So much so, in fact, that there are many who believe that

the pervasive use of information technology in the conduct of research is changing profoundly the very meaning

of the word 
ﬁresearch.ﬂ Are not our institutions, agencies, and companies, our policymakers, managers, and
vendors finding ways to place the new instruments of information technology in the hands of more and more

researchers? Yes, despite the usual fiscal constraints, they are.
Then what's the problem? Indeed, is there one? It was the suspicion that there is a problem (many, actually),
that there are serious impediments to the wider and more effective use of information technology in research,
that led the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP) to form the Panel on
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research and to charge it to explore the situation and to report its

findings, conclusions, and recommendations. I agreed to chair the Panel because, as a scientist turned university

administrator and federal official, and a computer illiterate, I was excited by the
PREFACEviiInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.prospect of learning something of an issue I sense is of paramount importance to the future of the global research
enterprise. This report is the result of the Panel's deliberations. Our subject is broad, its literature is scattered, and

some of its facets are still more art than science. We cannot claim to have produced the definitive picture of the

issue. We hope we have made a case for the importance of understanding and addressing it, and perhaps shed

some light on a creature that reminds some of us of the elephant once investigated by an earlier panel.
If this report has value, it is due to the salient characteristic of the Panel reflected in the report's subtitle,
ﬁThe User's View.
ﬂ Most of the Panel members are researchers active in disciplines not encompassed by the
term ﬁinformation technology.
ﬂ They are expert but skeptical users of information technology in their own
research, in possession of exciting visions of what this technology might bring to their fields, and of experienced

views of what it has brought, and at what cost. From my youth I remember an ad for an automobile, which urged

the reader to 
ﬁAsk the man who owns one!
ﬂ There's wisdom in that slogan; in the absence of a considerable body
of established knowledge, our Panel focused on asking the men and women 
ﬁwho own one.ﬂ The result is a
report that should speak to researchers experienced in the application of information technology, as well as those
who would like to gain more experience, and of course to those engaged in supporting research. We believe it is

worth the reader's attention.
The conception and early stages of the study owe much to the Committee on Science, Engineering, and
Public Policy. In particular, two former members of the Committee deserve mention: Floyd E. Bloom, whose

term with the committee ended soon after this study's initiation; and Gilbert S. Omenn. Dr. Bloom conceived the

topic and played a central role in its birth. Dr. Omenn chaired COSEPUP during the inception and most of the

execution of the study. We also must thank Norman Metzger of the National Research Council, who developed

the study's charge and initially served as study director.
Support for the study was provided by several federal agencies: the Department of Energy; the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration; the National Bureau of Standards and National Oceanic and Atmospheric

Administration of the Department of Commerce; the National Library of Medicine; and the National Science

Foundation. Sun Microsystems, Inc., donated an advanced workstation for the purpose of report production.
The study benefited from the opinions and reviews of many people: research users, experts in computing,
computing applications, and communications, and policymakers. We received helpful advice and suggestions

from too many persons to mention by name; but we acknowledge the vital part their input played. At the final

stages of the report's preparation, four members of COSEPUP served as a review group: John D. Roberts, as

chair, and Alfred P. Fishman, Francis E. Low, and Herbert A. Simon. We did not always take the advice offered;
but we always profited from it. Of course, the report's statements, findings, and recommendations remain the
sole responsibility of the Panel members.
PREFACEviiiInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Panel is particularly grateful to its professional staff: John Clement, Audrey Pendergast, Ann
Finkbeiner, and Nisha Govindani, who supported the study both intellectually and logistically, while exhibiting

exemplary patience. The Panel also owes special thanks to Allan Hoffman, executive director of COSEPUP, for

input and support from conception to final dissemination; and also to Barbara Candland and Cathy D. Williams

of the COSEPUP staff. Without the efforts of all these people, the study truly would not have taken place.
One final, and important, point: I share with many researchers a strong belief that much of the power of
science (whether practiced by scientists, engineers, or clinical researchers) derives from the steadfast

commitment to free and unfettered communication of information and knowledge. This principle has been part

of the ethos of the global research community for centuries, and has served it and the rest of humanity well. If

asked to distill one key insight from my service on this panel, I would respond with the assertion that

information technology is of truly enormous importance to the research community, and hence to all humanity,

precisely because it has the potential to enhance communication of information and knowledge within that

community by orders of magnitude. We can now only dimly perceive what the consequences of that fact may be.

That there is a revolution occurring in the creation and dissemination of information, knowledge, and, ultimately,

understanding is clear to me. It is also clear to me that it is critically important to maintain our commitment to

free and unfettered communication as we explore the uses of information technology in the conduct of research.

If my colleagues and I succeed through this report in conveying some sense of this to our readers, and of the

necessity that many individuals and institutions be attentive to it, we will have discharged our duty.
DONALD N. LANGENBERG

CHAIRPREFACEixInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  Executive Summary
 1  Introduction 7  The Use of Information Technology in Research
 11  The Conduct of Research
 13  Data Collection and Analysis
 14  Communication and Collaboration Among Researchers
 18  Information Storage and Retrieval
 23  New Opportunities: Approaching the Revolution Asymptotically
 30  Institutional and Behavioral Impediments to the Use of Information Technology in
Research 34  Panel Findings and Recommendations 47  Findings 47  Recommendations 50Appendix A:
 List of Position Papers
 57Appendix B:
 Biographies of Panel Members
 58  Bibliography and Selected Readings
 63  Index 69CONTENTSxiInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology and the Conduct of Research
xiiiThe User's ViewInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivInformation Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryInformation technology
Šthe set of computer and telecommunications technologies that makes possible
computation, communication, and the storage and retrieval of information
Šhas changed the conduct of
scientific, engineering, and clinical research. This report examines present trends, future potential, and
impediments to the use of information technology in support of research. Written from the viewpoint of the

researcher using information technology and including many examples, the report offers a number of

recommendations directed to two principal audiences: policymakers and leaders of institutions responsible for

the support and management of research, and researchers themselves.
The first programmable, electronic, digital computer was created nearly five decades ago. At first,
computers simply substituted for other means of carrying out arithmetic calculations; they were large, expensive,
often unreliable, and accessible only to a minority of scientists and engineers. With the advent of the integrated

circuit (the semiconductor 
ﬁchipﬂ), computational speed and power increased dramatically, and computer use
became widespread. Recently, computer technology has been joined with telecommunications technology to

create a new entity: information technology, which has done much to remove the constraints of speed, cost, and

distance from the researcher.
On the whole, information technology has led to improvements in research. New avenues for scientific
exploration have opened. Researchers can collaborate more widely and efficiently. Much more data are available

for analysis. Analytic capabilities have improved significantly, along with the capability to present results as

visual images. New information technologies offer further opportunities to improve research. But widespread use

of computers in research has not come about without problems. Some of these difficulties are technological,

some financial. Underlying many of them are complex institutional and behavioral constraints.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The report examines three aspects of the research process: data collection and analysis, communication and
collaboration among researchers, and information storage and retrieval.
In data collection and analysis, a number of trends are discussed, including
   Growth in the amount of information researchers can store and analyze;
   Creation of new families of computer-controlled instruments;
   Proliferation of computer networks dedicated to research; and
   Increasing availability of software 
ﬁpackagesﬂ supporting research activities.
Among the difficulties associated with data collection and analysis are uneven access to computing
resources, problems in obtaining support for software development and maintenance, and unnecessary

complexities of transmitting data over computer networks.
Communication and collaboration among researchers are changing. Not only can information be shared
more and more quickly, but researchers are also developing new collaborative arrangements. Three technologies

are involved: word processing, electronic mail, and computer communications networks. Word processing and
electronic mail are arguably the most pervasive of all the routine uses of computers in research communication.
Electronic mail
Šsending text from one computer user to another over the networks
Šis partially replacing
written and telephone communication among many communities of scientists. Scientists increasingly use

networks for conversation and for repeated exchanges of text and data files. Among the most important of the

potential applications of information technology is the emergence of a truly national research network.
The principal difficulties with communicating via electronic mail and file transfer technologies involve
incompatibility between different text and data processing systems and between network protocols. Also

significant are network limitations: addressing conventions are cumbersome and unhelpful, locator services are

nearly nonexistent, and overall network availability and reliability need improvement.
Electronic storage and retrieval of information hold enormous advantages: information can be stored
economically, found quickly without going to another location, and moved easily. For all disciplines, both

scientific data and reference database promise to be significant sources of knowledge for basic research.
However, a number of problems need to be resolved. Researchers have difficulty getting access to data stored by
other researchers. Even when researchers get access to colleagues' data, they have difficulty reading them.

Finally, when researchers get access to and read each others' databases, they often lack information on the

quality of the data.
The primary difficulty encountered with reference databases is in conducting searches. Most information
searches at present are incomplete, cumbersome, inefficient, expensive, and executable only by specialists.
There is a pressing need for new, more compact, and more permanent forms of data storage. Stored data
gradually become useless, either because the storage media decay or the storage technology itself becomes

obsolete. Underlying
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
2Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.difficulties in information storage and retrieval are significant problems in the institutional management of
resources.New computer-based technologies offer the prospect of new ways of finding, understanding, storing, and
communicating information, and should increase both the capabilities and the productivity of researchers.

Among these new technologies are simulations, new methods of presenting observational and computational

results as visual images, the use of knowledge-based systems as 
ﬁintelligent assistants,
ﬂ and more flexible and
intuitive ways for people to interact with, and control, computers.
The Panel has identified a number of problem areas in which institutional and behavioral impediments
underline many difficulties in the use of information technology in research. These areas include
   Issues of costs and cost sharing: financial impediments are chronic. Although institutions will continue
to do their best, information technology for research will continue to need more funds. The Panel

believes that increased support of information technology in research deserves high priority.
   The problem of standards: simplified, consistent standards for operation of, and interconnection among,
computer systems could have major impacts on research communications and productivity; however,

such standards are largely absent, and their development is a slow and controversial process.
   Legal and ethical constraints: the need to safeguard and maintain confidentiality of data on human
subjects is a major issue; also likely to become increasingly significant is the question of responsibility

in computer-supported decision making in engineering, clinical practice, or research.
   Gaps in training and education: learning to use information technology presently requires significant
initial investments of time and effort, and researchers who make these investments often receive

insufficient help. Although the problem is likely to diminish with time, it affects current attitudes of

many researchers toward the use of information technology.
   The perceived risks of organizational change: organizations and administrators can understandably be
reluctant to make the substantial changes required to make use of information technology.
   Of fundamental importance, the lack of an infrastructure for the use of information technology in
research: access to expertise, and support mechanisms to encourage such experts; tools for developing

and managing software; systems for storing and retrieving information; and support services for

communication and collaboration among researchers.
The report concludes with three major recommendations.
RECOMMENDATION I
The institutions supporting the nation's researchers must recognize and meet their responsibilities to develop
and support policies, services, and standards
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
3Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that help researchers use information technology more widely and productively. Specifically
   Universities should provide accessible, expert help in learning and using information technology.
   Universities departments,
 and 
scientific and professional groups,
 should establish career ladders for
scientific programming positions.
   Funding agencies
 should provide support for scientific programming and for help services in learning
and using information technology systems for research.
   Scientific associations
 should establish disciplinary standards for the storage and indexing of scientific
data.   University departments,
 and 
scientific and professional groups,
 should implement mechanisms for the
evaluation, merit (peer) review, and dissemination of software useful in the conduct of research.
   Vendors, in collaboration with 
scientific groups,
 should establish standards for simplified and consistent
user-machine interfaces.   Network administrators
 should provide simple user interfaces and addressing schemes, add gateways to
other networks, improve system reliability and capacity, and provide online help, such as guides to

services and mail addresses of individuals who can answer questions.
   Information service providers
 should create simplified common standards for accessing and querying
information sources and eventually provide unified access to information.
   Software vendors,
 and 
scientific and professional groups,
 should create program libraries and make
them accessible through the networks.
RECOMMENDATION II
The institutions supporting the nation's researchers, led by the federal government, should develop an
interconnected national information technology network for use by all qualified researchers. Specifically
   The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) in the Executive Office of the President, and the
federal agencies responsible for supporting and performing research and development, should plan and

fund a nationwide infrastructure for computer-based research communication.
   Planning and development of this nationwide infrastructure should be guided by users of information
technology in research, rather than by technical experts in information technology or hardware or

software vendors. The Panel believes strongly that such a national network is too important to the future

of research to be left only to the technical experts.
   The national research network should be founded on the fundamental premise of open access to all
qualified researchers/scholars that has nurtured the world's scientific community for centuries.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
4Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The national research network should be developed in an evolutionary manner, making full use of the
existing successful networks for research.
RECOMMENDATION III
To facilitate implementation of Recommendations I and II, and to focus attention on the opportunities and
impediments associated with research uses of information technology, the Panel recommends the establishment

at a national level of a user's group to oversee and advise on the evolution and use of information technology in

support of scientific, engineering, and clinical research.
Specifically, the National Research Council (NRC) should charge a standing committee or board (whether
existing or newly created) with the mandate to oversee and advise on research use of information technology.

The membership of this board should include a majority of users from a variety of research disciplines.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
5Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
6Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IntroductionThis report is about how information technology has changed the conduct of scientific, engineering, and
clinical research.
Information technology is that set of computer and telecommunications technologies that makes possible
computation, communication, and the storage and retrieval of information. The term, therefore, includes
   Computer hardware of all kinds, from microprocessors dedicated to specific research tasks to the largest
supercomputers;   Communications networks that link researchers to each other and to resources of various kinds; and
   Computer software that researchers use to design and run scientific projects, and to manage the
information that the projects yield.
The effect of information technology on the conduct of research has long been a concern of the Committee
on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP), a joint unit of the National Academy of Sciences, the

National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. A previous COSEPUP report, 
Frontiers in
Science and Technology: A Selected Outlook
 (W. H. Freeman, 1983), discussed ways of improving scientific and
technical communication and asked, 
ﬁHow can scientists and engineers be encouraged to use the new electronic
modalities innovatively and effectively?
ﬂThe science policy community has occasionally discussed how computer and communication technologies
affect research, although mostly as a corollary to other policy issues such as the need for support for advanced

computing, the computing requirements of individual research disciplines, national security concerns about
information dissemination, or the potential of developments in information technology research. For example, in
September 1985, the House of Representatives' Committee on Science and Technology held hearings on 
ﬁTheINTRODUCTION7Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Impact of the Information Age on Science
ﬂ as part of its study of U.S. science policy (U.S. Congress, 1986a,b).
COSEPUP members felt that the subject deserved a thorough examination. In July 1985, a COSEPUP
planning group recommended a study, and in December, 1986, after approval and selection of a panel, the study

formally began. The study has received financial support from the Department of Energy, the National

Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Bureau of Standards and National Oceanic and Atmospheric

Administration of the Department of Commerce, the National Library of Medicine, and the National Science

Foundation.COSEPUP's charge to the Panel on Information Technology and the Conduct of Research was to
   Examine current and prospective applications of information technology
Šcomputers andcommunicationsŠto improve productivity in selected fields of scientific and engineering research,
including the biological, physical, social, and engineering sciences;
   Identify impediments to the effective use of these technologies in research
Šsuch impediments may be
institutional, financial, behavioral, and technical;
   Examine the behavioral and cultural changes required to exploit the new opportunities offered by these
information technologies; and
   Suggest appropriate actions by federal agencies, as well as by universities and other research
institutions, manufacturers, vendors, scientific associations, and individual researchers.
In considering its charge, the Panel decided that the goal of the study would be to recommend how to
stimulate research through the use of information technology, and the focus of the study would be on both

current and prospective uses. Because little research on general scientific uses of information technology now

exists, the Panel gathered additional information from several disciplines representing the range of scientific and

engineering research. Experts were provided with a list of questions, and commissioned to prepare papers on the

use of information technology in their fields. They were asked to represent their colleagues' views as well as

their own. The Panel believes that these papers reflect the diversity in information technology uses within and

across the scientific disciplines. The papers provided essential inputs to the Panel's discussions and eventual

recommendations. They are listed in 
Appendix A
, and are available from COSEPUP on request.
The report is written from the point of view, not of those who specialize in information technology, but of
those who use it. For all researchers, information technology is beneficial; for some, it has become central. Some

researchers want only better access to current technologies; others urgently want much more. The Panel does not

presume to prescribe a single model for all researchers, but it does believe that the products of the information

age are invaluable and should be available to researchers who need them. Therefore, in what follows, the Panel
INTRODUCTION8Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.does not appraise developments in computing hardware or software but emphasizes instead how these
developments affect the productivity of researchers.
The report is directed to two principal audiences. One audience includes the policymakers and leaders of
those institutions responsible for the support and management of research. For this audience, the Panel describes

issues and impediments, and recommends ways of helping the research community enhance its use of

information technology. The second audience is the users themselves, that is, research scientists and engineers.

The Panel hopes that researchers will find their concerns about information technology addressed clearly and in

their own terms. In addition, the Panel hopes that practices in other disciplines may spark readers' ideas for their

own research.The Panel discovered early that there is almost no systematic information on the users and uses of
information technology. For example, the Panel cannot estimate how many or what proportion of scientists use

computers in different fields, how access to networks and computer facilities is distributed across disciplines, or

to what extent useful applications are disseminated throughout the research community. Systematic collection of

such information is essential to the development of intelligent policy. Researchers' experiences in using

information technology can help guide decisions about policy and resource allocation. In turn, these decisions
will shape the technological and institutional advances that break down impediments to the further use of
information technology. This process will continue to change the nature of scientific, engineering, and clinical

research itself.
Finally, the Panel has come to a view of new ways of managing scientific knowledge and conducting
scientific research. In this view, scientists are more productive because they are using the power of computers

both to augment their intellectual efforts and to improve communication. With artificial barriers to

communication lowered, science itself is closer to the open, collaborative search that is its goal.
The next section of the report describes present trends, future potential, and impediments to the use of
information technology in support of research, drawing on examples from a number of fields. The report's final

section summarizes the Panel's findings and recommendations.
INTRODUCTION9Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION10Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Use of Information Technology in Research
In this chapter we examine the effect of information technology on the conduct of research. New
technologies offer new opportunities, although pervasive use of computers in research has not come about
without problems. Some of these problems are technological, some financial. Underlying many of them are
complex institutional and behavioral constraints.
Nearly five decades ago, the first programmable, electronic, digital computer was switched on. That day
science acquired a tool that at first simply facilitated research, then began to change the way research was done.
Today these changes continue, and now amount to a revolution.
Electronic digital computers at first simply replaced earlier technologies. Researchers used computers to do
arithmetic calculations previously done with paper and pencil, slide rules, abacuses, or roomfuls of people
running mechanical calculators. Benefits offered by the earliest computers were more quantitative than

qualitative; bigger computations could be done faster, with greater reliability, and perhaps more cheaply. But

computers were large, expensive, required technically expert operators and programmers, and consequently were

accessible only to a relatively small fraction of scientists and engineers.
One human generation and several computer generations later, with the advent of the integrated circuit (the
semiconductor ﬁchipﬂ), computational speed increased by a factor of 1 trillion, computational cost decreased by
a factor of 10 million, and the smallest useful calculator went from the size of a typewriter to the size of a

wristwatch. At present, personal computers selling for a few thousand dollars can put significant computing

power on the desk of every scientist. Meanwhile, advances in the software through which people interact with

and instruct computers have made computers potentially accessible to people with no specific training in

computation. More recently, computer technology has joined telecommunications technology to create a new

entity,THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH11
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁinformation technology.
ﬂ Information technology has done much to remove from the researcher the constraints
of speed, cost, and distance.
On the whole, information technology has led to improvements in research. New avenues for scientific
exploration have opened. The amount of data that can be analyzed has expanded, as has the complexity of

analyses. And researchers can collaborate more widely and efficiently.
Different scientific disciplines use information technology differently. Uses vary according to the
phenomena the discipline studies and the rate at which the discipline obtains information. In such disciplines as

high energy physics, neurobiology, chemistry, or materials science, experiments generate millions of

observations per second, and these must be screened and recorded as they happen. For these disciplines,

computers that can handle large amounts of information quickly are essential and have made possible research

that was previously impractical. Other disciplines, such as economics, psychology, or public health, gather data

on events that accumulate slowly over relatively long periods of time. These disciplines also need computers
with large capacities, but do not need the capability to react in 
ﬁreal time.
ﬂ Most disciplines use information
technology in ways that fall somewhere in the range between these two extremes.
Boxes supplement or expand points in the text: the first two below deal with specific disciplines.
HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS: SCIENCE DRIVES THE LEADING EDGE OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY.An example helps to illustrate the direction in which many disciplines are moving: high energy physics
could not be done without information technology, and offers an extreme example of the trends for

computing and communication needs in many scientific disciplines.
Most high energy physicists work on the same set of questions: what is the behavior of the most
elementary particles, and what is the nature of the fundamental forces between them? Their experiments

are conducted in machines called accelerators, devices that produce beams of protons, electrons, or other
particles that are accelerated to high-speeds and huge energies. There are two types of accelerators: those
in which two beams of particles are made to collide with each other (colliders), and those in which a beam
hits stationary targets. Physicists then reconstruct the collision to find new phenomena.
Remarkable results have emerged from high energy physics experiments conducted over the past two
decades. For instance, a Nobel prize-winning experiment carried out at the proton-antiproton collider at the
European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland, discovered two new particles known as the
W and the Z. Their existence had been predicted by a theory claiming that the weak and electromagnetic
forces, seemingly unrelated at low energy levels, were in fact manifestations of a single force, called the
electroweak interaction, which would appear at sufficiently high energies. This discovery is a significant
step toward the description of all known interactionsŠgravity, electromagnetism, and the strong (nuclear)

and weak (radioactive decay) forcesŠas manifestations of a single unifying force.
The process by which some tens of these
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH12
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Panel recognizes the diversity in research methods, and differences in needs for information
technology. But the needs of researchers show sufficient commonalities across research fields to make a search

for common solutions worthwhile.
THE CONDUCT OF RESEARCH
The everyday work of a researcher involves such activities as writing proposals, developing theoretical
models, designing experiments and collecting data, analyzing data, communicating with colleagues, studying

research literature, reviewing colleagues' work, and writing articles. Information technology has had important

effects on all these activities, and more change is in the offing. To illustrate these effects, we examine three

particular aspects of research: data collection and analysis, communications and collaboration, and information

storage and retrieval. In each area, we discuss how researchers currently use information technology and what
difficulties they encounter. In a final part of this section, we discuss new technological opportunities and their
implications for the conduct of research.
new W and Z particles were isolated from millions of collision events in the CERN accelerator offers a
striking illustration of the dependence of high energy physics on the most advanced aspects of information

technology. Three steps are involved. First, data are acquired in real time as the experiment progresses;
second, the data obtained are transformed into flight paths, from which the particles making the paths are
identified; and third, the event itself is reconstructed, and those few events exhibiting the very special
characteristics of the new phenomenon are identified. In each of these steps computers are vital: to trigger
the identification of interesting events; to establish particle tracks from the data; and to carry out analysis
and interpretation.
In the future, high energy physicists will demand more from information technology than it can now
deliver. Proposed new particle accelerators, such as the Superconducting Super Collider (SSC), are
expected to produce several million collisions every second, of which only one or two collisions a second
can be recorded. Selecting this tiny fraction of the produced events in a manner that does not throw away
other interesting data is a tremendous challenge. It is hoped that 
ﬁfarmsﬂ of dedicated microprocessors
might be able to examine tens of thousands of collision events per second, so that sophisticated selection

mechanisms can screen all collisions and select the very few that are to be recorded. The computer
programs that need to be developed for these tasks are of unprecedented size and complexity, and will
challenge the capabilities of both the physicists programming them and the information technology software
support available to the programmers.
Even the small fraction of recorded events will result in some ten million collisions to be analyzed in a
year. Processing one year's worth of saved data from the SSC would take a modern mid-sized computer

500 years;THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH13
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Data Collection and Analysis
Current Use
 Collecting and analyzing data with computers are among the most widespread uses of
information technology in research. Computer hardware for these purposes comes in all sizes, ranging from

personal computers to microprocessors dedicated to specific instrumentational tasks, large mainframe computers

serving a university campus or research facility, and supercomputers. Computer software ranges from general-

purpose programs that computer numeric functions or conduct statistical analyses to specialized applications of

all sorts.The Panel has identified five trends in the use of information technology in data collection and analysis:
obviously, a faster processing rate is required. Although no computer currently on the market would
handle this load in reasonable time, existing plans suggest that, by the time it is needed, some combination
of dedicated microprocessors and large mainframe systems will be available.
High energy physicists are also highly dependent on networks. Accelerators are located in only seven
main laboratories in the United States, Switzerland, West Germany, the Soviet Union, and Japan; the
physicists who use them are located in many hundreds of universities and institutions scattered around the
world. Almost every high energy experiment, large or small, is a result of international collaboration: for
instance, one detector installed around one of the collision points of the accelerator at the Fermi National

Laboratory is run by a collaboration of four foreign and thirteen U.S. institutions, involving some 200
physicists. Physicists at several institutions designed different parts of the detector; since the detector has
to work as an integrated apparatus, the physicists had to coordinate their work closely. Different physicists
are also interested in different aspects of the experiment, and subsequent analysis of the data depends
crucially on adequate networking.
Future networking needs for high energy physics involve very high transmission speeds (as high as 10
megabits per second) between laboratories, with provision for exchange of collision event files, graphics,
and video conferencing. Present long distance communication links are limited to lower transmission

speeds (typically, 56 kilobits per second); each university physics group could use a 1.5 megabit per
second line for its own research needs. The provision of these facilities would be of enormous benefit to
university-based physicists and students who cannot travel frequently to accelerator sites.
   Increased use of computers for research. This trend coincides with large and continued increases in the
speed and power of computers and corresponding declines in their costs.
   Dramatic increases in the amount of information researchers can store and analyze. For example,
researchers can now process and manipulate observations in a database consisting of 18 years 
× 3,400
individuals × 1,000 variables per individual for each year, create sets of relationships among these
observations,THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH14
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and then subject the data to complex statistical analyses, all at a cost of less than $100. Two decades
ago, that kind of analysis could not have been conducted, and a much simpler analysis would have cost

at least ten times as much.
   The creation of new families of instruments in which computer control and data processing are at the
core of observation. For example, in new telescopes, image-matching programs on specialized

computers align small mirrors to produce the equivalent light-gathering power of much larger

telescopes with a single mirror. For instruments such as radio-telescope interferometers, the computer

integrates data from instruments that are miles apart. For computer-assisted tomographic scanners, the

computer integrates and converts masses of data into three-dimensional images of the body.
   Increased communication among researchers, resulting from the proliferation of computer networks
dedicated to research, from a handful in the early 1970s to over 100 nationwide at present. Different

networks connect different communities. Biologists, high energy physicists, magnetic fusion physicists,

and computer scientists each have their own network; oceanographers, space scientists, and

meteorologists are also linked together. Networks also connect researchers with one another regionally;

an example is NYSERNET, the New York State Education and Research Network. Researchers with
defense agency contracts are linked with one network, as are scientists working under contract to the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Such networks allow data collection and

analysis to be done remotely, and data to be shared among colleagues.
   Increasing availability of software 
ﬁpackagesﬂ for standard research activities. Robust, standardized
software packages allow researchers to do statistical analyses of their data, compute complex

mathematical functions, simplify mathematical expressions, maintain large databases, and design

everything from circuits to factories. Many of these packages are commercial products, with high-

quality documentation, service, and periodic updates. Others are freely shared software of use to a

specialized community without the costs or benefits of commercial software.
One example illustrating several of the above trends is a system that geophysicists have set up to predict
earthquakes more accurately. Networks of seismographs cover the western United States. One such network in

northern California is called CALNET. Information from the 264 seismographs in CALNET goes to a special-

purpose computer called the real-time picker. The software on the real-time picker looks at data as they come in

and identifies exceptional events: patterns that indicate a coming earthquake. Then it notifies scientists of the
events by telephone and sends graphics displays of locations and magnitudes, all within minutes.
Difficulties Encountered
 The difficulties that researchers encounter using information technology to collect
and analyze data vary in importance depending on the particular discipline.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH15
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.One difficulty is uneven access to computing resources. Information technology is not equally accessible to
all researchers who could benefit from its use, even though broadening access is a continuing focus of

institutions and funding agencies. To take an example from the field of statistics: according to a 1986 report on

the Workshop on the Use of Computers in Statistical Research, sponsored by The Institute for Mathematical

Statistics, ﬁ–the quality and quantity of computational resources available to researchers today varies
dramatically from department to department 
– Perceived needs appear to vary just as dramatically 
– [While]
departments that already have significant computer hardware feel a strong need for operating support, 
–departments that do not have their own computational resources feel an equally strong need for hardware.
ﬂ(Eddy, 1986, p. iii.)
Exclusion from resources happens for a variety of reasons, all reducible in the end to financial constraints.
Not all academic or research institutions have links to networks; in addition, access to networks can be

expensive, so not everyone who wants it can afford it. In some cases, since access to networks often mediates

access to resources such as supercomputers, exclusion from networks can mean exclusion from advanced

computing.One of the most frustrating difficulties for researchers is finding the right software. Software that is
commercially available is often unsuited to the specialized needs of the researcher. In those fields in which

industry has an interest, however, commercial software is being developed in response to a perceived market.

Software could be custom designed for the researcher, but relatively few researchers pay directly for software

development, partly because research grants often cannot be used to support it. Consequently, most research
See box on software, page 18.
RESEARCH MATHEMATICS AND COMPUTATION
Computation and theory in mathematics are symbiotic processes. Machine computing power has
matured to the point where mathematical problems too complicated to be understood analytically can be
computed and observed. Phenomena have been observed for the first time that have initiated entirely new
theoretical investigations. The theory of the chaotic behavior of dynamic systems depends fundamentally
on numerical simulations; the concept of a 
ﬁstrange attractor
ﬂ was formulated to understand the results of a
series of numerical computations. Recent advances in the theory of knots have relied on algebraic
computations carried out on computers. These advances can be directly applied to such important topics

as understanding the folding of DNA molecules. In the field of geometry, numerical simulation has been
used recently to discover new surfaces whose analytic form was too difficult to analyze directly. The
simulations were understood by the use of computer graphics, and led to the explicit construction of infinite
families of new examples.
The modern computer is the first laboratory instrument in the history of mathematics. Not only is it
being used increasingly for research in pure mathematics, but, equally important, the prevalence of
scientific computing in other fields has provided the me
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH16
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ers, although they are not often skilled software creators, develop their own software with the help of graduate
students. The result meets researchers' minimum needs but typically lacks documentation and is designed for one

purpose only. Such software is not fully understood by any one person, making it difficult to maintain or

transport to other computing environments. This means that the software often cannot be used for related

projects, and the scientific community wastes time, effort, and money duplicating one another's efforts. In

sections to follow we examine how this problem is being addressed by professional associations, nonprofit
groups, and corporations.dium for communication between the mathematician and the physical scientist. Here modern graphics
plays a critical role. This interaction is particularly strong in materials science, where the behavior of liquid
crystals and the shapes of complex polymers are being understood through a combination of theoretical
and computational advances.
In spite of all this, mathematics has been one of the last scientific disciplines to be computerized. More
than other fields, it lacks instrumentation and training. This prevents the mathematician from using modern
computing hardware and techniques in attacking research problems, and at the same time isolates him/her
from productive communication with scientific colleagues.
Of course, mathematics is an important part of the foundation and intellectual basis of most of the
methods that underlie all scientific use of computational machinery. To use today's high-speed computing
machines, new techniques have been devised. The need for new techniques is providing a serious
challenge to the applied mathematician, and has placed new and difficult problems on the desk of the

theorist; algorithms themselves have become an object of serious investigation. Their refinement and
improvement have become at least as important to the speed and utility of high-speed computing as the
improvement of hardware.
Some disciplines are limited by available computer power because computers needed are not on the market.
Some contemplated calculations in theoretical physics, quantum chemistry, or molecular dynamics, for example,

could use computers with much greater capacity than any even on the drawing boards. In other cases, data

gathering is limited by the hardware presently available. Most commercial computers are not designed to

accommodate hardware and programs that select out interesting information from observational data, and

scientists who want such computers must build them.
Another difficulty researchers encounter is in transmitting data over networks at high-speed. For researchers
such as global geophysicists who use data collected by satellite, a large enough volume of information can be

sent in a short enough time, but transmission is unreliable. Researchers often encounter delays and incur extra

costs to compensate for 
ﬁnoiseﬂ on high-speed networks. Technological solutions such as optical fiber and error-
correcting coding are currently expensive to install and implement and are often unavailable in certain

geographic regions or for certain applications.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH17
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communication and Collaboration among Researchers
Current Use
 Researchers cannot work without access to collaborators, to instruments, to information
sources and, sometimes, to distant computers. Computers and communication networks are increasingly

necessary for that access. Three technologies are concerned with communications and collaboration: word

processing, electronic mail, and networks. Word processing and electronic mail are arguably the most pervasive

of all the routine uses of computers in research communication. Electronic mail
Šsending text from one
computer user to another over the networks
Šis replacing written and telephone communication among many
communities of scientists, and is changing the ways in which these communities are defined. Large,
collaborative projects, such as oceanographic voyages, use electronic mail to organize and schedule experiments,

coordinate equipment arrivals, and handle other logistical
IF KITCHEN APPLIANCES WERE LIKE SOFTWARE
If kitchen appliances were like programs, they would all look alike sitting on the counter. They would all
be gray, featureless boxes, into which one places the food to be processed. The door to the box, like the
box itself, is completely opaque.
On the outside of each box is a general description of what the box does. For instance, one box might
say: ﬁMakes anything a meal
ﬂ; another: ﬁCooks perfectly every time
ﬂ; another: 
ﬁNever more than 100
calories a serving.
ﬂ You can never be exactly sure what happens to food when it is placed in these boxes.
They don't work with the door open, and the 200-page user's manual doesn't give any details.
Working in a kitchen would be a matter of becoming familiar with the idiosyncracies of a small number
of these boxes and then trying to get done what you really want done using them. For instance, if you want
a fried-egg sandwich, you might try the 
ﬁMakes anything a meal
ﬂ box, since a sandwich is a sort of meal.
But because you know from past experience that this box leaves everything coated with grease, you use
the ﬁNever more than 100 calories
ﬂ box to postprocess the output. And so on. The result is never what you
really want, but it is all you can do.
You aren't allowed to look inside the boxes to help you do what you really want to do. Each box is
sealed in epoxy. No one can break the seal. If the box seems not to be working right, there is nothing you
can do. Even calling the manufacturer is no help, because the box is not under warranty to be fit for any
particular purpose. The manufacturer do have help lines, but not for help with broken boxes
Šrather to help
you figure out how to use functioning boxes. But don't try to ask how your box works. The help-line people
don't know, or if they do, they won't tell you. Several times a year you get a letter from the manufacturer

telling you to ship them your old box and they will send you a new one. If you do so, you find yourself with a
shinier box, which does whatever it did before a little faster, or perhaps it does a little more
Šbut since you
were never sure what it did before, you cannot be sure it's better now.
SOURCE: Mark Weiser, 1987. 
ﬁSource Code,
ﬂ IEEE Computer,
 20(11): 66
Œ73.See box on document processing, page 19. 
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH18
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.details. With the advent of electronic publishing tools that help lay out and integrate text, graphics, and pictures,
mail systems that allow interchange of complex documents will become essential.
Networks range in size from small networks that connect users in a certain geographic area, to national and
international networks. Scientists at different sites increasingly use networks for conversations by electronic mail

and for repeated exchanges of text and data files.
The Panel has identified two major trends in the way information technology is changing collaboration and
communication in scientific research:
   Information can be shared more and more quickly. For example, one of the first actions of the federal
government after the discovery of the new high-temperature superconductors was to fund, through the

Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory, the creation of a superconductivity information exchange.

The laboratory publishes a biweekly newsletter on advances in high-temperature superconductivity

research, available in both paper and electronic forms; the electronic version is sent out to some 250

researchers.   Researchers are making new collaborative arrangements. The technology of networks provides
increased convenience and faster turnaround times
Šoften several completed message exchanges in one
day. For shorter messages, special software allows real-time exchanges.
See box on collaboration, page 20.
DOCUMENT PROCESSING
[An] area of significant change is document processing. This began in the 1960s with a few simple
programs that would format typed text. In the context of UNIX* in the 1970s, these ideas led to a new
generation of document processing programs and languages, such as SCRIBE and the UNIX-based tools
troff, eqn, tbl,
 and 
pic. The quintessence of these ideas are Knuth's TeX and METAFONT systems, which
have begun to revolutionize the world's printing industry. In workstations, these ideas have produced

WYSIWYG (wizzy-wig, or 
ﬁwhat you see is what you get
ﬂ) systems that display formatted text exactly as it
will appear in print. International standards organizations are considering languages for describing
documents, and some software manufacturers are constructing systems, such as the POSTSCRIPT
protocols, embodying these ideas. The NSF-sponsored EXPRES project, at the University of Michigan and
Carnegie Mellon University, illustrates a serious effort to develop a standard method of exchanging full
scientific documents by network. Low-cost laser printers now make advanced document preparation and
printing facilities available to many people with workstations and personal computers. It is now possible for

everyone to submit high-quality, camera-ready copy directly to publishers, thus speeding the publication of
new results; however, it is no longer true that a well-formatted document can be trusted to have undergone
a careful review and editing before being printed.
SOURCE: Peter J. Denning, 1987, Position Paper: Information Technology in Computing.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH19
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.As Lederberg noted a decade ago (Lederberg, 1978), digital communication allows scientists to define
collegial relationships along the lines of specialized interests rather than spatial location. This is immensely

beneficial to science as a whole, but causes some consternation among administrators who find more loyalty to

disciplines than to institutions.
Technologies in the process of development show the networks' remarkable potential. Multimedia mail
allows researchers to send a combination of still images, video, sound, and text. Teleconferencing provides

simultaneous electronic links among several groups. Electronic chalkboards allow researchers to draw on their

chalkboard and have the drawing appear on their computer and on the computers of collaborators across the

country. Directory services, or 
ﬁnameservers,ﬂ supply directories of the names and network addresses of users,
processes, and resources on a given network or on a series of connected networks. Program distribution services
include the supply of mathematical software to subscribers. A spectacular new technology is represented in the

Metal Oxide Semiconductor Implementation System (MOSIS), a service that contracts for the manufacture of

very large-scale integrated (VLSI) chips from circuit diagrams pictured on a subscriber's screen. Fabrication time

is often less than 30 days. In one notable example, the researchers designing a radiotelescope in Australia

designed custom chips for controlling the telescope. MOSIS returned the chips in a matter of days; the normal

manufacturing process would have taken months and would have delayed the development of the instrument

considerably.NEW FORMS OF COLLABORATION THROUGH THE NETWORKS
The development of COMMON LISP (a programming language) would most probably not have been
possible without the electronic message system provided by ARPANET, the Department of Defense's
Advanced Research Projects Agency network. Design decisions were made on several hundred distinct
points, for the most part by consensus, and by simple majority vote when necessary. Except for two one-
day face-to-face meetings, all of the language design and discussion was done through the ARPANET

message system, which permitted effortless dissemination of messages to dozens of people, and several
interchanges per day.The message system also provided automatic archiving of the entire discussion, which has proved
invaluable in preparation of this reference manual. Over the course of thirty months, approximately 3000
messages were sent (an average of three per day), ranging in length from one line to twenty pages
– It
would have been substantially more difficult to have conducted this discussion by any other means, and

would have required much more time.
SOURCE: Guy Steele, 1984. COMMON LISP: The Language. Bedford, MA: Digital Press, pp. xi-xii.
Reprinted with permission. Copyright Digital Press/Digital Equipment Corporation.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH20
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.To share complex information (such as satellite images) over the networks, researchers will need to be able
to send entire pictures in a few seconds. One technique that is likely to receive more attention in the future is data

compression, which removes redundant information and converts data and images to more compact forms that

require less time to transmit.
Among the most important of potential applications of information technology is the emergence of a truly
national research network
Šthat is, a set of connections, or gateways, between networks
Što which every
researcher has access. The National Science Foundation has announced its intention to serve as a lead agency in

the development of such a network, beginning with a backbone, called NSFNET, that links the NSF-supported

supercomputing centers, and widening to include other existing networks.
Widespread access to networks will also offer much more than just communications links. They can
become what the network serving the molecular biology community aims to be: a full-fledged information system.
Difficulties Encountered
 The principal difficulty with communicating across research communities via
electronic mail and file transfer technologies is incompatibility. The networks were formed independently,

evolved over many years, and are now numerous. Consequently, networks use different protocols, that is,

different conventions for packaging data or text for transmission, for locating an appropriate route from sender to

receiver over the physical network, and for signaling the start and stop of a message. For example, a physicist on

the High Energy Physics network (HEPNET) trying to send data to a physicist on one of the regional networks

would first have to ask 
ﬁWhat network are you on?
ﬂ; ﬁHow do I address you?
ﬂ; and ﬁWhat form do you want the
information in?
ﬂ In the gateway between two networks, the protocols of the first network must be removed from
the message and the protocols for the second added. Under heavy traffic loads, the gateways can become

bottlenecks. As a result, navigating from one network to a researcher on another is time-consuming, tiresome,

and often unreliable; navigating over two networks to a researcher on a third is prohibitively complex.
Text can frequently be moved from one word processing system to another only with significant loss of
formatting information
Šincluding the control of spacing, underlining, margins, or indentations. Graphics can
only rarely be included with text. Such issues of compatibility may delay the expansion of electronic publishing

as well as electronic proposal submission and review
Šthe goals of the National Science Foundation's EXPRES
project.The issues are summarized succinctly by Denning: 
ﬁMost word processors are inadequate for scientific
needs: they cannot handle graphs, illustrations, mathematics and layout, and myriad file formats make exchange

extremely difficult. With so many experts and so much competition in the market, it is hard to win agreement on

standards. There is virtually no electronic support for the remainder of the process of scientific publication
Šsubmission, review, publication, and
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH21
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.distribution. These issues can be expected to be resolved over the next few years, as document interchange
formats are adopted by standards organizations and incorporated into software revisions and equipment

upgrades. However, the transition process will not be painless
ﬂ (Denning, 1987, pp. 26
Œ27).In addition, some networks limit use under certain circumstances; for instance, one network bars
communication among researchers at industrial laboratories. The fear is that corporations would use a research

network for commercial profit or even for sales or marketing. The Panel believes such fear is misplaced and that

networks should be open for all research communication.
On the whole, the management of the networks is anarchic. Networks operate not as though they were a
service vital to the health of the nation's research community but as small fiefdoms, each with strong disciplinary

direction, with little incentive to collaborate. The National Science Foundation has taken an early leadership role,

with such initiatives as NSFNET, which addresses many of the current networking problems, and the EXPRES

project, which establishes standards for the electronic exchange of complex documents. Such efforts to provide
integration and leadership are vital to increased research productivity.
Boxes on pages 22
Œ27 examine network use alternatives.
FROM A NETWORK TO AN INFORMATION RESOURCE PROTOTYPE: BIONET
BIONET is a nonprofit resource for molecular biology computing that provides access to software,
recent versions of databases relevant to molecular biology, and electronic communications facilities. Work
is in progress to expand BIONET as a logical network reaching molecular biologists throughout the
research community worldwide. Many existing physical networks are in use by molecular biologists, and it
is BIONET's aim to utilize them all. BIONET is working on plans to provide molecular biologists with access

to one or more supercomputers or parallel processing resources. Special programs will be developed to
provide molecular biologists with an easy interface to submit supercomputer jobs.
Especially active are the METHODS-AND-REAGENTS bulletin board (for requesting information on
lab protocols and/or experimental reagents) and the RESEARCH-NEWS bulletin board, which has become
a forum for posting interesting scientific developments and also a place where scientists can introduce their
labs and research interests to the rest of the electronic community. Bulletin boards have been instituted for

the GenBank and EMBL nucleic acid sequence databases. Copies of messages on these bulletin boards
are forwarded to the database staff members for their attention. These bulletin boards serve as a medium
for discussing issues relating to the databases and as a place where users of the databases can obtain
assistance. Along these same lines BIONET has developed the GENPUB program that facilitates
submission of sequence data and author-entered annotations in computer-readable form directly to
GenBank and EMBL via the electronic mail network.
The journals CELL and CABIOS have established accounts on BIONET and the Journal of Biological
Chemistry and several others
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH22
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Storage and Retrieval
Current Uses
 How information is stored determines how accessible it is. Scientific texts are generally
stored in print (in the jargon, in hard copy) and are accessible through the indices and catalogs of a library. Some

texts, along with programs and data, however, are stored electronically
Šon disks or magnetic tapes to be run in
computersŠand are generally more easily accessible. In addition, collections of data, known as databases, are
sometimes stored in a central location. In general, electronic storage of information holds enormous advantages:

it can be stored economically, found quickly without going to another location, and moved easily.
One kind of database holds factual scientific data. The Chemical Abstracts Service, for example, has a
library of the molecular structures of all chemical substances reported in the literature since 1961. GenBank is a

library of known genetic sequences. Both the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the National

Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have thousands of tapes holding data on space and the earth and

atmosphere.will also soon be on board. Several journals have indicated an interest in publishing research abstracts
on BIONET in advance of hardcopy articles.
Annotated examples of program usage have been included into the HELP ME system. The examples,
formatted to be suitable for printing out as a manual, cover the major uses of the BIONET software for data
entry, gel management, sequence, structure and restriction site analysis, cloning simulations, database
searches, and sequence similarities and alignments. A manual of standard molecular biology lab protocols
has also been added to HELP ME for users to reference.
One of BIONET's major goals is to serve as a focus for the development and sharing of new software
tools. Towards achieving this goal, BIONET has made available to the community a wide variety of
important computer programs donated by a number of software developers. A collaborative effort has

occurred between the BIONET staff and the software authors to expand the usefulness of important
software by making it compatible with a number of hardware and user community constraints.
BIONET provides an increasing number of databases online: lists of restriction enzymes; a bank of
common cloning vector restriction maps and complete vector sequences; a database of regular
expressions derived from published consensus sequences; the searchable full text of a recent revision of
ﬁGenetic Variations of Drosophila melanogaster
ﬂ by Dan L. Lindsley and E.H. Grell (the Drosophila 
ﬁRedBookﬂ). Some of these can be used as input to search programs. BIONET invites curators of genetic and
physical genome maps to use this resource for the collection, maintenance, and distribution of their
databases.SOURCE: Roode et al., 1988. 
ﬁNew Developments at BIONET,
ﬂ Nucleic Acids Research,
 16(5):1857
Œ1859.THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH23
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A second kind of database, a reference database, stores information on the literature of the sciences. For
example, Chemical Abstracts Service has abstracted all articles published in journals of chemistry since 1970

and makes the abstracts available electronically. The National Library of Medicine operates services that index,

abstract, and search the literature database (known as MEDLARS). In addition, it distributes copies of the

database for use on local computers and has developed a communications package, called GRATEFUL MED,

that simplifies searching the major MEDLARS files
Šover six million records through 1987. In addition to
biomedicine and clinical medicine, the National Library of Medicine partially covers the literature of the
disciplines of population control, bioethics, nursing, health administration, and chemistry. One of its most

important databases, for instance, is TOXLINE, which references the chemical analysis of toxins. Information

search services have grown up around these and other databases, including a number of commercial ones, and

now constitute a substantial industry.
BIRTH OF A NETWORK: A HISTORY OF BITNET (EXCERPTED).
BITNET (Because It's Time NETwork) began as a single leased telephone line between the computer
centers of The City University of New York (CUNY) and Yale University. It has developed into an
international network of computer systems at over 800 institutions worldwide. Because membership is not
restricted by disciplinary specialty or funding ability, BITNET plays a unique role in fostering the use of
computer networking for scholarly and administrative communication both nationally and internationally.
In 1981, CUNY and Yale had been using internal telecommunications networks to link computers of
their own. The New York/New Haven link allowed the same exchanges to take place between two
universities. The founders of BITNET
ŠIra Fuchs, then a CUNY vice chancellor, and Greydon Freeman, the
director of the Yale Computing Center
Šrealized that the fledgling network could be used to share a wide
range of data. Furthermore, the ease and power of electronic mail showed new potential for cooperative
work among scholars; collective projects could now be undertaken that would have been difficult or
impossible if conducted by postal mail or by phone.
Fuchs and Freeman approached the directors of other academic computer centers with major IBM
installations to invite them to become members of the new network. The plan of shared resources that
BITNET offered included two proposals: a) that each institution pay for its own communications link to the
network; and b) that each provide facilities for at least one new member to connect. Software was used to
create a store-and-forward chain of computers in which files, messages, and commands are passed on

without charge from site to site to their final destination. BITNET became a transcontinental network in
1982 when the University of California at Berkeley leased its own line to CUNY. Berkeley agreed to allow
other Califor
A database, taken together with the procedures for indexing, cataloging, and searching it, makes up an
information management system. Some potentials of information management systems have been predicted for

years, beginning with
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH24
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Vannevar Bush's MEMEX (Bush, 1945). The box on pages 28
Œ29 illustrates a current working information
management system that links texts and databases in genetics and medicine.
nia institutions to link to the network through its line, in return for some expense sharing.
In 1984, IBM agreed to support CUNY and EDUCOM (a nonprofit consortium of colleges, universities,
and other institutions founded in 1964 to facilitate the use and management of information technology) in
organizing a centralized source of information and services to accommodate the growing number of
BITNET users. EDUCOM set up a Network Information Center (BITNIC), whose ongoing functions include
the handling of registration of new members; at the same time, CUNY established a Development and

Operations Center (BITDOC), which develops tools for the network.
BITNET's success (it is now in all fifty states) led to the formation of a worldwide network of computers
using the same networking software: in Europe and the Middle East (EARN, the European Academic
Research Network), Canada (NetNorth), Japan, Mexico, Chile, and Singapore (all of which are members of

BITNET). There is also active interest from other countries in the Far East, Australia and New Zealand, and
South America. Although political and funding considerations have forced their administrative segregation,
BITNET, EARN, and NetNorth form one topologically interconnected network.
Success has also meant some further structuring of what had once been essentially a buddy system.
BITNET is now governed by a board of trustees elected by and from its membership. The members of the
board each participate in various policy-making committees focusing on network usage, finance and

administration, BITNIC services and activities, and technical issues. What began as a simple device for
intercampus sharing is simple no longer.
SOURCE: Holland Cotter, 1988. Birth of a network: A history of BITNET. 
CUNY/University Computer
Center Communications,
 14:1Œ10.Difficulties Encountered
 For all disciplines, both factual and reference databases promise to be significant
sources of knowledge for basic research. But to keep this promise, a Pandora's box of problems will have to be

solved.Difficulties encountered with factual databases, stated succinctly, are: the researcher cannot get access to
data; if he can, he cannot read them; if he can read them, he does not know how good they are; and if he finds

them good, he cannot merge them with other data. Researchers have difficulty getting access to data stored by

other researchers. Such access permits reanalysis and replication, both essential elements of the scientific
process. At present, with a few exceptions, data storage is largely an individual researcher's concern, in line with
the tradition that researchers have first rights to their data. The result has been a proliferation of idiosyncratic

methods for storing, organizing, and indexing data, with one researcher's data essentially inaccessible to all other

researchers.THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH25
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Even if a researcher gets access to a colleague's data, he may not be able to read them. The formats with
which data are written on magnetic tape
Šlike the formats used in word processing systems
Švary from
researcher to researcher, even within disciplines. The same formatting problems prohibit the researcher from

merging someone else's data into his own database. In order either to read or to merge another's data,

considerable effort must be dedicated to converting tape formats.
Finally, when a researcher gets access to and reads another's database, he often has no notion of the quality
of the data it contains. A number of proposals (see Branscomb, 1983, National Research Council, 1978) have

been made for the creation of what are called evaluated databases, in which data have been verified by

independent assessment.
In fields such as organizational science or public health, the costs of collecting and storing data are so large
that researchers often have to depend on case studies of organizations or communities to test hypotheses.

Researchers in these fields have proposed combining data from many surveys into databases of national scope. If

differences in research protocols and database formats can be resolved, such national databases can increase the

quality and effectiveness of research.
THE STUDY PANEL'S EXPERIENCE WITH ITS OWN ELECTRONIC MAIL IS INSTRUCTIVE.
Most of the members of the Panel use electronic mail in their professional work; some use it
extensively, exchanging as many as seventy messages in one day. At their first meeting, Panel members
and staff decided it would be useful to establish electronic communication links for the Panel. Using a
network to which he had access, one of the Panel members devised a distribution-list scheme for the
Panel. He designed a system that would allow Panel members to exchange messages or documents easily
by naming a common group 
ﬁaddress.ﬂ This group address would connect everyone by name from their
own network. Panel members would not have to remember special codes or routes to other networks, but

could use their own familiar network. Also, messages could be sent to one, several, or all of the Panel
members at once.
Between December 1986 and March 1988, nearly 2,000 messages went out using the Panel's special
electronic group address. In line with what has been found in systematic research on electronic mail by 
adhoc task groups (Finholt, Sproull and Kiesler, 1987), most of the messages went from study staff managing
the project to Panel members. Typically, staff used electronic mail to perform coordinating and attentional
functions, e.g., to structure meetings, to ask Panel members for information or to perform writing tasks, and

to provide members with progress reports. In addition, some Panel members sent mail through other
network channels to each other; for instance, two Panel members exchanged electronic mail about
computers in the oceanographic community through BITNET, ARPANET, and OMNET.
Although previous research and our own
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH26
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The primary difficulty encountered with reference databases is in conducting searches. Most information
searches at present are incomplete, cumbersome, inefficient, expensive, and executable only by specialists.

Searches are incomplete because databases themselves are incomplete
Šupdating a database is difficult and
expensiveŠand because information is stored in more than one database. Searches are cumbersome and
inefficient because different databases are organized according to different principles and cannot readily be

searched except by commands specific to each database. Searches are expensive because access is expensive (as
much as $300 per hour), because network linkages to the databases impose substantial surcharges, and because
the inefficiency of the systems means that searches may have to be repeated.
A difficulty common to both scientific and reference databases is a pressing need for new and more
compact forms of data storage. Disciplines such as oceanography, meteorology, space sciences, and high energy

physics have already gathered so much data that more efficient means of storage are essential; and others are

following close behind. One solution seems to lie in optical disk storage, for which various alternative

technologies are under development. Currently, these new techniques lack commonly accepted standards.
informal observations agree in suggesting that the electronic group mail scheme helped the Panel to
work more efficiently, the system was used much less extensively than had been originally envisioned. For
example, when delivery of report drafts was crucial, the staff relied on overnight postal mail. Network
service inadequacies and technical problems are partly to blame; for example, it took months before

messages could be sent predictably and reliably to every Panel member. Because the networks do not
facilitate access to service support (comparatable to telephone system operators, for example), Panel
members had to rely on their own resources to remedy any system inefficiencies. For example, changes to
electronic mail addresses in the system could not be made after a few months, so that new addresses had
to be added to individual messages.
Such technical problems, though by no means insurmountable, were annoying. Analysis of a sample of
messages received by Panel staff indicates that approximately 10 percent contained some complaint about

delays, losses of material in transmission, or unavailability of the group mail system. Often, documents
were difficult to read because document formatting codes embedded in the document files were removed
prior to transmission. A message legible on one system might be filled with unintelligible characters when
received on another. At considerable difficulty, some Panel members converted messages received
electronically to formats they could read using their text editors. Then they would type in their own

revisions, which once again would have to be converted to plain formats to be sent back through the
networks. This experience suggests that much needs to be done to make internetwork communication by
groups more efficient and easier to use.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH27
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Another difficulty is that stored data gradually become useless, either because the storage media decay or
the storage technology itself becomes obsolete. Data stored on variant forms of punched cards, on paper tape, or

on certain magnetic tape formats may be lost due to the lack of reading devices for such media. Even if the

devices still exist, some data stored on magnetic tapes will be lost as the tapes age, unless tapes are copied

periodically. Needless to say, such preservation activities often receive low priority.
An important archival activity that also receives a low priority is the conversion of primary and reference
data from pre-computer days into machine readable form. In this regard, the efforts of the Chemical Abstract

Service to extend their chemical substance and reference databases are praiseworthy.
HOW A LIBRARY USES COMPUTERS TO ADVANCE PRODUCTIVITY IN SCIENCE
In 1985 the William H. Welch Medical Library of the Johns Hopkins University began a unique
collaboration with Dr. Victor A. McKusick, the Johns Hopkins University Press, and the National Library of

Medicine to develop and maintain an online version of McKusick's book 
Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(known as OMIM, for Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man). While the book contains 3,900 phenotypes (a

specific disorder or substance linked to a genetic disease) and updates are issued approximately every five

years, OMIM currently describes more than 4,300 phenotypes and is updated every week. A gene map is

available, keyed to the phenotype descriptions.
Any registered user worldwide can dial up OMIM and search its contents through a simple three-step
process: 1) state the search in simple English (e.g., relationship between Duchenne muscular dystrophy

and growth deficiency hormone); 2) examine the list of documents, which are presented in ranked order of

relevance; and 3) select one or more documents to read in detail. Having selected a document, the

searcher can determine through a single keystroke whether the phenotype has been mapped to a specific

chromosome. OMIM entries are also searchable in a related file, the Human Gene Mapping Library

(HGML) at Yale University. By mid-1988, researchers will be able to use the same access code to enter

and search three related databases: HGML in New Haven, the Jackson Laboratory Mouse Map in Bar

Harbor, and OMIM in Baltimore.
OMIM is more than an electronic text. It is a dynamic databases with many applications. Searching the
knowledge base is only one of its uses. It can be used as a working tool. For example, at the last biennial

international Human Gene Mapping conference in Paris (September 1987) the results of the committees'

deliberations were used to update and regenerate the database each evening. Every
Another difficulty in storing information is private ownership. By tradition, researchers hold their data
privately. In general, they neither submit their data to central archives nor make their data available via

computer. Increasingly, however, in disciplines like meteorology and the biomedical sciences, submission of

primary data to data banks has become accepted as a duty. In the field of economics, the National Science

Foundation now requires that data collected with the support of the Economics Program be archived in machine

readableTHE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH28
See box on satellite-derived data, page 30.
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.form, and that any professional article citing program support be accompanied by a fully documented disk

describing the underlying data. In the social sciences, a 1985 report of the National Research Council's

Committee on National Statistics recommended both that 
ﬁsharing data should be a regular practice
ﬂ and that a
ﬁcomprehensive reference service for computer-readable social science data should be developed.
ﬂ (Fienberg,Martin, and Straf, 1985.)
morning, the conferees had fresh files to consult. This information was available worldwide at the same
time. In the future, these conferences can take place electronically as frequently as desired by the scientific

community.OMIM is a node in an emerging network of biotechnology databases, data banks, tissue repositories,
and electronic journals. In a few years, it may be possible to enter any of these files from any one of the

related files. Through this kind of linkage, OMIM may serve as a bridge between the molecular geneticists

and the clinical geneticists. Currently, these databases are primarily text or numerical files. As technology

improves and becomes ubiquitous, and as network band-width expands, databases will routinely include

visual images and complex graphics. It may also be possible to jump from one point within a file to relevant

and related points deep within other files.
OMIM and its future manifestations result from collaborative efforts and support from diverse groups.
Dr. Victor A. McKusick is the scientific expert responsible for the knowledge base; his editorial staff adds

new material and updates the database. The National Library of Medicine developed OMIM as part of its

Online Reference Works program. The Welch Medical Library provides the computers, network gateways,

database maintenance and management, and user support. Finally, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute

provides partial support for access, maintenance, and future development of the system.
The Welch Library must work closely with both the author and the users to represent research
knowledge in ways that best suit the users' purposes. It must be able to respond quickly to the changing

needs of the author and the users. It is in a unique position to study and engineer a new kind of knowledge

utility. The OMIM effort is part of a project to develop a range of online texts and databases in genetics and

internal medicine, carried out in the Library's Laboratory for Applied Research in Academic Information.
In addition, peer review of articles and proposals has been constrained by the difficulty of gaining access to
the data used for analysis. If writers were required to make their primary data available, reviewers could repeat at

least part of the analyses reported. Such review would be more stringent, would demand more effort from

reviewers, and raises a number of operational questions that need careful consideration; but it would arguably

lead to more careful checking of published results.
Underlying the difficulties in information storage and retrieval are problems in the institutional management
of resources. Who is to manage, maintain, and update information services? Who is to create and enforce

standards? At present the research community has three alternative answers: the federal government, which

manages such resources as MEDLINE and the GenBank; professional
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH29
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.societies, such as the American Chemical Society, which manages the Chemical Abstracts Service, and the
American Psychological Association, which manages Psychological Abstracts; and private for-profit enterprises

such as the Institute for Scientific Information.
HANDLING SATELLITE-DERIVED OBSERVATIONAL DATA
At present both the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) operate earth-orbiting satellites and collect data from them. Both
NOAA and NASA store large volumes of primary data from the satellites on digital tape. Both have faced
problems, although each organization's problems are different. NOAA, until 1985, had a system that, for
purposes of satellite operations, stored environmental satellite data on a Terabit Memory System (TBM).

The TBM technology was used from 1978 to 1985, at which time it became obsolete; the more than 1,000
tapes of data collected have been reduced by about 40 percent in transforming most of the useful materials
to standard digital tape for storage. NASA has used standard digital tape and disk storage technologies
and, since ceding the LANDSAT satellites, has recorded and saved data from its research earth-observing
satellites as needed.Both NASA and NOAA face real problems in making data accessible for scientific analysis. NASA has
expended time, effort, and money building a number of satellite data distribution systems that provide
digital data archives and a catalog of satellite data holdings, as well as images and graphical analyses

produced from satellite data. For example, NASA's National Space Science Data Center received and filled
some 2,500 requests for tapes, films, and prints in the first half of fiscal 1988, and also provided network
access to specific databases. NOAA has been largely unable to get financial support for its proposed
satellite data management systems. Selection of needed information from among the data available
remains a problem. Some pilot systems under development at both agencies succeed in leading in the user
through a catalog, but fail to contain much valuable new information and data. Both agencies continue to
hold great amounts of environmental satellite data in their permanent achieves that are difficult to access,

expensive to acquire, and as a result are ignored by many researchers who could benefit from their use.
Much remains to be done to improve access to important satellite-derived data.
New Opportunities: Approaching the Revolution Asymptotically
The information technologies and institutions of the past that revolutionized scholarly communication
Šwriting, the mails, the library, the printed book, the encyclopedia, the scientific societies, the telephone
Šmadeinformation more accessible, durable, or portable. The advent of digital information technology and management

continues the revolution, suggesting a vision, still somewhat
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH30
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.incoherent, of new ways of finding, understanding, storing, and communicating information.
Some technologies involved in the revolution are
   Simulations of natural (or hypothesized) phenomena;
   Visualization of phenomena through graphical displays of data; and
   Emerging use of knowledge-based systems as 
ﬁintelligent assistantsﬂ in managing and interpreting data.
Simulations allow examination of hypotheses that may be untestable under normal conditions. Plasma
physicists simulate ways of holding and heating a hot, turbulent plasma until it reaches the temperatures

necessary for fusion. Cosmologists simulate the growth of galaxies and clusters of galaxies in an infant universe.

Engineers simulate the growth of fractures in a metal airplane wing or nuclear reactor. Chemists' simulations

may someday be sophisticated enough to screen out unproductive experiments in advance. Drug companies are

considering the use of simulations to design drugs for a particular function, for example, a non-addictive drug

that also kills pain. In general, simulations extend researchers' ability to model a system and test the model

developed.See box on simulation, below.

See box on visualization, pages 32-33.
USES OF SIMULATION IN ECONOMETRICSSimulation techniques take estimated relationships or numerical models that appear to be consistent
with observations of actual behavior and apply them to problems of predicting the changes induced by time,

or of measuring the relationships among sets of economic variables. For example, simulation models have

been utilized to study the effects of oil price changes on the rate of inflation, proposed policies regarding

labor law, and future interest rates. In addition, exchanges among groups of agents in an economy have

been used in dynamic input-output analysis to make inferences about the feasible or likely future course of

economic growth in the entire economy or within specific industries or regions.
There is a growing interest in investigating the properties of models that represent the workings of
firms, markets, and whole economies as nonlinear adaptive systems. Recently this has begun to expand

the reliance placed by essentially theoretical researchers upon extensive applications of numerical

simulation methods. Finally, in both extensions of the line of inquiry just noted and in other contexts, direct

simulation of stochastic processes via Monte Carlo techniques can be used by economists to gain insights

into the properties of stochastic systems that resist deductive techniques due to their (current) analytic

intractability.SOURCE: Paul A. David and W. Edward Steinmuller, 1987. Position paper: ﬁThe Impact of InformationTechnology Upon Economic Science,ﬂ p.21.Visualization techniques turn the results of numerical computations into images. The remarkable ability of
the human brain to recognize patterns in pictures allows faster understanding of results in solutions to complex

problems, as well as faster ways of interacting with computer systems and models. For
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH31
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.instance, while small molecules have a few dozen atoms and are easy to visualize, large molecules, like proteins,
have tens of thousands of atoms. A useful physical model of the structure of a protein might stand six feet high

and cost several thousand dollars. Moreover a researcher could not slice a physical model to see how it looks

inside; with visualization techniques, he could. Visualization is the single advanced technology most widely

mentioned by Panel members and position paper writers. (For a critical analysis of opportunities in visual

imaging, see McCormick, DeFanti, and Brown, 1987.)
VISUALIZATION IN SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING
Scientists need an alternative to numbers. A technical reality today and a cognitive imperative
tomorrow are the use of images. The ability of scientists to visualize complex computations and simulations
is absolutely essential to ensure the integrity of analyses, to provoke insights, and to communicate those
insights with others.Several visually oriented computer-based technologies already exist today. Some have been exploited
by the private sector, and off-the-shelf hardware and software can be purchased; others require new
developments; and still others open up new research areas. Visualization technology, well integrated into
today's workstation, has found practical application in such areas as product design, electronic publishing,
media production and manufacturing automation. Management has found that visualization tools make their
companies more productive, more competitive, and more professional.
So far, however, scientists and academics have been largely untouched by this revolution in
computing. Secretaries who prepare manuscripts for scientists have better interactive control and visual
feedback with their word processors than scientists have over large computing resources that cost several
thousand times as much.Traditionally, scientific problems that required large-scale computing resources needed all the
available computational power
Intelligent assistants can serve as interfaces between the researcher and the computer. Just as computers
increase our power to collect, store, filter, and retrieve data, they can also help us reason about the data. Over the

last three decades, computer scientists have been developing methods for symbolic information processing or

artificial intelligence. While these programs are not fully intelligent in the sense that humans are, they allow

computers to solve problems that are not reducible to equations.
Artificial intelligence programs have been written for many scientific tasks. These tasks are not expressible
in terms of numerical operations alone, and, thus, require symbolic computation. The programs fall into a general

class, called expert systems, because they are programmed to reach decisions in much the same way as experts

do. Expert systems have been successfully applied to industrial areas such as manufacturing and banking. To

date, only a few prototype systems have been written for scientific research. Prototypes include programs that

assist in chemical synthesis planning, in planning experiments in molecular genetics, in interpreting mass aspects

of organic molecules, in trou
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH32
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bleshooting particle beam lines for high energy physicists, and in automated theory formulation in chemistry,
physics, and astronomy.to perform the analyses or simulations. The ability to visualize results or guide the calculations
themselves requires substantially more computing power.
Electronic media, such as videotapes, laser disks, optical disks, and floppy disks, are now necessary
for the publication and dissemination of mathematical models, processing algorithms, computer programs,
experimental data, and scientific simulations. The reviewer and the reader will need to test models,
evaluate algorithms, and execute programs themselves, interactively, without an author's assistance.
Scientific publication needs to be extended to make use of visualization-compartible media.
Reading and writing were only democratized in the past 100 years and are the accepted
communication tools for scientists and engineers today. A new communication tool, visualization, in time
will also be democratized and embraced by the great researchers of the future.
The introduction of visualization technology will profoundly transform the way science is communicated
and will facilitate the commission of large-scale engineering projects. Visualization and Science go hand in
hand as partners. No one ever expected Gutenberg to be Shakespeare as well. Perhaps we will not have

to wait 150 years this time for the geniuses to catch up to the technology.
SOURCE: B. H. McCormick, T. A. DeFanti, and M. D. Brown, 1987. Visualization in Scientific
Computing (NSF Report). 
Computer Graphics
 21(6), ACM SIGGRAPH: New York, Association for
Computing Machinery.The methods to needed to assist with complex reasoning tasks are themselves the subject of considerable
research in such fields as computer science, cognitive science, and linguistics. Research in these fields, in turn, is

producing tools that facilitate research in other disciplines.
As these methods are used more widely in the future, some experts predict the conduct of research will
change dramatically. Intelligent assistants, in the form of software, can carry out complex planning and

interpretation tasks as instructed, leaving humans free to spend time on other tasks. When these reasoning

programs are coupled to systems with data-gathering capabilities, much of the drudgery associated with research
planning, data collection, and analysis can be reduced. Research laboratories and the conduct of research will
become even more productive. When every researcher has intelligent assistants at his/her disposal and when the

functions of these assistants are interlinked, science will expand the fronties of knowledge even more rapidly

than it now does.
Future technologies will provide other forms of research support. Programs that recognize and follow
natural-language commands, like 
ﬁGive me the data from this file,
ﬂ can simplify interaction between the
researcher and computer systems. Spoken-language recognition offers the advantage of hands-free interaction.

Speech production, in which computers generate connected sentences in responses to instructions, will,

according to one author, lead to a revolutionary expansion in the use of computers in business and office
environments (Koening, 1987). A variety of manipulative interfaces of different kinds are under active
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH33
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.exploration (Foley, 1987). For example, the 
ﬁdata glove
ﬂ is a glove on a computer screen that is an image of a
specially-engineered glove on a researcher's hand. The data glove follows the motions of the researcher's hand,

permitting a researcher, for instance, to manipulate a molecule directly on screen. When the data glove is

coupled with feedback devices in the researcher's glove, a researcher can 
ﬁfeelﬂ the fit between two molecular
structure surfaces.
The Panel believes that the mature and emerging information technologies, taken together, suggest a vision
of new approaches to scientific and engineering research. The vision focuses on an open infrastructure for

research support and communication among researchers, along with the services for maintaining this

infrastructure. Below are several examples of parts of the vision and of forms the vision could take. We discuss

further steps in the report's final section on recommendations.
See boxes on pages 35
Œ41.INSTITUTIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL IMPEDIMENTS TO THE USE OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH
Underlying many of the difficulties we have discussed in the use of information technology in research are
institutional and behavioral impediments. We have identified six such impediments that seem to affect research

in most or all disciplines:
MOLECULAR GRAPHICSThe use of interactive computer graphics to gain insight into chemical complexity began in 1964.
Interactive graphics is now an integral part of academic and industrial research on molecular structures and

interactions, and the methodology is being successfully combined with supercomputers to model complex
systems such as proteins and DNA. Techniques range from simple black-and-white bit-mapped
representations of small molecules for substructure searches and synthetic analyses to the most
sophisticated 3D color stereographic displays required for advanced work in genetic engineering and drug
design.The attitude of the research and development community toward molecular modeling has changed.
What used to be viewed as a sophisticated and expensive way to make pretty pictures for publication is
now seen as a valuable tool for the analysis and design of experiments. Molecular graphics complements

crystallography, sequencing, chromatography, mass spectrometry, magnetic resonance, and the other
tools of the experimentalist, and is an experimental tool in its own right. The pharmaceutical industry,
especially in the new and flourishing fields of genetic and protein engineering, is increasingly using
molecular modeling to design modifications to known drugs and to propose new therapeutic agents.
SOURCE: B. H. McCormick, T. A. DeFanti, and M. D. Brown, 1987. Visualization in Scientific
Computing (NSF Report). 
Computer Graphics
 21(6). ACM SIGGRAPH: New York, Association for
Computing Machinery.THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH34
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(1) Issues of costs and cost sharing;
(2) The problem of standards;

(3) Legal and ethical constraints;

(4) Gaps in training and education;

(5) Risks of organizational change; and

(6) Most fundamental, the absence of an infrastructure for the use of information technology.
Issues of Costs and Cost Sharing
 Many forces drive developments in information technology and its
application to research. The result of these developments is constantly increasing requirements for higher

performance computer and communications equipment, making current equipment obsolete. Universities and

other research organizations are spending increasing fractions of their budgets on information technology to

maintain competitive research facilities and to support computer-related instruction. At a number of private
research universities, for example, tution has increased faster than inflation for a number of years, in part to
cover some of these costs. It is unrealistic to rely on such funding sources to cover further cost increases that will

be required to build local network infrastructures.
RESEARCH ON INTEGRATED INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Nearly a decade ago the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) recognized the strategic
importance of information technology to the conduct of biomedical research. In response to a study
released by the AAMC in 1982, the National Library of Medicine has supported eleven institutions in efforts
to develop strategic plans and prototypes of an Integrated Academic Information Management System
(IAIMS). The objective of IAIMS is to develop the institutional information infrastructure that permits their

individuals to access information they need for their clinical or research work from any computer terminal
whenever and whenever it is needed, pull that information into a local environment, and read, modify,
transform it, or otherwise use it for many different purposes.
Several pilot prototype models have emerged. The Baylor Medical College is developing a 
ﬁvirtualnotebook,ﬂ a set of tools for researchers to collect, manipulate, and store data. Georgetown Medical Center
has a model called BIOSYNTHESIS that automatically routes a user's query from one database to another.
The knowledge sector development of a comprehensive patient management clinical decision support
system called HELP is the IAIMS project focus at the University of Utab; and Johns Hopkins University is
developing a knowledge workstation.A related issue is who will pay for the costs of research computing support Historically, such costs have
been partially recovered by bundling them into charges for use of time-shared mainframe computers. As usage
has moved from campus mainframes to other options (ranging from supercomputer centers to workstations and
personal computers), this source of revenue has been lost, while the needs for administrative staff and support

personnel for consulting.THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH35
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.training, and documentation have continued. Efforts to move research support into indirect cost categories have
not succeeded as many research institutions and universities fact caps on indirect cost rates and have no room to

accommodate new costs.
Advances in communications and computing generate new service that require subsidy during the first years
of their existence if they are to be successfully tested. This is particularly true of network-related services.

Building services into a national network for research will require significant federal, state, and institutional

subsidy, which cannot be recovered from user service charges until large-scale connectivity has been achieved

and services are mature. Sources for these subsides must be determined.
A RESONABLE MODEL.Although the Panel is unaware of anything precisely like the vision it holds for sharing information,
proposals for the newly established National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) at the National
Library of Medicine may come close. The NCBI proposes to facilitate easy and effective access to a
comprehensive array of information sources that support the molecular biology research community.
Many, but not all, of these sources are electronic. They encompass raw data, text, bibliographic
information, and graphic representations. Ownership and responsibility for development and maintenance
of these sources range from individual researchers to departmental groups, institutes, professional

organizations, and federal agencies. Each was designed to serve specific needs and audiences, created in
many different hardware configurations and software applications. Consequently, NCBI's mission requires
experts in both information technologies and biotechnologies, NCBI staff must
   Provide directories to knowledge sources;
   Create useful network gateways between systems;
   Assist users in using databases effectively;
   Reduce incompatibilities in retrieval approaches, vocabulary, nomenclature and data structures;
   Promote standards for representing information that will reduce redundancy and detect inconsistencies
or errors;
   Provide useful tools for manipulating and displaying data; and
   Identify new analytic and descriptive services and systems.
Some computing-intensive universities (e.g., Carnegie Mellon University and Brown University) and
Medical centers (e.g., Johns Hopkins University, the University of Utah, Baylor University, and Duke
University) are also attempting to develop instances of the vision.
Methods used for cost recovery can have significant impacts on usage. Two alternatives are to charge users
for access to services or to charge users for the amount of service used. Networks such as BITNET have grown

substantially in connectivity and use because they have fixed annual institutional charges for membership and

connection, but charge no fees for use. Use-insensitive charge methods (often referred to as the library model)

are attractive to institutions because costs can be treated as infrastructure costs and are predictable. Charges
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH36
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for amount of use, in contrast, can inhibit usage; a major inhibitor to use of commercial databases for
information searches, for instance, is the unpredictability of user charges for time spent searching the databases.

During the development of network services, it seems desirable to recover costs through fixed access charges

wherever possible.The Problem of Standards
 The development of standards for interconnection makes it possible for every
telephone in the world to communicate with every other telephone. The absence of commonly held and

implemented standards that would allow computers to communicate with every other computer and to access

information in an intuitive and consistent way is a major impediment to scholarly communication, to the sharing

of information resources, and to research productivity.
Standards for computer communication are being developed by many groups. The pace of these efforts is
painfully slow, however, and the process is intensely political. The technologies are developing faster than our

ability to define standards that can make effective use of them. Further, standards that are developed prematurely

can inhibit technological progress; standards developed by one group (for example, and equipment vendor) in

isolation create islands of users with whom effective communications is difficult or impossible.
Development of standards not only improves efficiency but also reduces costs. Open interconnection
standards permit competition among vendors, which leads to lowered costs and improved capabilities.

Proprietary standards restrict competition and lead to increased costs. Federal government procurement rules

have been major source of pressure on vendors to support open standards.
Current mechanisms for reaching agreement on standards need examination and significant improvement.
Such examination needs input from user groups, which will have to exert pressure on standards bodies and on

the vendors who are major players in the standard-setting process.
Legal and Ethical Constraints
 The primary legal and ethical constraints to wider use of information
technology are issues of the confidentiality of, and access to, data. The following discussion will only illustrate

these issues; we believe they are too important and too specialized to be adequately addressed in a document as

general as this one. In the report's final section, we recommend the establishment of a body that will study and

advise on these issues.Information technology has made possible large-scale research using data on human subjects. For the first
time, researchers can merge data collected by national surveys with data collected in medical, insurance, or tax

records. For instance, in public health research, long-term studies of workers exposed to specific hazards can be

carried out by linking health insurance data on costs with Internal Revenue data on subsequent earnings, Social

Security data on disability payments, and mortality data, including data and cause of death (Steinwachs, 1987,

Position Paper: Information Technology and the Conduct of Public Health
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH37
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Research). The scientific potential of such data mergers is enormous; the actual use of mergers is small,
primarily because of concerns about privacy and confidentiality.
The right to confidentiality of personal information is held strongly in our society. Concerns about the
conflict between researchers' needs and citizens' rights have been extensively explored by a number of scientific

working groups, under the auspices of both governmental agencies such as the Census Bureau and private groups

(for example, the National Academy of Sciences). As more information about individuals is collected and cross-

linked, fears are raised that determined and technically sophisticated computer experts will be able to identify

specific individuals, thus breaching promises of confidentiality and privacy of information. The Census Bureau,

in particular, fears that publicity surrounding such breaches of confidentiality will undermine public confidence
and inhibit cooperation with the decennial censuses.
Although there have been discussions and legislative proposals for outright restrictions on mergers of
government survey or census data, a reasonable alternative seems to be to impose severe penalties on researchers

who breach confidentiality by making use of information on specific individuals. The issue here, as elsewhere in

public policy problems, is the balance of benefits against costs. Does better research balance the risk of

compromising perceived fundamental rights to privacy? This is a topic that will need to be debated among both

researchers and concerned constituencies in the general public.
THE FAR SIDE OF THE DREAM: THE LIBRARY OF THE FUTURE
ﬁCan you imagine that they used to have libraries where the books didn't talk to each other?
ﬂ [Marvin
Minsky, MIT]
The libraries of today are warehouses for passive objects. The books and journals sit on shelves,
waiting for us to use our intelligence to find them, read them, interpret them, and cause them finally to
divulge their stored knowledge. 
ﬁElectronicﬂ libraries of today are no better. Their pages are pages of data
files, but the electronic page images are equally passive.
Now imagine the library as an active, intelligent 
ﬁknowledge server.
ﬂ It stores the knowledge of the
disciplines in complex knowledge structures (perhaps in a formalism yet to be invented). It can reason with
this knowledge to satisfy the needs of its users. The needs are expressed naturally, with fluid discourse.
The system can, of course, retrieve and exhibit (the electronic textbook). It can collect relevant information;
it can summarize; it can pursue relationships.
It acts as a consultant on specific problems, offering advice on particular solutions, justifying those
solutions with citations or with a fabric of general reasoning. If the user
A related issue is that of acceptable levels of informed consent for human subjects. At present, consent is
usually obtained from each respondent to a survey; it is described as informed because the respondent

understands what will be done with responses
Šusually, that they will be used only for some specific research
project. Data-collecting organizations protect the confidenti
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH38
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ality of the information obtained from respondents, but guarantee only that information about specific
individuals will not be released in such a way that they can be identified. The extent to which informed consent

can be given to unknown future uses of survey data, in particular to their merger with other data sources, is of

great concern to survey researchers. Controlling the eventual uses of merged, widely distributed data sets would

be difficult.can suggest a solution or a hypothesis it can check this, even suggest extensions. Or it can critique the
user viewpoint, with a detailed rationale of its agreement or disagreement.
– The user of the Library of the Future need not be a person. It may be another knowledge system
Šthat is, any intelligent agent with a need for knowledge. Such a Library will be a network of knowledge
systems, in which people and machines collaborate.
Publishing is an activity transformed. Authors may bypass text, adding their increment to human
knowledge directly to the knowledge structures. Since the thread of responsibility must be maintained, and
since there may be disagreement as knowledge grows, the contributions are authored (incidentally allowing
for the computation of royalties for access and use). Knowledge base maintenance (
ﬁupdatingﬂ) itselfbecomes a vigorous part of the new publishing industry.
SOURCE: Edward A. Feigenbaum, 1986. Autoknowledge: From file servers to knowledge servers. In:
Medinfo 86.
 R. Salamon, B. Blum, and M. Jorgensen, eds. New York: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
(North-Holland).Another concern that needs to be addressed is one of responsibility in computer-supported decision making.
Scientists, engineers, and clinicians more and more frequently will use complex software to help analyze
and interpret their data. Who then is morally and legally responsible for the correctness of their interpretations,

and of actions based on them? Experiments involving dangerous materials or human lives may soon be

controlled by computers, just as many commercial aircraft landings are at present. Computers may be capable of

faster or more precise determinations in some situations than humans. But software designers lack strong

guidelines on assignment of responsibility in case of malfunction or unforesen disaster, and lack the expertise to

guarantee against malfunctions or disasters. With complex software overlaid on complex hardware, it is

impossible to prove beyond a doubt in all circumstances that both hardware, and software are performing
precisely as they were specified to perform.
Gaps in Training and Education
 The training and education necessary for using information technology
are lacking. Two decades ago many researchers dealt with computers only indirectly through computer

programmers who worked in data processing centers. The development of information technology has brought

computing into the researcher's laboratory and office. As a result, the level of computing competence expected of

researchers, their support staff, and their students has increased manyfold.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH39
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computers are changing what students need to learn. Undergraduate students of chemistry, for example,
need more than the standard courses in organic, inorganic, analytic, and physical chemistry; in the view of many

practicing chemists, they should also have courses in calculus, differential equations, linear algebra, and

computer simulation techniques, and through formal courses or practical research experience, should be

competent in mathematical reasoning, electronics, computer programming, numerical methods, statistical

analysis, and the workings of information management systems (Counts, 1987, Position Paper: The Impact of
Information Technologies on the Productivity of Chemistry).
Neither students nor researchers can obtain adequate training and education through one-time training
courses. Because the numbers of new tools are multiplying, researchers need ways to continuously learn about,

evaluate, and, if necessary, adopt these new tools. Using commercial programs and tutorial systems only partly

alleviates the problem because the technologies often change faster than such supports can accommodate to the

changes. Instructors in the uses of information technologies within the disciplines are rare. Senior researchers are
especially hard hit. The Panel took no formal survey, but informal discussions suggest that most senior
researchers have had exposure to no more than a one-semester programming course and have few of the skills

needed to evaluate and use the available technology.
DOCUMENTS AS LINKED PIECES: HYPERTEXT
The vision of computing technology revolutionizing how we store and access knowledge is as old as
the computing age. In 1945 Vannevar Bush proposed MEMEX, an electrooptical-mechanical information
retrieval system that could create links between arbitrary chunks of information and allow the user to follow
the links in any desired manner. In the early 1960s, Ted Nelson introduced 
ﬁhypertext,ﬂ a form of
nonsequential writing: a text branches and allows choices to the reader, best read at an interactive screen.

In 1968, Doug Englebart demonstrated a simple hypertext system for hierarchically-structured documents
Šthat is, a list of sections, each of which decomposes into a list of subsections, each of which decomposes
into a list of paragraphs, and so on
Što which annotations could be added during a multiple-workstation
conference. Today hypertext refers to information storage in which documents are preserved as networks
of linked pieces rather than as a single linear string of characters; readers can add links and follow links at
will.Nelson's XANADU system is perhaps the most ambitious hypertext system proposed. XANADU would
make all the world's knowledge accessible in a global distributed database to which anyone can add
information,For all researchers, learning advanced computing means taking a risk. They must interrupt their work and
pay attention to something new and temporarily unproductive. They must become novices, often where sources
of appropriate instruction and help are unclear or inaccessible. The investment of time and level of frustration are
likely to be high. Understandably, many researchers cannot find the time and the confidence to learn technical

computing; some justify their
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH40
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.choices with negative attitudes, for example: 
ﬁI get enough communications as it is; I don't need a computer
network,ﬂ or 
ﬁIf I put my data on the computer, others will steal it,
ﬂ or 
ﬁWe are doing fine as things are; why
change at this point?
ﬂand in which anyone can browse or search for information. A document is a set of one or more linked
nodes of text, plus links to nodes already in the global database; a document may be mostly links,

constructed out of pieces already in the database. Users pay a fee proportional to the number of characters
they have stored. Anyone accessing an item in the global database pays an access charge, a portion of
which is returned to the owner as a royalty. Individuals can store private documents that cannot have public
links pointing to them and can attach annotations to public documents that become available to everyone
reading those documents. Documents can be composed of different parts including text, graphics, voice,

and video. INTERMEDIA, a hypertext system with some of these properties, has been implemented at
Brown University and has been used to organize information in a humanities course for presentation to
students. Small-scale hypertext systems, such as Apple's Hypercards for the Macintosh, are available on
personal computers; their promoters claim these systems will change information retrieval as radically as
spreadsheets changed accounting a few years ago.
SOURCE: Peter and Dorothy Denning, personal communication, 1987.
Given these natural but negative attitudes, organizations are sometimes slow in responding to demands for
new information technologies. Some research organizations view these attitudes as unchangeable and wait to

introduce advanced computing until existing researchers move or retire. Others are actively replacing personnel

or creating new departments for computational researchers. Still others are attempting to change attitudes by

giving researchers the necessary time and support systems. While we have no data on changes in productivity,

there is some evidence that in organizations following the latter course, existing researchers at all ranks can

achieve as high computing competence as new personnel (Kiesler and Sproull, 1987).
Because people are now being introduced to computing skills at earlier stages of schooling, the lag in
computer expertise is disappearing. Over time, alternatives to personal expertise in the form of user-friendly

software or individual assistance from specialists will also develop.
Risks of Organizational Change
 Changing an organization to make way for advanced information
technology and its attendant benefits entails real risks. Administrators and research managers are often reluctant

to incur the costs
Šfinancial, organizational, behavioral
Šof new technology. In some cases, administrators and
research managers relegate computer resources
Šhardware, software, and people-based support services
Što a
lower priority than the procurement and maintenance of experimental equipment. The result can be a long-term

suppression of the development and use of the tools of information technology.
See box on electronic laboratory notebook, page 42.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH41
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In other cases, administrators are misled into underestimating the time and resources required to deploy new
information technology. Efforts to develop effective networks have been insufficiently supported by government

planners and research institution administrators, who have been led to assume that technology and services to

provide network access are easily put in place. Some administrators have promoted change, but without adequate

planning for the resources or infrastructure needed to support users. Problems such as these are exacerbated by

overly optimistic advice given the administrators by technological enthusiasts. This particular impediment
probably cannot be overcome. It can, however, be alleviated by establishing collaborative arrangements to
develop plans for and share the costs of change. EDUCOM, for example, is a consortium of research universities

with large computing resources that promotes long-range planning and sharing of resources and experiences.
LEGAL CONSTRAINTS TO AN ELECTRONIC VERSION OF A LABORATORY NOTEBOOK
Today, the paper laboratory notebook is the only legally supportable document for patent applications
and other regulatory procedures connected with research. Some organizations, however, routinely
distribute electronic versions of laboratory notebook information to managers and other professionals who
would otherwise have to visit the research site physically or request photocopies. The benefits of legal
electronic notebooks are speculative but attested to by those using them informally (Liscouski, 1987). First,

they would help give researchers access to information or expertise that is otherwise lost because people
have moved or reside in different departments. Second, they would allow research managers and
researchers to observe and compare changes in results over time. Third, they would eliminate or make
easier the assembly of paper versions of documents needed for government agencies. The barrier to an
electronic notebook is social
Šits lack of acceptance as a legal document. Such acceptance could take
place if legal conditions for an electronic system
Šstorage, format, security
Šwere delineated. However,
researchers, scientific associations, and government agencies have failed to develop such guidelines. This

failure is probably connected to the traditions of privacy in laboratory notebooks, to the inability to forecast
how an electronic system would stand up in court, (and related to that, the risk and unacceptable cost to
any single institution of developing a system), and to the uncertainty of the ultimate benefits on some widely
accepted index of research effectiveness. Whatever the reasons, the end result is that a complete and
accepted electronic notebook remains undeveloped.
Absence of Infrastructure
 Most fundamental of all the institutional and behavioral impediments to the use
of information technology is the absence of an infrastructure that supports that use. Just as use of a large
collection of books is made possible by a building and shelves in which to put them, a cataloguing system,
borrowing policies, and reference librarians to assist users, so the use of a collection of computers and computer

networks is supported by the existence
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH42
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of institutions, services, policies, and experts
Šin short, by an infrastructure. On the whole, information
technology is inadequately supported by current infrastructures.
An infrastructure that supports information technology applications to research should provide
   Access to experts who can help;
   Ways of supporting and rewarding these experts;
   Tools for developing software, and a market in which the tools are evaluated against one another and
disseminated;   Communication links among researchers, experts, and the market; and
   Analogs to the library, places where researchers can store and retrieve information.
Several different kinds of experts in information technology help researchers. Some are specialists in
research computing. Some are programmers who develop and maintain software specific to research. Others are

specialists who carry out searches. Still others are 
ﬁgatekeepers,ﬂ who help with choices of software and
hardware. Gatekeepers are members of an informal network of helpers centered around advocates and
specialists, experts in both a discipline and in information technology who become known by reputation.
Overdependence on gatekeepers creates other problems: as with any informal service, some advice received may

be narrowly focused or simply wrong and the number of persons wanting free information often becomes larger

than the number of persons able to provide it. As a result, the gatekeepers may become overloaded and

eventually retreat from their gatekeeping roles.
To hold on to expert help of all types, research and funding institutions must find ways of supporting and
rewarding it. While institutions and disciplines have evolved ways of rewarding researchers
Špublication in
refereed journals, promotion, tenure
Šno such systems yet reward expert help.
Another aspect of the needed infrastructure is some formal provision for developing and disseminating
software for specific research applications. Tools for constructing reliable, efficient, customized, and well-

documented software are not used in support of scientific research. Computer science, as a supporting discipline,

needs to facilitate rapid delivery of finished software, and easy extension and revision of existing software. The
Department of Defense has recently pioneered the creation of a Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie
Mellon University. Efforts to create tool building and research resources for nondefense software are worth

encouraging.Development and dissemination of scientific software could be speeded in many cases by adoption of
emerging commercial standards. These standards are supported by many vendors for a variety of computing

environments. The temptation to narrowly match software to specific applications should be resisted in favor of
standard approaches.
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH43
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Software, once developed, needs to be evaluated and disseminated. The research establishment now
evaluates research information principally through peer review of funding proposals and manuscripts submitted

for publication. Software needs to be dealt with in a similar manner. EDUCOM has recently announced its

support of a peer-review process for certain kinds of academic software. Other prototypes of systems for

evaluating and disseminating software already exist (see boxes on BIONET and on IBM's software market).

These prototypes couple an electronic 
ﬁmarket,ﬂ through which software can be disseminated, with a
conferencing capability that allows anyone with access to contribute to the evaluation of the market wares. The
system provides an extremely important feature: those contributors who are most successful in the open market

can automatically be identified and given credit in much the same way as authors of books and research papers

now are.AN EXAMPLE OF A SOFTWARE MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE: IBM RESEARCH
IBM's internal computer network connects over 2,000 individual computers worldwide, providing IBM's
researchers, developers, and other employees with communications facilities such as electronic mail, file
transfers, and access to remote computers. In recent years, software repositories and online conferencing
facilities have grown and flourished, and become one of the primary uses of the network. With a single
command, any IBMer has access to some 3,000 software packages, developed by other IBMers around

the world and made available through the network. Many of these packages are computer utilities and
programming tools, but others are tools for research. They include statistical and graphics applications,
simulation systems, and AI and expert system shells, as well as many everyday utilities to make general
use of the computer simpler. The high level of interconnection offered by the network and the centralization
of information offered by the repositories allows scientists with a particular need to see if software to satisfy
that need is available, to obtain it if it is, and to develop it if it is not, with confidence that they are not
duplicating the efforts of some colleague.
The online conferences (public special-purpose electronic bulletin boards), which are as widespread
and accessible as the software repositories, allow users of the software (and of commercial and other
software) to exchange experiences, questions, and problems. These conferences provide a form of peer
review for the software developer. For internally developed software, they provide a fast and convenient
channel between the software author and the users; authors with an interest in improving their programs

have instant access to user suggestions and to
The infrastructure for information technology also depends on communication links. The Panel believes that
one of the most important services that computer networks can provide is the link between users and expert help.

Existing links often take the form of electronic bulletin boards on various networks; other mechanisms also exist.

Until more formal mechanisms come about, open communication with pioneers, advocates, and enthusiasts is

one ofSee software market, box below. 
THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH44
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the best ways to allow new technologies to be disseminated and evaluated by research communities.
eager testers. Users with a special need or a hard question have equally fast access to the author for
enhancements or answers.
The conferences also allow users with common interests to exchange other sorts of information in the
traditional bulletin board style. AI researchers debate the usefulness of the concept of intentionality or
discuss how software engineering methodologies apply to expert systems development; computer graphics
and vision workers talk about the number of bits required to present a satisfactory image to the human eye.
Over 100 individual conferences support thousands of separate discussions about computer hardware
and software and virtually all other aspects of IBM's undertakings. The software repositories provide a
ﬁreviewedﬂ set of tools and applications for a broad population on a wide spectrum of problems.
The organization that originally sets up a repository or a conference generally provides user support for
it (answering 
ﬁhow to do it
ﬂ questions), and installation and maintenance of local services is usually handled
either by an onsite group that has an interest in the specialty served by the facility, or on a more formal
basis by the local Information Systems department.
The benefits of these repositories and conferences are at least as widely distributed and probably even
harder to quantify, but the success of these software libraries and online conferences within IBM should
serve as an encouraging sign for others with the same sorts of needs. A market can be made to succeed,
provided that high levels of standardization and compatibility in both hardware and software can be
achieved. Such levels of interoperability have, so far, been easier to achieve at commercial institutions
such as IBM Research than at research universities. Such as IBM Research than at research universities.
A final piece of infrastructure largely missing is housing and support for the storing and sharing of
information. Such a function could be performed by disciplinary groups or, more generally, at the university

level. Many university libraries have a professional core staff whose members hold faculty rank and function not

only as librarians but also as researchers and teachers. Some university computer centers operate similarly.

National laboratories, like astronomical observatories and accelerator facilities, have a core staff of astronomers

or physicists whose main task is to serve outside users while also maintaining their own research programs.
The existence of such a professional staff involved in the storage and retrieval of information for a
discipline would provide a means of recognizing, rewarding, and providing status to these people. In some cases,

a university might wish to consider integrating its information science department with its computer center and

its library.THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH45
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN RESEARCH46
Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Panel Findings and Recommendations
The vision of a more productive research enterprise, and the recognition of difficulties in reaching that
vision, prompted this report. In preceding sections, we reviewed many aspects of the use of information
technology in research. In this section we present our findings and recommendations.
FINDINGSThe Panel finds that
1. Information technology has already had a significant and widespread impact on the conduct of
research. For the future, that impact amounts to a revolution.
Computer and communication technologies are valuable to every scientific discipline and essential to a
growing number of them. The Panel examined the uses of information technology in ten science and engineering

disciplines. Although these fields use information technology in different ways, the Panel also found many

similarities. These can be summarized as follows:
   As the power and speed of computers have increased, numerical computations of increasing complexity
have become practical. The result has been more realistic simulation of systems either physically

impossible or too costly to study directly.
   Another consequence of increased computational power has been the capability to collect, store,
retrieve, manipulate, and analyze enormous quantities of information. Electronic storage of information

means that huge information archives
Šfor example, the Human Genome Project
Šare not only feasible
but also accessible to more researchers from different disciplines.
   An additional consequence of increased computational power has been the capability to present the
results of numerical computations as visual images. The
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
47Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.remarkable ability of the human brain to recognize patterns in pictures allows faster understanding of
computational results and speedier, more efficient interaction with models when numbers are turned

into visual images.   Information technology allows computers to take over monitoring and control of scientific instruments.
This in turn makes scientific observation more convenient, more reliable, and often lower in cost; in

some cases, it has led to new computer-based instruments that extend the bounds of observation.
   Information technology has greatly expanded the capabilities for communication among researchers.
Communications systems mediated by computers have led to the rapid and relatively inexpensive

exchange of everything from memoranda to massive data files.
The Panel further finds that:
2. Significant impediments to the widespread use of information technology in research require careful
attention. Some impediments are technical and financial. Other impediments, which up to now have

received the least attention, are behavioral and institutional.
   Technical impediments are serious in a few fields. Fields doing large-scale experiments, using satellites
to gather data, and using graphics to analyze large amounts of data will for the foreseeable future need
computers, software, and networks that are bigger, faster, more capable, and more efficient. The needs
of these fields deserve, and will continue to receive, attention from computer scientists and engineers,

from information technology manufacturers, and from institutions such as the federal government and

universities.   Financial impediments are chronic. Despite the decreasing cost of hardware, no sources will ever supply
enough money to provide every researcher the best information technology environment. The
institutions that fund researchers will continue to do their best, and information technology will
continue to need more funding.
While the Panel cannot suggest detailed means for increasing the total resources devoted to information
technology, it does feel strongly that the provision of such resources is critical to progress in American clinical,

engineering, and scientific research. In the resource-constrained environment likely to confront research in the

future, difficult decisions will be made on reallocating necessary resources. With a declining population pool

from which to draw new scientists, clinicians, and engineers, and with the increasing complexity of research, the

Panel believes that increased support of information technology in research deserves high priority. If the nation's

best researchers are not given the appropriate tools, our role in the international scientific community will

continue to diminish in importance. The limited resources of federal agencies must continue to be allocated on

the basis of scientific merit and significance of the proposed research activities.
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
48Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The Panel believes that serious impediments to increasing the use of information technology in research
are behavioral and institutional. These can be sorted into four major categories: problems of access,

problems with learning and use, attitudes of individual researchers, and problems of management.
   Problems of access. Computer networks, hardware, and software are not necessarily accessible to the
researchers who want them, nor can everyone who wants them afford them. Network access is still

limited and inconvenient. The limitation is especially important since network access permits both

collaboration with distant colleagues and access to computing resources. For many researchers in a

large number of fields, the hardware to which they have access is adequate. Some researchers, however,

require large amounts of time on specialized, expensive hardware; supercomputers leads researchers to
reconsider scientific problems, one can anticipate increased demands for access and network use;
researchers in the future may find time on supercomputers limited and networks congested.
Finding the right software is a more serious problem. Software that is commercially available is often
unsuited to the specialized needs of the researcher, and professionals who create software for research groups are

rare. Consequently, many researchers, who are usually not skilled software creators, develop their own. Too

often, members of the research community waste time, effort, and money duplicating one another's efforts.
What appears to be lacking are institutional means for providing the services of skilled professionals to
create and maintain appropriate software. Funding sources do not consider support for such professionals

essential; institutions give them neither recognition nor career status.
Also needed is an institutional system to collect, review, document, and disseminate scientific and
engineering application software. Prototypes exist but need broader evaluation. Such a system could evaluate

software's effectiveness and eventually lead to standardization of software for wider use.
   Problems with learning and use. Learning to use information technology requires a large investment in
time and effort before the investment pays off, and help is hard to find. Researchers who need

information technology face difficult choices: they must either learn to use whatever hardware and

software the market offers, create their own, or do without. When researchers learn to use existing
information technology, they receive haphazard help in learning; instruction or specialists in
information technology are often unavailable. Neither the researchers' disciplines nor their institutions

provide incentives for learning. Furthermore, researchers must invest time at the expense of their

research productivity during the learning period.
Once researchers learn the necessary information technology, they face problems in using it. Networks pose
a significant problem. Most of the approximately 100 research-oriented computer networks in the United States

were established to serve the needs of small and widely scattered communities of
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
49Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.researchers. As a result, a researcher on one network wanting to communicate with a researcher on another faces
problems of compatibility. The technical aspects of these problems are tractable; the institutional and behavioral

aspects are less so. No one agrees on how procedures for using the networks might be standardized. The

networks are not well coordinated with one another, and users have limited opportunity to suggest improvements.
   Problems of the attitudes of individual researchers are twofold. For reasons enumerated above,
researchers often approach new information technology applications cautiously. When senior

researchers, who are involved in peer review and decisions about publications and research proposals,

are resistant, their attitudes can lead to the rejection of innovative applications of information
technology to research. Another problem is that of proprietary attitudes toward research data in many
disciplines. So long as primary data are viewed as the exclusive property of the researcher who collects

them, they will not be available to other researchers. Even if data are made available, they will be left in

idiosyncratic formats with insufficient explanatory documentation; and the effort required to make these

data usable to the research community will not receive high priority. Increased access to data does,

however, raise issues of how large volumes of primary data should be stored, and of the need for

validating stored information.
   Problems of managing information technology. Some basic questions need to be addressed: who is to
manage, maintain, and update information services? Who will create standards? How will costs be

charged, and who will pay for them? No current institutional framework provides the ideal answer to

these questions. Federal agencies, professional societies and scientific associations, and private profit-

making groups need to consider how to address the needs of research users of information technology.
RECOMMENDATIONSRecommendation I
The institutions supporting the nation's researchers must recognize and meet their responsibilities to develop
and support policies, services, and standards that help researchers use information technology more widely and
productively. Specifically, we recommend that
   Universities provide accessible, expert help in learning and using information technology.
   University departments,
 and 
scientific and professional groups,
 establish career ladders for scientific
programming positions.
   Funding agencies
 provide support for scientific programming and for help services in learning and
using information technology systems for research.
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
50Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Scientific associations establish disciplinary standards for the storage and indexing of scientific data.
   University departments,
 and 
scientific and professional groups,
 implement mechanisms for the
evaluation, merit (peer) review, and dissemination of software useful in the conduct of research.
   Vendors, in collaboration with 
scientific groups,
 establish standards for simplified and consistent user-
machine interfaces.
   Network administrators
 provide simple user interfaces and addressing schemes, add gateways to other
networks, improve system reliability and capacity, and provide online help, such as guides to services

and mail addresses of individuals who can answer questions.
   Information service providers
 create simplified common standards for accessing and querying
information sources, and eventually provide unified access to information.
   Software vendors,
 and 
scientific and professional groups,
 create program libraries and make them
accessible through the networks.
Rationale. Information technology is now becoming an essential component of the research environment.
The services needed by research users include
   Access to computers;
   Access to networks, both local and wide-area;
   Long-term storage of and access to data;
   Hardware maintenance and augmentation;
   Help in learning to use existing software and services;
   Production of new software and customization of existing software; and
   Collection, review, documentation, and dissemination of software.
In some instances these services may be efficiently provided by a central organization; in others, by
decentralized groups. The services may be provided either by augmenting the responsibilities of existing groups

or by creating new groups. Currently such services are being provided in a variety of ways, with highly variable
degrees of success and efficiency, across many laboratories, professional societies, universities, and federal
agencies. In the most successful models, the researchers feel their needs are paramount. These models need to be

publicized, evaluated, and disseminated so that policy and allocation decisions are well informed by the views of

research users of information technology.
With regard to policies, the Panel recognized a number of issues, cited earlier, that need further discussion;
the appropriate groups may wish to consider the specific recommendations that follow.
   The federal government, through policies of its research-supporting agencies, should ensure proper
support for software development for scientific research. Software developed should meet minimal
standards of compatibility, reliability, and documentation, and should be made available to other
researchers.PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
51Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   As a general principle, data collected with government support rightfully belongs in the public domain,
although the right of researchers to reasonable time for first publication must be respected. Federal

agencies, scientific societies and professional associations, university consortia, and other private

groups may wish to make specific recommendations based on their reexamination of the implications of

the adoption of such a policy. Such recommendations might include the creation and maintenance of

data banks and indices to data by research communities, the potential of evaluated databases, and the
possibility of including reanalyses of data as part of peer review of publications.
   There is a pressing need for new and more compact forms of data storage. One particular area in which
these techniques would be useful is that of image compression. One solution seems to lie in optical disk

storage. Unfortunately, these new techniques are still immature and lack commonly accepted standards.

Federal agencies should encourage engineering research on optical storage techniques for scientific

purposes.   Efforts to create tool building and research resources for nondefense software should be encouraged.
   The federal government should fund pilot efforts of two kinds. One would implement information
storage and software dissemination concepts for selected disciplines. The other would implement the

concept of software markets, with emphasis on the development of generic tools useful in several or

many disciplines.   In addition, these pilot projects should be coupled with exploration of such policy issues as protection of
confidentiality of information about human subjects, protection of intellectual property, and information

security concerns in a global electronic information environment.
Recommendation II
The institutions supporting the nation's researchers, led by the federal government, should develop an
interconnected national information technology network for use by all qualified researchers.
Specifically, we recommend that
   The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) in the Executive Office of the President and the
federal agencies responsible for supporting and performing research and development plan and fund a

nationwide infrastructure for computer-based research communication.
   Planning and development of this nationwide infrastructure be guided by users of information
technology in research, rather than by technical experts in information technology or hardware or

software vendors. The Panel believes strongly that such a national network is too important to the future

of research to be left only to the technical experts.
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
52Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The national research network be founded on the fundamental premise of open access to all qualified
researchers/scholars that has nurtured the world's scientific community for centuries.
   The national research network be developed in an evolutionary manner, making full use of the existing
successful networks for research.
Rationale. The Panel views the federal government's role in developing a national network for research as
analogous to its role in developing the nation's network of roads, streets, and highways. Here, the federal

government has planned and funded the interstate highway system and the national highways, and has imposed

or encouraged certain national standards. State and local governments have planned and funded a network of
highways, roads, and streets that is fully interconnected and compatible with the federal framework. In the
national research network, analogs would be research institutions, scientific and professional associations, and

corporate groups operating individually or banded together in consortia.
Funding for this undertaking, as outlined in the report of the Federal Coordinating Council on Science,
Engineering, and Technology (FCCSET) Committee issued recently (Office of Science and Technology Policy,

1987) should be made available to ensure an advanced national network infrastructure and services for the
nation's research communities. Appropriate division of responsibilities among federal and state agencies and
research institutions warrants careful attention.
The Panel notes that the Director of the National Science Foundation has announced the Foundation's
intention to serve as lead agency in developing a national network. The Panel strongly supports the concept of a

lead agency, believing that leadership in coordination of support for a national research network is an essential

element in the nation's science policy. The Panel believes the National Science Foundation would be an
appropriate lead agency, given its legislatively mandated responsibility for supporting research and education
across the full range of science and engineering disciplines.
The creation of a national network will take a considerable amount of time. In the meantime some valuable
and much-used networks
Šsuch as BIONET, OMNET, BITNET, or HEPNET
Šexist within particular scientific
or academic communities. Many of these networks have been improved with advice from their users, and can be

an invaluable source of advice to the designers of any national science network. It is particularly important,
therefore, that the existing academic and disciplinary networks continue to receive support until such time as
they can either be integrated into or supplanted by the national network.
The Panel's recommendation for a national research network is similar in substance and spirit to the more
detailed recommendations contained in a recent report of the National Research Network Review Committee of

the NRC's Computer Science and Technology Board (National Research Council, 1988).
Crucial to setting up and running a national network infrastructure is participation by users. The Panel urges
that agencies work with an advisory board
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
53Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.largely composed of users. A research network of national scope must be oriented toward the research user of

information technology. Its philosophy and structure should be such that learning, entering, using, and leaving

the network are simple. This should involve, among other things, an easily interpreted program for helping the

user, instructions for different levels of use, and simple connections between the network and many varieties of

terminals, personal computers, and workstations. The network should be capable of transmitting graphics,

symbols, and large amounts of data quickly. It should have gateways to networks in other countries. It should be

supported by a professional staff whose main task is to help users.
The Panel recognizes that constraints on access to information are sometimes warranted in cases where the
privacy of personal information, the protection of human subjects or of intellectual property, or national security

concerns are of overriding importance. Nevertheless, the Panel believes that the interests of the global research

community are best served by establishing open and unfettered access as a fundamental presumption in the

operation of a national research network.
Recommendation IIITo facilitate implementation of Recommendations I and II, and to focus continuing attention on the
opportunities and impediments associated with research uses of information technology, the Panel recommends

the establishment at a national level of a user's group to oversee and advise on the evolution and use of

information technology in support of scientific, engineering, and clinical research.
Specifically, the National Research Council (NRC) should charge a standing committee or board (whether
existing or newly created) with the mandate to oversee and advise on research use of information technology.

The membership of this board should include a majority of users from a variety of research disciplines.
Rationale. The problems and needed changes addressed by Recommendations I and II are diverse and do
not have short-term solutions, and, therefore, require some institutional setting for ongoing examination and

discussion. Leadership and coordination in the application of information technology in research would be

provided best by a single organization.
Many organizations currently promote developments in information technology at a national level. Among
these are: the National Science Foundation and its Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE)

Directorate and Division of Advanced Scientific Computing, especially through the NSFNET initiative,

EXPRES program, and the Panel on Graphics, Image Processing, and Workstations; the National Research

Council, especially its Computer Science and Technology Board, Numerical Data Advisory Board, Committee

on NationalPANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
54Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Statistics, and Board on Telecommunications and Computer Applications; a variety of initiatives within the
National Library of Medicine; and the Federal Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering, and Technology

(FCCSET) of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (especially its committees on Networking and on

High Performance Computing). These activities, however, are fragmented, specialized, and tend to give little

attention to the behavioral aspects of research uses of information technology.
The Panel recommends location of the user's group within the National Research Council (NRC) rather than
a federal agency because it believes that the group ought to be free to focus on the interests and concerns of

users, unconstrained by immediate concerns for the distribution of funds among disciplines or agencies. Several

boards or committees now existing at the NRC have titles related to the charge to be given this new board.

However, it is the Panel's view that none of the existing groups represents adequately the needs of users.

Whether one of the existing groups might be reconstituted to create a body of the required nature or whether a

new body might be founded is, in the view of the Panel, far less important than the nature of the resulting body.
What is needed is a group of researchers who use information technology, supplemented by a few expert
providers of information technology.
The National Research Council unit (whether existing or new) would have several specific functions. One
function would be to advise policymakers on a broad range of issues related to research uses of information

technology. Some of these issues are: international implications of networking; national security concerns

associated with scientific databases; and issues of cost for network communications. Ad hoc study panels would

be established as appropriate.
Another important function of the unit would be to collect, analyze, and disseminate data on how
researchers use information technology. In the course of its deliberations the Panel became painfully aware that

these data presently do not exist. Such data would inform not only the actions of those responsible for the

support of research but would also apprise researchers themselves of new opportunities offered by information

technology. A model for such activities among present National Research Council operating groups might be the

Office of Scientific and Engineering Personnel.
This mechanism would also provide a forum to facilitate the transfer of technology: by sponsoring
workshops for scientists on newly developed information technology and on coordination of approaches to

simplified standards; by exchanging information with technology developers; and by coordinating interaction

among scientific organizations and professional associations. The board would disseminate information on

current uses of information technology and new developments.
The unit would also convene meetings between researchers and those responsible for supporting research.
By providing a forum for discussion, it would ensure that the needs of the research community are brought to the

attention of appropriate officials and administrators.
PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
55Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
56Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
List of Position Papers
Drafts of these papers can be obtained by contacting the study director, Dr. John R. B. Clement, or the
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, at the following address:
National Academy of Sciences, Room NAS 246

2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.

Washington, D.C. 20418
RICHARD J. BLAKELY, U.S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park, California: 
ﬁComputers and Solid-Earth
GeophysicsﬂRICHARD W. COUNTS, Quantum Chemistry Exchange Program, Indiana University:

ﬁThe Impact of Information Technologies on the Productivity of Chemistry
ﬂPAUL A. DAVID and W. EDWARD STEINMUELLER, Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford
University: 
ﬁThe Impact of Information Technology Upon Economic Science
ﬂPETER J. DENNING, Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffet
Field, California: 
ﬁInformation Technology in Computing
ﬂJOHN HUBBARD, Department of Mathematics, Cornell University: 
ﬁComputers in MathematicsﬂHARVEY NEWMAN, Physics Department, California Institute of Technology: 
ﬁComputing and Data
Communications for High Energy Physics
ﬂCYNTHIA H. NULL, Phychology Department, The College of William and Mary, and BERT F. GREEN,
Psychology Department, The Johns Hopkins University: 
ﬁComputers in Behavioral Science
ﬂDONALD M. STEINWACHS, School of Hygiene and Public Health, The Johns Hopkins University: 
ﬁInformationTechnologies and the Conduct of Public Health Research
ﬂAPPENDIX A
57Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Biographies of Panel Members
DONALD N. LANGENBERG, Chancellor, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois (
Chairman).For much of his career, Dr. Langenberg was Professor of Physics and, for a time, also Professor of
Electrical Engineering and Science at the University of Pennsylvania. There he directed a materials research
facility, the Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter, and served as Vice Provost for Graduate Studies

and Research. From 1980 to 1982, he served as Deputy Director of the National Science Foundation and, for

several months, as Acting Director. He became the first Chancellor of the University of Illinois' Chicago campus

(UIC) in 1983. His research interests were in condensed matter physics and included the Fermi surfaces of

metals and semiconductors, tunneling, Josephson effects and nonequilibrium phenomena in superconductors, and

precision measurement and the fundamental physical constants. He has served on many boards and advisory

committees, and is currently a member of the Board of Directors of the American Association for the

Advancement of Science (AAAS). Dr. Langenberg holds a B.S. degree from Iowa State University, an M.S.

degree from the University of California at Los Angeles, and a Ph.D. degree from the University of California at

Berkeley, all in physics. He also holds an honorary M.A. and an honorary D.Sc. from the University of

Pennsylvania. Unfortunately, he is, as noted in the Preface, computer illiterate.
W. RICHARDS ADRION,
 Chair, Computer and Information Science Department, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.
Dr. Adrion came to the University of Massachusetts in 1986 from the National Science Foundation, where
he was most recently Chief Scientist for the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering,
and before that Deputy Director for Computer Research. Previously, he served as manager of the Software

Engineering Group at the National Bureau of Standards, and has been on the faculty at both Oregon State

University and The University of Texas at
APPENDIX B
58Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Austin, and as adjunct professor at The American University, George Washington University, and Georgetown
University. His research interests are in the areas of programming systems and software engineering, especially

programming environments, program verification, and object bases for software development. Dr. Adrion earned

bachelor's and master's degrees in electrical engineering at Cornell University, and a Ph.D. degree in the same

subject at The University of Texas at Austin.
JOSEPH BALLAM,
 Professor of Physics, Stanford Linear Accelerator, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.Dr. Ballam is emeritus associate director of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center and head of its Research
Division. He was on the physics faculty of Princeton University and a professor of physics at Michigan State

University. His research interests include elementary particles, cosmic rays, and experimental high energy

physics. Dr. Ballam received a B.S. degree from the University of Michigan and a Ph.D. degree from the

University of California at Berkeley.
BRUCE G. BUCHANAN,
 Professor and Co-Director, Center for Parallel, Distributed, and Intelligent
Systems, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
For many years Dr. Buchanan was professor of Computer Science Research and co-director of the
knowledge Systems Laboratory at Stanford University. In 1988 he moved to the University of Pittsburgh.

Professor Buchanan's main research interest is in artificial intelligence, in particular the design of intelligent

computer programs that assist scientists and physicians. These include programs and methods for knowledge

acquisition and machine learning, scientific hypothesis formation, and construction of expert systems. He was

one of the principals in the design and development of DENDRAL, Meta-DENDRAL, MYCI, E-MYCIN, and

PROTEAN systems. Dr. Buchanan holds a B.A. degree in mathematics from Ohio Wesleyan University, and

M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in philosophy from Michigan State University.
WILLIAM J. EMERY,
 Professor, Aerospace Engineering Science, Colorado Center for Astrodynamics
Research, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.
Trained as a physical oceanographer, Dr. Emery leads a group concentrating on satellite remote sensing of
atmosphere and ocean. In cooperation with NOAA's Program for Regional Observing and Forecasting Services

(PROFS), his group operates a satellite receiving system to collect data from operational weather satellites. His

research interests include large-scale ocean and atmosphere problems with an emphasis on the analysis of large

volumes of data. As a consequence of the need to analyze satellite images, he has developed new image-

processing tools for SUN, DEC/SPX, and Macintosh II workstations in order to provide students with easy

access to a variety of display systems. Dr. Emery has a B.S. from Brigham Young University in mechanical

engineering and a Ph.D. from the University of Hawaii in physical oceanography.
APPENDIX B
59Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID A. HODGES,
 Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California,
Berkeley, California.Dr. Hodges teaches and researches microelectronics technology and design, communications and computer
systems, and computer-integrated manufacturing systems at the University of California, where he has been a

member of the faculty since 1970. Before then, he held positions at Bell Telephone Laboratories, in the

components area at Murray Hill and as head of the systems elements department at Holmdel. He is a member of

the National Academy of Engineering and has served on several National Academy of Engineering and National

Research Council committees. Dr. Hodges' degrees are in electrical engineering; he earned his B.S. degree at

Cornell University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees at the University of California, Berkeley.
DAVID A. HOFFMAN,
 Professor, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.
David Hoffman is Professor of Mathematics at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, and a member
of the Geometry Analysis Numerics and Graphics Center. His recent research interests include the use of

computation and computer graphics in the study of extremal surfaces in mathematics and polymer physics. He

has held positions at the University of Michigan, Stanford University, and IMPA, Rio de Janeiro. Dr. Hoffman

has a B.A. degree from the University of Rochester and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University in

mathematics.F. THOMAS JUSTER,
 Professor of Economics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Dr. Juster is also Research Scientist in the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan's Institute
for Social Research. He has served on a number of National Research Council committees, including the

Committee on National Statistics, and chairs both the NRC Committee on the Supply and Demand for

Mathematics and Science Teachers as well as the American Economic Association Committee on the Quality of

Economic Data. Dr. Juster is a fellow of the American Statistical Association. His research includes the design of

economic and social accounting systems, the development of measures of economic welfare, consumer behavior
and forecasting, and analysis of household saving and asset accumulation behavior. Dr. Juster received a B.S.
degree from Rutgers University in education and a Ph.D. degree from Columbia University in economics.
SARA B. KIESLER,
 Professor, Social Sciences and Social Psychology, Department of Social and
Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Dr. Kiesler has been on the faculty of the College of Humanities and Social Sciences and of the Robotics
Institute at Carnegie Mellon since 1979; previously, she was a staff member of the National Research Council

and a professor at the University of Kansas. She was the senior staff director of three National Research
APPENDIX B
60Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Council committees that produced reports on aging, basic research in education, and behavioral and social
sciences. She has served on several committees of the National Academies of Sciences (NAS) and Engineering

(NAE). Her research interests include the study of the introduction and impact of computer and computer-

communication technologies in groups and organizations. Dr. Kiesler received a B.S. degree from Simmons

College in social science, an M.A. degree from Stanford University, and a Ph.D. degree from Ohio State

University, both in psychology.
KENNETH M. KING,
 President, EDUCOM, Princeton, New Jersey.
Kenneth King currently serves as President of EDUCOM, a consortium of 550 universities founded to
develop and work toward common goals in information technology and communications. Previously, he was

Vice Provost for Computing at Cornell University, where he was responsible for all academic and administrative

computing. This included active programs in the development of instructional software for microcomputers, in

networking, in library system development, and a national supercomputer center. Before that, he was professor,
vice chancellor for university systems, and university dean for computer systems at the City University of New
York. He also was director of Columbia University's computer center, and manager of Columbia's IBM Watson

Scientific Computing laboratory. Dr. King received a B.A. degree in physics from Reed College and a Ph.D.

degree in theoretical physics from Columbia University.
ROBERT LANGRIDGE,
 Professor of Pharmaceutical Chemistry in the School of Pharmacy and
Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics in the School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,

California.Dr. Langridge also directs the Computer Graphics Laboratory at his university's School of Pharmacy. He
has been a professor in the biochemistry department at Princeton University and a professor in the department of

biophysics at the University of Chicago. His research includes computer graphics, biomolecular structure and

function, protein engineering, and drug design. In particular, he uses computer graphics to visualize the motions

of molecules in three dimensions and in time. Dr. Langridge holds a B.Sc. degree from the University of London
in physics and a Ph.D. degree from King's College, the University of London, in crystallography.
NINA W. MATHESON,
 Associate Professor of Medical Information and Director, William H. Welch
Medical Library, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
Before going to Johns Hopkins, Ms. Matheson was special consultant to the National Library of Medicine
in Bethesda, Maryland, and assistant director of health information management studies at the Association of

American Medical Colleges in Washington, D.C. She had previously been assistant research professor in the

department of health care sciences and director of the Himmelfarb
APPENDIX B
61Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Science Library at The George Washington University, where she introduced automated library operating
systems. She has served as President and member of the Board of both the Medical Library Association and the

Association of Academic Health Sciences Library Directors, and is a member of the National Library of

Medicine's Board of Regents. Ms. Matheson's B.A. and M.L. degrees are in English and Library Science, from

the University of Washington.
DAVID A. PENSAK,
 Corporate Advisor, Computing Technology, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc.,
Wilmington, Delaware.
Dr. Pensak has been at du Pont since 1974, where he manages the corporation's computer science research
and development. His organization is chartered with identifying those areas of science and technology in which a

two order of magnitude (or greater) increase in complexity or capacity of modelling would permit revolutionary

advances in understanding (and the construction of the appropriate hardware and software to achieve these

goals). He was a member of the American Chemical Society's Task Force on Large Scale Computing. His

research includes structure-activity correlations, theory of catalysis, interactive graphics, programming language

design and human engineering, systems, artificial intelligence, and parallel computer architectures. Dr. Pensak

has a B.A. degree from Princeton University in chemistry and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Harvard University,
also in chemistry.ALLAN H. WEIS,
 Vice President, Data Systems Division, IBM Enterprise Systems, White Plains, New
York.Mr. Weis has worldwide responsibility for the strategy, development, and technical support of IBM's large
system for numerically intensive computing.
His career at IBM, which began in 1961, has included assignments in research, development, new business
areas, and information systems. Most recently, Mr. Weis was responsible for the computing and communication

system at IBM's research laboratories, and for the direction of a number of advanced technology programs.
Mr. Weis majored in electrical engineering at the University of Kansas, and received his M.S. from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology on an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship. He is a member of the Board of

Directors of NYSERNET, and is on the Executive Committee of the NSFNET.
APPENDIX B
62Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bibliography and Selected Readings
Barbacci, Mario R., A. Nico Habermann, and Mary Shaw. The Software Engineering Institute: Bridging practice and potential. 
IEEESoftware, volume 2, number 6, pp. 4
Œ21, November 1985.
Bardon, Marcel. 
A National Computing Environment for Academic Research
 (Kent K. Curtis, Chair). NSF Working Group on Computers for
Research. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation, July 1983.
Bikson, Tora K., Barbara A. Gutek, and Don A. Mankin. Implementing Computerized Procedures in Office Settings. Santa Monica, CA
: TheRand Corporation. R-3077-NSF/IRIS. October, 1987.
Bird, Peter. Formation of the Rocky Mountains, western United States: A continuum computer model. 
Science, 
volume 239, pp. 1501
Œ1507,25 March 1988.
Bowler, Ken C., Alastair D. Bruce, Richard D. Kenway, G. Stuart Pawley, and David J. Wallace. Exploiting highly concurrent comp
uters for
physics. 
Physics Today, 
special issue: Computational physics, volume 40, number 10, pp. 40
Œ48, October 1987.
Bowman, Carlos M., John A. Nosal, and Anne E. Rogers. Effect of new technology on information transfer in the 1990s. 
Journal of
Chemical Information and Computing Sciences, 
volume 27, pp. 147Œ151, 1987.
Branscomb, Lewis M. Improving R&D productivity: The federal role. 
Science, 
volume 222, pp. 133
Œ135, 14 October 1983.
Brooks, Frederick P., Jr. No silver bullet: Essence and accidents of software engineering. 
IEEE Computer, 
volume 20, number 4, pp. 10
Œ19,April 1987.
Brown, Frank R., and Norman H. Christ. Parallel supercomputers for lattice gauge theory. 
Science, 
volume 239, pp. 1393
Œ1400, 18 March
1988.Bush, Vannevar. As we may think. 
The Atlantic Monthly, 
volume 176, number 1, pp. 101
Œ108, July 1945.
Caming, H.W. William. Protection of personal data in the United States. 
The Information Society, 
volume 3, number 2, pp. 113
Œ130, 1984.
Cotter, Holland. Birth of a network: A history of BITNET. 
CUNY/University Computer Center Communications, 
volume 14, number 1
Œ2,pp. 1
Œ10, January-February 1988.
Davis, Ruth M. Where will technology put the library of the 21st century? 
Bulletin of the Medical Library Association, 
volume 75, number 1,
pp. 1
Œ6, January 1987.
DeLisi, Charles. Computers in molecular biology: Current applications and emerging trends. 
Science, 
volume 240, pp. 47
Œ52, April 1, 1988.
Denning, Peter J. Paradigms crossed. Editorial. 
Communications of the ACM, 
volume 30, number 10, p. 808, October 1987.
__. The science of computing: Electronic publishing. 
American Scientist,
 volume 74, pp. 582
Œ585, 1986.
__. The science of computing: A new paradigm for science. 
American Scientist, 
volume 75, pp. 572
Œ573, November-December 1987.
Drake, Miriam. From print to nonprint materials: Library information delivery systems. 
EDUCOM Bulletin, 
pp. 28Œ30, Spring 1988.
Eddy, William F. (chairman). 
Computers in statistical research: Report of a workshop on the use of computers in statistical research. 
Washington, D.C.: The Institute for Mathematical Statistics, 1986.
EDUCOM Networking and Telecommunications Task Force. 
A national higher education network: Issues
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SELECTED READINGS
63Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and opportunities. 
NTTF Paper Number One. Princeton, NJ: EDUCOM, May 1987.
Ezzell, Carol. AIDS workers going for computer link. 
Nature, 
volume 332, p. 194, 17 March 1988.
Feigenbaum, Edward A. Autoknowledge: From file servers to knowledge servers. In: Salamon, R., B. Blum, and M. Jorgensen (eds.)
Medinfo 86, 
pp. xliii
Œxlvi. Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland), 1986.
Fienberg, Stephen E., Margaret E. Martin, and Miron L. Straf (eds.) 
Sharing research data. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1985.
Foley, 1987. Manipulative interfaces.

Freeman, John. Data quality and the development of organizational social science: An editorial essay. 
Administrative Science Quarterly,
volume 31, pp. 298
Œ303, 1986.
Gillespie, Robert G. (with Deborah A. Dicaro). 
Computing and higher education: An accidental revolution. 
Washington, D.C.: National
Science Foundation, 1981.
Green, Bert F. Adaptive testing by computer. In: R.B. Ekstrom (ed.), 
Measurement, technology, and individuality in education. 
NewDirections for Testing and Measurement, number 17. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, March 1983.
Haggin, Joseph. Process control no longer separate from simulation, design. 
Chemical and Engineering News, 
volume 62, number 14, pp. 7
Œ16, April 2, 1984.
__. Workshop underscores wide use of computers in chemical engineering. 
Chemical and Engineering News, 
volume 65, number 45, pp. 27
Œ29, November 9, 1987.
Hey, Anthony J. G., John H. Merlin, Martin W. Ricketts, Michael T. Vaughn, David C. Williams. Topological solutions in gauge th
eory and
their computer graphic representation. 
Science, 
volume 240, pp. 1163
Œ1168, 27 May 1988.
Hoffman, David. The computer-aided discovery of new embedded minimal surfaces. 
The Mathematical Intelligencer, 
volume 9, number 3,
pp. 8
Œ21, 1987.
Holland, William R., and James C. McWilliams. Computer modeling in physical oceanography from the global circulation to turbule
nce.Physics Today, 
special issue: Computational physics, volume 40, number 10, pp. 51
Œ57, October 1987.
Holmstrom, Engin Inel. 
Access to supercomputers. 
Higher Education Panel Report Number 69. Washington, D.C.: American Council on
Education, January 1986.
Hut, Piet, and Gerald Jay Sussman. Advanced computing for science. 
Scientific American, 
special issue: The next computer revolution,
volume 257, pp. 144
Œ153, October 1987.
IEEE Computer Society. 
Proceedings: First international conference on supercomputing systems. 
St. Petersburg, Florida, December 16
Œ20,1985. IEEE-CS order number 654. Washington, D.C.: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1985.
Kahn, Robert E. Networks for advanced computing. 
Scientific American,
 special issue: The next computer revolution, volume 257, pp. 136
Œ143, October 1987.
Karplus, Martin. Molecular dynamics simulation of proteins. 
Physics Today, 
special issue: Computational physics, volume 40, number 10,
pp. 68
Œ72, October 1987.
Kerr, Richard A. Pluto's orbital motion looks chaotic. 
Science, 
volume 240, pp. 986
Œ1987, 20 May 1988.
Kiesler, Sara B., and Lee S. Sproull (eds.) 
Computing and change on campus. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Koening, 1987. Speech production and its impact on use of computers
.Lax, Peter D
. Report of the Panel on Large-scale Computing in Science and Engineering
 (P.D. Lax, Chair). Washington, D.C.: National
Science Foundation, December 26, 1982.
Leaf, Jesse J. Databases turn computers into science libraries. 
Computers in Physics, 
January/February 1988, volume 2, number 1, pp. 24
Œ31.Lederberg, Joshua. Digital communications and the conduct of science: The new literacy
. Proceedings of the IEEE, 
volume 66, number 11,
pp. 1314
Œ1319, November 1978.
Lievrouw, Leah A. The communication network as interpretive environment: 
ﬁSense-makingﬂ among biomedical research scientists.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California, April 1986.
Liscouski, Joseph G. Note on barriers to information technology in research. Personal communication, January 23, 1987.

Londer, Randi. Access to supercomputers. 
Mosaic, 
volume 16, number 3, pp. 26
Œ32, 1985.Lunin, Lois F., and Peter B. Schipma (eds.) Perspectives on CD-ROM for information storage and retrieval. 
Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science, 
special issue, volume 39, number 1, January 1988.
Mace, Scott. University net thrives as 8,000-node system. User profile. 
InfoWorld, 
November 2, 1987, p. 24.
Malone, Thomas W., Joanne Yates, and Robert I. Benjamin. Electronic markets and electronic hierarchies. 
Communications of the ACM, 
volume 30, number 6, pp. 484
Œ497, June 1987.
Manuel, Tom. What's holding back expert systems? Inside technology, special report. 
Electronics, 
pp. 59Œ63, August 7, 1986.
Marshall, Eliot. The scourge of computer viruses. 
Science, 
volume 240, pp. 133
Œ134, April 8, 1988.
Mathis, Robert F. The last ten percent. 
IEEE Transactions of Software Engineering, 
volume SE-12, number 6, pp. 705
Œ712, June 1986.
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SELECTED READINGS
64Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.McCormick, Bruce H., Thomas A. DeFanti, and Maxine D. Brown. Visualization in scientific computing. (NSF Report) 
Computer Graphics, 
volume 21, number 6, pp. 1
Œ14. New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery, ACM SIGGRAPH, November 1987.
Metzger, Norman. A third kind of science. 
Mosaic, 
volume 16, number 3, pp. 2
Œ7, 1985.
Morris, James H., Mahadev Satyanarayanan, Michael H. Connor, John H. Howard, David S. H. Rosenthal, and F. Donelson Smith. Andr
ew:A distributed personal computing environment. 
Communications of the ACM, 
volume 29, number 3, pp. 184
Œ201, March 1986.
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine. Committee on Science, Engineering, and Pu
blicPolicy. Frontiers in science and technology: A selected outlook. 
New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Company, 1983.
__. Research briefing on computer architecture. 1984. Reprinted in: 
New Pathways in Science and Technology. 
New York, NY: Vintage
Books, 1985.National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council, Ad Hoc Committee on Resources for the Mathematical Sciences . 
Renewing U.S.
mathematics: critical resource for the future
 (E. E. David, Chair). Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, 1984.
National Commission for Employment Policy. 
Computers in the workplace: Selected issues. 
Report No. 19. Washington, D.C.: National
Commission for Employment Policy, March 1986.
National Library of Medicine. 
Long range plan executive summary. 
Report of the Board of Regents. Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of
Health, January 1987.
__. Long range plan. Report of Panel 2: 
Locating and gaining access to medical and scientific literature. 
Washington, D.C.: National
Institutes of Health, December 1986.
__. Long range plan. Report of Panel 4: 
Medical informatics. 
Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health, December 1986.
National Research Council, Committee on the Applications of Mathematics, Office of Mathematical Sciences, Commission on Physica
lSciences, Mathematics, and Resources. 
Computational modeling and mathematics applied to the physical sciences. 
Washington,D.C.: National Academy Press, 1984.
National Research Council, Committee on Computer-Assisted Modeling, Board on Basic Biology, Commission on Life Sciences. 
Computer-assisted modeling: Contributions of computational approaches to elucidating macromolecular structure and function. 
Washington,D.C.: National Academy Press, 1987.
National Research Council, Committee on Data Needs, Numerical Data Advisory Board, Assembly of Mathematical and Physical Scienc
es.National needs for critically evaluated physical and chemical data. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences, 1978.
National Research Council, Computer Science and Technology Board, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources. 
The national challenge in computer science and technology. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1988.
National Research Council, National Research Network Review Committee, Computer Science and Technology Board, Commission on
Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources. 
Toward a National Research Network. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press, 1988.
National Research Council, Panel on Education, Numerical Data Advisory Board, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and
Resources. 
Improving the treatment of scientific and engineering data through education. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press, 1986.
National Research Council, Panel on Mathematical Sciences, Board on Mathematical Sciences, Commission on Physical sciences,
Mathematics, and Resources. 
Mathematical sciences: A unifying and dynamic resource
 (Phillip A. Griffiths, Chair). Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1986.
National Research Council, Physics Survey Committee, Board on Physics and Astronomy, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathemati
csand Resources. 
Physics through the 1990s: An overview. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1986.
Norris, William C. Computer generations and technological cooperation. 
The Bridge, 
volume 16, number 4, pp. 19
Œ24, Winter 1986.NYSERNET. 
Market and economic impact study: Lessons from four networks.
 Second report. New York, NY: New York State Education
and Research Network, Inc., April 5, 1988.
Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President . 
A research and development strategy for high performance 
computing. 
Committee on Computer Research and Applications, Federal Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering, and
Technology (FCCSET). Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President, November 20, 1987.
__. Report of the Federal Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering, and Technology Panel on Advanced Computer Research in the
Federal Government. 
Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President, June 1985.
__. Research in very high performance computing: Policy recommendation and research require-
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SELECTED READINGS
65Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ments statement. 
Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President, November 1985.
Peterson, Ivars. Packing it in: Fractals play an important role in image compression. 
Science News, 
volume 131, number 18, pp. 283
Œ285,May 2, 1987.
__. Picture this: The sounds of speech lead to novel ways of representing complex data. 
Science News, 
volume 131, pp. 392
Œ395, June 20,
1987.__. Twists of space: An artist, a computer programmer and a mathematician work together to visualize exotic geometric forms. 
ScienceNews, 
volume 132, pp. 264
Œ266, October 24, 1987.
__. Reaching for the supercomputing moon. 
Science News, 
volume 133, number 11, pp. 172
Œ173, March 12, 1988.
__. A digital matter of life and death. 
Science News, 
volume 133, number 11, pp. 170
Œ171, March 12, 1988.
__. A computer at your fingertips. 
Science News, 
volume 133, number 22, p. 351, May 28, 1988.
__. Highways for information. 
Science News, 
volume 133, number 25, pp. 394
Œ395, June 18, 1988.
Porter, Alan L., and Frederick A. Rossini. Current and future uses of the computer: Industrial R&D in the United States. 
R&D Management,
volume 16, number 4, pp. 279
Œ289, 1986.
Quarterman, John S., and J. C. Hoskins. Notable computer networks. 
Communications of the ACM, 
volume 29, number 10, pp. 932
Œ971,October 1986.
Raveche, Harold J., Duncan H. Lawrie, and Alvin M. Despain. 
A national computing initiative: The agenda for leadership. 
Report of the
Panel on Research Issues in Large-Scale Computational Science and Engineering. Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and

Applied Mathematics, 1987.
Rheinboldt, Werner C. (chairman) 
Future directions in computational mathematics, algorithms, and scientific software. 
Report of the Panel
on Future Directions in Computational Mathematics, Algorithms, and Scientific Software . Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industri
aland Applied Mathematics, 1985.
Roberts, Leslie. Academy backs genome project. 
Science, 
volume 239, pp. 725
Œ726, 12 February 1988.
Roode, David, Rob Liebschutz, Sunil Maulik, Terry Friedemann, David Benton, and David Kristofferson. New developments at BIONET
.Nucleic Acids Research, 
volume 16, number 5, part a, pp. 1857
Œ1859, 1988.
Rumble, John R. Why can't we access more numeric data via computers? In: Williams, M. E., and T. H. Hogan (eds.)
. Proceedings of the
National Online Meeting, 
pp. 325
Œ330. Medford, N.J.: Learned Information, Inc., 1984.
Simon, Herbert A. Whether software engineering needs to be artificially intelligent. 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 
volumeSE-12, number 7, pp. 726
Œ732, July 1986.
Steele, Guy. 
COMMON LISP: The language. 
Bedford, MA: Digital Press, 1984.
Straub, Galen K. Role for PCs in theoretical physics? In: Kahaner, David K. (ed.). 
Science on small computers. SIAM News, 
p. 12, March
1988.Thomsen, Dietrick E. Seeking supernovas systematically. 
Science News,
 volume 132, number 10, pp. 156
Œ157, September 5, 1987.
__. Big telescopes on a roll. 
Science News, 
volume 132, pp. 170
Œ171, September 12, 1987.
Turner, Judith A. Science agency picks Michigan group to run computer network: $50 million 
ﬁNSFNETﬂ will link supercomputers,
researchers. 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
pp. A1, A14, November 25, 1987.
__. Project linking different computers may alter the way researchers collaborate
. The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
volume 34, number
27, pp. A13, A20, March 16, 1988.
__. Uncertainties strain computer networks for U.S. professors. 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
pp. A12
ŒA13, April 6, 1988.
__. E-mail technology has boomed, but manners of its users fall short of perfection. 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
pp. A12
ŒA16, April
13, 1988.
__. Plan for $5-million prototype of electronic research library announced. 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
p. A27, June 1, 1988.
U.S. Congress. General Accounting Office. 
Satellite Data Archiving: U.S. and Foreign Activities and Plans for Environmental Information.
Report RCED-88
Œ201. Washington, D.C.: United States General Accounting Office, September 1988.
U.S. Congress. General Accounting Office. 
Space operations: NASA's use of information technology. 
Report IMTEC-87
Œ20. Washington,
D.C.: United States General Accounting Office, April 1987.
U.S. Congress. House Committee on Science and Technology. Task Force on Science Policy. 
The impact of the information age on science. 
Science Policy Study
ŠHearings volume 10 (September 10
Œ12, 1985). No. 103. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1986a.
U.S. Congress. House Committee on Science and Technology. Task Force on Science Policy. 
The impact of the information age on science. 
Science Policy Study
ŠBackground Report No. 5. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1986b.
U.S. Congress. Office of Technology Assessment. 
Information technology R&D: Critical trends and issues. 
New York, N.Y.: Pergamon
Press, 1985.
U.S. Congress. Office of Technology Assessment. 
Science technology and the Constitution
ŠBackground paper, 
OTA-BP-CIT-43.Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1987.
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SELECTED READINGS
66Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.University of Michigan. 
EXPRES Newsletter. 
Volume 1, Number 1. Available from: Violet Elder, CSMIL, C2420 Business Administration
Building, 904 Monroe St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109 . June 1987.
Warlick, Charles H. Academic computing facilities and services in higher education
Ša survey. 
EDUCOM Bulletin, 
volume 21, number 3,
pp. 2
Œ7, Fall/Winter 1986.
Weiser, Mark. Source code. 
IEEE Computer, 
volume 20, number 11, pp. 66
Œ73, November 1987.
Weiss, Rick. Organic origami: Scientists study the art of protein folding. 
Science News, 
volume 132, pp. 344
Œ346, November 28, 1987.
Westbrook, J. H., H. Behrens, G. Dathe, and S. Iwata (eds.) 
Materials data systems for engineering. 
Proceedings of a CODATA workshop,
September 22Œ27, 1985. Karlsruhe, FRG: Fach-informations-zentrum, 1986.
Westbrook, J. H., and L. R. McCreight (eds.) 
Computerized aerospace materials data (Computerized materials property and design data for
aerospace technology). 
New York, N.Y.: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1987.
Westbrook, J.H., and J. R. Rumble, Jr. (eds.) 
Computerized materials data systems. 
Office of Standard Reference Data. Gaithersburg, MD:
National Bureau of Standards, 1983.
Winkler, Karl-Heinz A., Jay W. Chalmers, Stephen W. Hodson, Paul R. Woodward, and Norman J. Zabusky. A numerical laboratory.
Physics Today
 (Special Issue: Computational Physics), volume 40, number 10, pp. 28
Œ37, October 1987.
Wooster, Harold. Historical note: Shining palaces, shifting sands: National information systems. 
Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 
volume 38, number 5, pp. 321
Œ335, September 1987.
Wright, Robert. Virtual reality. The information age. 
The Sciences,
 volume 27, number 6, pp. 8
Œ10, November/December 1987.
Zurer, Pamela S. Computers gaining firm hold in chemical labs. Special Report. 
Chemical and Engineering News, 
pp. 21
Œ46, August 19,
1985.BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SELECTED READINGS
67Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SELECTED READINGS
68Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IndexAAcademic sector, 
see Universities
Access to computing resources, 
37, 49, 50, 51compatibility/incompatibility (systems), 
2, 21-22, 23, 25,27, 36, 49-50databases, 
25-29hardware, 
2, 17networks, 
16, 49, 51software, 
11, 16-17Administration and administrators, 
see Management andmanagersAlgorithms, 
17American Chemical Society (ChemAbstracts), 
23, 24, 28, 30American Psychological Association, 
30Ames Laboratory, 19ARPANET, 
20, 26Artificial intelligence and expert systems, 
3, 31, 32-33, 35,38-39Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), 
35Associations, 
see Professional associations
BBaylor Medical College, 
35Behavioral factors, 
see Human factors
BIONET, 
22-23BITDOC, 25BITNET, 
24, 26, 36BITNIC, 
25Brown University, 
41Bush, Vannevar, 40CCABIOS, 
22California, 
15CALNET, 
15Canada, 
25Carnegie Mellon University, 
19, 43CELL, 
22Chemical Abstracts Service, 
23, 24, 28, 30Chips (memory), 
20City University of New York, 
24-25Committee on National Statistics, 
29Committee on Science and Technology, 
7-8Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, 
7-8
COMMON LISP, 
20Communications technology, 
1, 18-22, 48electronic mail, 2, 18, 19, 20-22, 26-27networks (computers), 
2, 3, 14-27, 36-37, 40-41, 49-51, 53telecommunications, 
1, 11-12Compatibility/incompatibility (systems), 
2, 23, 25, 49-50databases, 27, 36networks, 
21-22, 36, 49-50see also
 StandardsComputational sciences,
high energy physics, 
12-14mathematical theory, 
16-17medical sciences, 
22-23, 28-29, 35, 36Computer graphics
earthquakes, 
15interactive, 20, 34, 40INDEX69Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mathematics-physical science interface, 
17satellites, 
30Computer hardware, 
7access to, 
2, 17data collection and analysis, 
14historical developments in, 
2, 11microprocessors, dedicated, 
13-14optical disks, 27, 52semiconductors, 
20supercomputers, 
21, 22, 49Computer simulation, 
3, 31, 47in econometrics, 
31numerical computations, 
16-17Computer software, 
2, 7access to, 
11, 16-17customized, 
16-17, 43, 49data collection and analysis, 
14evaluation, 
43-44expert systems, 
3, 31, 32-33, 35federal government, 52high energy physics and, 
13IBM infrastructure, 
44-45institutional infrastructure, 
3instrument control, 
15, 48libraries of, 
4, 51molecular biology, 
22-23, 28-29, 36networks (computers), 
2, 3, 14-27, 36-37
, 40-41, 49-51, 53packages, 
15, 16-17, 18, 44-45standards, 
3word processing, 
2, 18, 21-22Computer visualization, 
3, 21, 30, 31-32, 47-48Confidentiality, 
3, 37-38, 52Congress, 7-8DDatabases, 
2-3
, 15, 24-28economics, 
36-37hypertext, 
40-41molecular biology, 
22-23, 28-29, 36searching, 
2, 24, 27, 28see also specific databases
Data collection and analysis, 
2, 14-17capacities, 
14Decision making, 
3, 39policymakers, 
1, 9, 29, 55Defense, 
15, 20, 43Denning, Peter, J., 
19, 22-23Department of Commerce, 
8Department of Defense, 
20, 43Department of Energy, 
8, 19Document processing, 
19EEarthquakes, 
15Econometrics, 
31Economic factors, 
3, 4, 48, 49, 50access to computers, 16costs and cost sharing, 
14-15, 35-37satellite data system, 
30study funding, 8time sharing, 
35Education and training, 
3, 39-41, 49universities, 4, 14, 19, 24-25, 35, 36EDUCOM, 
25, 44Electronic mail, 
2, 18, 19, 20case study, 
26-27incompatibility problems, 
21molecular biology, 
22Electronic publishing, 
19, 21-22EMBL, 
22Englebart, Doug, 
40Ethics, 
see Law and ethics
European Access Research Network (EARN), 
25Expertise (human), 
4, 43, 44, 52early computers, 
11policymakers, 
1, 9, 29, 55study methodology, 
8, 57Expert systems and artificial intelligence, 
3, 31, 32-33, 35,38-39EXPRES, 
19, 21, 22, 54FFederal Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering, and
Technology (FCCSET), 
53, 55Federal government, 
48, 51-53databases, 23, 29-30national research network, 
4-5
, 21, 52-54panel study funding, 8Fermi National Laboratory, 14File transfer, 
21Frontiers in Science and Technology: A Selected Outlook, 
7GGatekeepers, 
43GenBank, 
22, 23, 29GENPUB, 
22Genetics, 
22, 23, 28-29Geometry, 
16Georgetown Medical Center, 
35Graphics, 
see Computer graphics
HHELP, 
35High Energy Physics Network, 
21INDEX70Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Human factors, 
3, 8, 49attitudinal, 40-41, 50confidentiality, 
3, 37-38, 52education and training, 
3, 39-41, 49infrastructure, 
3, 4-5
, 21, 34, 35, 42-45
, 52-54institutional factors, 
3-4, 41-42, 49, 51law and ethics, 
3, 22, 37-38, 42, 50, 52management and managers, 
1, 4, 9, 20, 22, 29, 41, 50, 51user-machine interfaces, 
4Human Gene Mapping Library (HGML), 
28Hypertext, 
40-41IIBM, 
24-25, 44-45
Images and image processing, 
see Computer visualization
Incompatibility (systems), 
see Compatibility/incompatibility;
StandardsIndexes, 24, 25Information dissemination, 
2, 43-44national research network, 
4-5
, 21, 52-54Information storage and retrieval, 
2-3
, 14, 23-30databases 
2-3
, 15, 22-23, 24-28, 29, 36-37, 40-41networks (computers), 
2, 3, 14-27, 36-37
, 40-41, 49-51, 53Information technology, definition and development of, 
1, 7,11-12Infrastructure, 
3, 34, 35, 42-45national, 
4-5
, 21, 52-54Institute for Mathematical Statistics, 
16Institute for Scientific Information, 
30Institutional factors, 3-4, 41-42, 49, 51Instrument control, 
15, 48Integrated Academic Information Management System
(IAIMS), 
35Intellectual property, 22, 42, 50, 52INTERMEDIA, 
41International activities
gene mapping conference, 
28-29networks (computers), 
14, 22, 24-25standards, 
19JJackson Laboratory Mouse Map, 
28Johns Hopkins University, 
35LLANDSAT, 
30Languages (programming), 
20Law and ethicsconfidentiality, 
3, 37-38, 52decision-making liability, 
38Intellectual property, 
22, 42, 50, 52laboratory notebooks, electronic, 
42security of information, 
22, 37-38
, 42, 52Library science, 
19, 24, 28, 38-39, 51LISP, 
20MManagement and managers, 
1, 9, 20, 29, 41, 50of networks, 
4, 22, 51Mathematicssimulations, 16-17, 47software packages, 
15McKusick, Victor A, 
28-29Medical sciences, 
24, 35genetics, 22, 23, 28-29molecular biology, 
22-23, 28-29, 36MEDLARS, 
24MEDLINE, 
29MEMEX, 
25, 40Mendelian Inheritance in Man, 
28METAFONT, 
19Metal Oxide Semiconductor Implementation System, 
20Microprocessors, 
13-14
Military sciences, 
see DefenseModels, 
see Computer simulation
Molecular biology, 
22-23, 28-29, 36NNational Academy of Engineering, 
7National Academy of Sciences, 
7National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
8, 15, 23, 30National Bureau of Standards, 
8National Center for Biotechnology Information, 
36National Library of Medicine, 
8, 24, 28-29, 35, 36, 55National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
8, 23, 30National Research Council, 
29, 54-55National Science Foundation, 
8, 19, 21, 22, 28-29, 53, 54National Space Science Data Center, 
30Nelson, Ted, 
40NetNorth, 
25Networks (computers), 
2, 15, 18, 20-21, 53access to, 16, 49, 51earthquake prediction, 
15economics, 36-37electronic mail, 2, 18, 19, 20-22, 26-27high energy physics research and, 
14hypertext, 
40-41incompatibility problems, 
21-22, 36, 49-50INDEX71Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.international, 
14, 22, 24-25molecular biology, 
22-23national, 
21reliability of transmission, 
17standards, 
3university, 
14, 24-25see also specific networks
New York State Education and Research Network
(NYSERNET), 
15NSFNET, 
21, 22, 54OOffice of Science and Technology Policy, 
4, 52, 53, 55OMIM, 
28-29OMNET, 
26Optical disks, 
27, 52Organizational factors, 
see Institutional factors;
Networks (computers)
PPanel on Information Technology and the Conduct of
Research, 
8-9
, 26-27Particle physics, 
see PhysicsPatents, 
42Personal computers, 11, 19Physicshigh energy, 
12-15, 21mathematics and, 
16-17Policymakers, 
1, 9, 29, 55Policy recommendations, 
3-5, 50-55Postal services, see Electronic mail
POSTSCRIPT, 
19Professional associations, 
4, 17, 30, 35, 50, 55Programs and programming, 
see Computer software;
Languages (programming)
Psychological Abstracts, 
30Publishing, 
19, 21-22QQuality control, 2see also
 StandardsRReal time, 
13, 15SSatellites, 
30SCRIBE, 
19Searching (databases), 
2, 24, 27, 28Security issues, 
22, 37-38
, 42, 52Semiconductors, 
20Simulation, 
see Computer simulation
Software, 
see Computer software
Speech production (computers), 
33Standards, 
3, 4, 19, 27, 37, 43, 51, 53, 55document processing, 
19, 21-22Statistics, 
15, 16Supercomputers, 
21, 22, 49Superconducting Super Collider, 
13-14Superconductivity, 
19TTelecommunications, 
1, 11-12networks (computers), 
2, 3, 14-27, 36-37, 40-41, 49-51, 53Terabit Memory System, 
30TeX, 
19Time sharing, 
35TOXLINE, 
24Training, 
see Education and training
UUniversities, 
4, 19, 28, 35, 36, 41, 42, 43, 50networks (computers), 
14, 24-25see also specific universities
University of California at Berkeley, 
24-25University of Michigan, 
19University of Utah, 
35UNIX, 
19VVendors, 
4, 51, 52Very large-scale integration, 
20Visualization, 
see Computer visualization
WWilliam H. Welch Medical Library, 
28-29Word processing, 
2, 18, 21-22Workshop on the Use of Computers in Statistical Research, 
16Workstations, 
19WYSIWYG, 
19XXANADU, 
40-41YYale University, 
24, 28INDEX72Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A ﬁfractal dragonﬂ generated by the IBM Fellow Benoit B. Mandelbrot, the originator of fractal geometry. This is
an example of the ﬁJulia set,ﬂ which in turn is an example of a ﬁspeller setﬂ of a dynamic system. This may seem to

be an extremely complicated shape, yet it has a very simple equation based on the formula From the front cover of
the book The Fractal Geometry of Nature by Benoit B. Mandelbrot, 1982, W. H. Freeman and Company.
73Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The ﬁfractal planetriseﬂ by IBM scientist Richard F. Voss. In spite of its startling realism, every element in this
picture is artificially generated. The striking resemblance between some fractal images and familiar landscapes

illustrates the fact that fractals describe aspects of nature that have formerly eluded mathematical description. From
the back cover of the book The Fractal Geometry of Nature by Benoit B. Mandelbrot, 1982, W. H. Freeman and
Company. Courtesy of the IBM Corporation.
Van der Waals surface of dihydrofolate reductase and methotextrate. Red is oxygen, blue is nitrogen, green is

carbon, and yellow is phosphorus. Produced by the Computer Graphics Laboratory, University of California, San
Francisco. © Regents, University of California.
74Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This realistic-looking landscape is actually only a few hundred atoms square and approximately 10 atoms high.
Generated by IBM scientist Richard F. Voss, who used a computer to add color, lighting, and shading to a scanning
tunneling microscope image of thermally roughened silicon. In addition to the esthetic benefits of such pictures,
scientists and engineers can use such images to understand the properties of critical materials such as silicon. Color
coding, for example, can emphasize and delineate specific atomic areas of interest, such as atomic trace impurities
or surface defects. Courtesy of the IBM Corporation.
Frame from a computer-animated film depicting clustering of matter in the early evolution of the universe. The film

itself was produced by a collaborative effort between an astrophysicist and a Hollywood special-effects graphics
firm. © Joan M. Centrella, Drexel University.
75Information Technology and the Conduct of Research: The User's ViewCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Scherk's doubly periodic minimal surface, which has recently been proposed as a model microstructure for grain
boundaries in copolymers. Nature, August 8, 1988.
© J. T. Hoffman.
76