DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9460Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources,Summary of a Workshop136 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06540-5 | DOI 10.17226/9460Panel on Distributed Geolibraries, National Research CouncilDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Distributed GeolibrariesSpatial Information Resources
Summary of a Workshop
Panel on Distributed Geolibraries
Mapping Science Committee
Board on Earth Sciences and Resources
Commission on Geosciences, Environment, and Resources
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.iDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the

National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
Support specifically for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation and the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. The project also utilized resources provided to the

Mapping Science Committee by the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, the U.S. Geological

Survey and the Federal Geographic Data Committee, the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, the

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Bureau of Land Management, and the

Bureau of the Census. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this

publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the agencies that pro-

vided support for this project.

International Standard Book Number (ISBN) 0-309-06540-2

Copies of this report are available from

Mapping Science Committee

Board on Earth Sciences and Resources

National Research Council

2101 Constitution Avenue, NW

Washington, DC 20418

Cover: Backdrop for the collage is a digital orthophoto of the Boston, Massachusetts, area. The fig-
ure was downloaded from the Internet from MIT/MassGIS Digital Orthophoto Project (see

Appendix D)Copyright 1999 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America
iiDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL ON DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES
MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD (
Chair) University of California, Santa Barbara
PRUDENCE S. ADLER, Association of Research Libraries, Washington, D.C.

BARBARA P. BUTTENFIELD, University of Colorado, Boulder

ROBERT E. KAHN, Corporation for National Research Initiatives, Reston,
VirginiaANNETTE J. KRYGIEL, National Defense University, Ft. Lesley J. McNair,
Washington, D.C.HARLAN J. ONSRUD, University of Maine, Orono

NRC Staff
THOMAS M. USSELMAN, Senior Staff Officer

JENNIFER T. ESTEP, Administrative Assistant
iiiDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MAPPING SCIENCE COMMITTEE
MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD (
Chair) University of California, Santa Barbara
KAREN C. SIDERELIS (
Vice-Chair) North Carolina Center for Geographic
Information and Analysis, Raleigh
BRIAN J. L. BERRY, The University of Texas at Dallas

CLIFFORD A. BEHRENS,
+ Telcordia Technologies, Morristown, New Jersey
BARBARA P. BUTTENFIELD,
* University of Colorado, Boulder
NICHOLAS CHRISMAN, University of Washington, Seattle

DAVID J. COLEMAN, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton

MICHAEL J. FOLK,
* University of Illinois, Urbana
HENRY L. GARIE, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
TrentonBARRY GLICK, Carillon Consulting, Arlington, Virginia

NINA S-N. LAM, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge

JOEL L. MORRISON,
+ Ohio State University, Columbus
HARLAN J. ONSRUD, University of Maine, Orono

C. STEPHEN SMYTH, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington

REX W. TRACY, GDE Systems, Inc., San Diego, California

A. KEITH TURNER, Colorado School of Mines, Golden

LYNA L. WIGGINS, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey

NRC Staff
THOMAS M. USSELMAN, Senior Staff Officer

JENNIFER T. ESTEP, Administrative Assistant
+ Term of appointment began in 1999.

* Term of appointment ended December 31, 1998.
ivDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOARD ON EARTH SCIENCES AND RESOURCES
J. FREEMAN GILBERT (
Chair) University of California, San Diego
JOHN J. AMORUSO, Amoruso Petroleum Company, Houston, Texas

PAUL B. BARTON, JR., Emeritus, U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia

KENNETH I. DAUGHERTY, Marconi Information Systems, Reston, Virginia

BARBARA L. DUTROW, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge

RICHARD S. FISKE, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

JAMES M. FUNK, Shell Continental Companies, Houston, Texas

WILLIAM L. GRAF, Arizona State University, Tempe

RAYMOND JEANLOZ, University of California, Berkeley

SUSAN M. KIDWELL, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois

SUSAN KIEFFER, Kieffer & Woo, Inc., Palgrave, Ontario

PAMELA LUTTRELL, Mobil Corporation, Dallas, Texas

ALEXANDRA NAVROTSKY, University of California, Davis

DIANNE R. NIELSON, Utah Department of Environmental Quality, Salt Lake
CityJILL D. PASTERIS, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri

EDWARD M. STOLPER, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena

JOHN R. G. TOWNSHEND, University of Maryland, College Park

MILTON H. WARD, Cyprus Amax Minerals Company, Engelwood, Colorado

NRC Staff
ANTHONY R. DE SOUZA, Director

TAMARA L. DICKINSON, Senior Program Officer

ANNE M. LINN, Senior Program Officer

THOMAS M. USSELMAN, Senior Program Officer

VERNA J. BOWEN, Administrative Assistant

JENNIFER T. ESTEP, Administrative Assistant

JUDITH L. ESTEP, Administrative Assistant
vDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON GEOSCIENCES, ENVIRONMENT, AND
RESOURCESGEORGE M. HORNBERGER (
Chair) University of Virginia, Charlottesville
RICHARD A. CONWAY, Union Carbide Corporation (
Retired), S. Charleston,
West VirginiaTHOMAS E. GRAEDEL, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut

THOMAS J. GRAFF, Environmental Defense Fund, Oakland, California

EUGENIA KALNAY, University of Oklahoma, Norman

DEBRA KNOPMAN, Progressive Policy Institute, Washington, D.C.

KAI N. LEE, Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts

RICHARD A. MESERVE, Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.

JOHN B. MOONEY, JR., J. Brad Mooney Associates, Ltd., Arlington, Virginia

HUGH C. MORRIS, El Dorado Gold Corporation, Vancouver, British Columbia

H. RONALD PULLIAM, University of Georgia, Athens

MILTON RUSSELL, University of Tennessee, Knoxville

THOMAS C. SCHELLING, University of Maryland, College Park

ANDREW R. SOLOW, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
MassachusettsVICTORIA J. TSCHINKEL, Landers and Parsons, Tallahassee, Florida

E-AN ZEN, University of Maryland, College Park

MARY LOU ZOBACK, U.S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park, California

NRC Staff
ROBERT M. HAMILTON, Executive Director

GREGORY H. SYMMES, Associate Executive Director

CRAIG SCHIFFRIES, Associate Executive Director for Special Programs

JEANETTE SPOON, Administrative and Financial Officer

SANDI FITZPATRICK, Administrative Associate

MARQUITA SMITH, Administrative Assistant/Technology Analyst
viDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
This report has been reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse
perspectives and technical expertise in accordance with procedures approved by

the NRC's Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is

to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the authors and the NRC

in making their published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report

meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the

study charge. The content of the review comments and draft manuscript remain

confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank

the following individuals for their participation in the review of this report:
Christine L. Borgman

Presidential Chair in Information Studies

University of California, Los Angeles

Edward A. Fox
Department of Computer Science

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

Blacksburg
Kenneth D. Gardels

Research Program in Environmental Planning and Geographic Information
SystemsCollege of Environmental Design

University of California, Berkeley

John L. King

Department of Information and Computer Science

University of California, Irvine

Xavier R. Lopez

Spatial Products/Data Server Division

Oracle Corporation
Nashua, New Hampshire
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSvii
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Clifford A. Lynch

Executive Director

Coalition for Networked Information

Washington, D.C.

Hugh C. Morris

El Dorado Gold Corporation

Vancouver, British Columbia

Jane Smith Patterson
Senior Advisor for Science and Technology

Office of the Governor

Raleigh, North Carolina

James F. Williams II

Dean of Libraries

University of Colorado, Boulder

While the individuals listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this report rests

solely with the authoring committee and the NRC.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSviii
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceThe Mapping Science Committee serves as a focus for external advice to
federal agencies on scientific and technical matters related to spatial data

handling and analysis. The purpose of the committee is to provide advice on the

development of a robust national spatial data infrastructure for making informed

decisions at all levels of government and throughout society in general.
The concept of a national spatial data infrastructure (NSDI) was first
advanced by the Mapping Science Committee (MSC) in its 1993 report, 
Toward a
Coordinated Spatial Data Infrastructure for the Nation. 
Subsequent MSC reports
have addressed specific components of the NSDI, including partnerships

(Promoting the National Spatial Data Infrastructure Through Partnerships, 
1994), basic data types (
A Data Foundation for the National Spatial Data
Infrastructure, 1995), and future trends (The Future of Spatial Data and
Society, 1997).When the NSDI was defined in 1993, few users or producers of geospatial
data* made much use of the Internet or the World-Wide Web (WWW). Although
there was emphasis on digital geospatial data, the primary method of

dissemination was by magnetic tape. There were virtually no digital online

catalogs of geospatial data or methods for searching for data across computer

networks. Moreover, since most useful geospatial data were produced by a small

number of federal agencies, there was little problem locating the appropriate

source. Today, the WWW has grown into an enormously successful tool and has

had a profound impact on the entire environment for geospatial data acquisition.

At the same time, it has presented a growing problem as the number of potential

suppliers has mushroomed, in its inability to deal effectively with the task of
* The report follows evolving practice in the NSDI community by adopting the term
geospatial 
to refer to maps and images of the Earth's surface and near surface and their
digital equivalents. The terms 
geographic 
and spatial are often used almost synonymously
but are avoided here.
PREFACEixDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.discovering what geoinformation exists and of locating an appropriate source.
This report can be understood therefore as an updating of the MSC's concept
of the NSDI in the era of the WWW. In organizing this effort and producing this

report, the committee is expressing its view that the WWW has added a new and

radically different dimension to its earlier conception of NSDI, one that is much

more user oriented, much more effective in maximizing the value of the nation's

geospatial data assets, and much more cost effective as a data dissemination

mechanism. Distributed geolibraries reflect the same basic thinking about the

future of geospatial data, which emphasizes sharing, universal access, and

productivity but in the context of a technology that was almost impossible to

anticipate prior to 1993.
A panel under the aegis of the MSC convened a workshop to explore the
following topics:Ł   Development of a vision for geospatial data dissemination and access in
2010.  Comparison of current efforts in digital library research, clearinghouse
development, and other data distribution and search activities.
  Suggestion of short- and long-term research and development needed to
achieve the vision.
  Identification of the policy and institutional issues, particularly for
convergence of efforts to realize the vision.
By clarifying the vision of distributed geolibraries and identifying some of
the key issues, it is hoped that the workshop and this report will provide a

common focus for the many efforts already under way and will stimulate new and

expanded efforts. The workshop was only a first step in this process, and many

issues remain to be clarified by further discussions, research, and development of

prototypes.The report makes extensive use of the traditional library as a framework for
discussion because it is so familiar and well understood. Undoubtedly, much

future work in researching and developing distributed geolibraries will occur

within this framework,
PREFACExDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.but the framework will also be constraining in some respects. Exactly how

distributed geolibraries develop and how closely they follow the metaphor of the

library remain to be seen. Moreover, the metaphor is used selectively, since many

of the functions of libraries that may have no equivalent in distributed

geolibraries were not discussed at the workshop, and may not be relevant.
The workshop began on Monday, June 15, 1998, and followed the agenda
given in Appendix C. Workshop participants were selected in such a way that all
major sectors of the NSDI community and geospatial data activity were

represented by their respective stakeholders, with an appropriate balance among

them. Of the participants, 35 percent were from federal and state government, 39

percent were from academia, 12 percent were from the private sector, and 14

percent were from other sectors (e.g., associations). See 
Appendix A
 for a list of
participants. Another way of considering the participants is by their primary

focusŠ44 percent with a geospatial background, 36 percent from computing

science and engineering, 12 percent from the library sciences, and 8 percent

''other."The Panel on Distributed Geolibraries coordinated the preparation of a series
of white papers in advance of the workshop to stimulate discussion on certain key

issues. These were posted on the WWW several weeks prior to the workshop and

were available to participants and others who happened across them. Titles of the

white papers for the workshop are given in 
Appendix B.This report reflects the consensus of the panel regarding the discussions that
took place at the workshop, the issues that arose there and in the white papers,

and the workshop's broader context.
PREFACExiDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering 

research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their 
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by 

the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise 

the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. 

Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences. 

The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the 
charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of 

outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the 
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the 

responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of 

Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national 
needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National 

Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy   
of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate 
professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of 

the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National 

Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the 
federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical 

care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the 

Institutedicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and 
technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and 

advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general 

policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal 

operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National 

Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, 

and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. 
Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the 

National Research Council. 
www.national-academies.org
xiiDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  Executive Summary
 1  Characteristics and Benefits of Distributed Geoli-
braries 2  The National Spatial Data Infrastructure
 2  Contents, Services, and Functions of Distributed
Geolibraries 3  Architecture of Distributed Geolibraries
 4  Intellectual Property Issues
 5  Organizational Issues
 51 Introduction 7  Examples 8  Emergency Response
 8  Housing Relocation
 10  Public Health 11  Natural Resource Planning 12  A Common Theme
 132 A Vision for Distributed Geolibraries 15  Recent Developments
 15  A Library Vision 19  Defining a Distributed Geolibrary
 20  A Distributed Library 20  Geoinformation 22  Characteristics of a Distributed Geolibrary
 25  Distributed Geolibraries and the NSDI
 28  Distributed Geolibraries and Digital Earth
 32CONTENTSxiiiDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 The Distributed Geolibrary in Societal and Institu-
tional Context
 35  Local Focus
 36  Library Considerations 37  The Library as an Institution
 37  Economic Considerations 38  Distributed Geolibraries and the Existing
Library Institution 39  Data, Information, and Knowledge
 40  Intellectual Property Concerns
 42  Uses of Data, Information, and Knowledge
 43  Access 45  Summary and Additional Issues
 474 Services and Functions
 53  Library Services 53  Distributed Geolibrary Services
 55  The Need for Distributed Geolibrary Services
 56  Services as Collections of Function
 57  Necessary Distributed Geolibrary Functions
 58  Search by Geographical Location
 58  Search by Place Name
 60  Search by Subject Theme or Time Period
 61  Item Display and Description
 62  Collection Creation and Maintenance
 63  Searching over Distributed Assets
 65  Integration, Analysis, and Manipulation
 66  Assisting Users
 69  Assessment and Feedback
 69  Options for the Delivery of Distributed Geolibrary
Services 705 Building Distributed Geolibraries
 73  Requirements 73  Standards and Protocols
 75  Data Sets
 77  Georeferencing 79CONTENTS
xiv
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Cataloging 80  Visualization 81  Knowledge Construction
 82  Research Needs
 82  Institutional Needs 85  Measuring Progress
 876 Conclusions 89  Revisiting the Rationale for Distributed Geolibraries
 89  Distributed Geolibraries in Context
 90  References 93  Appendixes  Appendix A: Workshop Participants 99Appendix B:
 Contributed White Papers
 103Appendix C:
 Workshop Agenda 105Appendix D: Example Prototypes
 109Appendix E:
 Biographical Sketches of Panel Members
 117CONTENTSxvDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS
xvi
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryA distributed geolibrary is a vision for the future. It would permit users to
quickly and easily obtain all existing information available about a place that is

relevant to a defined need. It is modeled on the operations of a traditional library,

updated to a digital networked world, and focused on something that has never

been possible in the traditional library: the supply of information in response to a

geographically  defined need. It would integrate the resources of the Internet and
the World Wide Web into a simple mechanism for searching and retrieving

information relevant to a wide range of problems, including natural disasters,

emergencies, community planning, and environmental quality. A geolibrary is a

digital library filled with geoinformationŠinformation associated with a distinct

area or footprint on the Earth's surfaceŠand for which the primary search

mechanism is place. A 
geolibrary is distributed if its users, services, metadata,
and information assets can be integrated among many distinct locations.
This report presents the findings of the Workshop on Distributed
Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, convened by the Mapping Science

Committee of the National Research Council in June 1998. The report is a vision

for distributed geolibraries, not a blueprint. Developing a distributed geolibrary

involves a series of technical challenges as well as institutional and social issues,

which are addressed relative to the vision.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHARACTERISTICS AND BENEFITS OF DISTRIBUTED
GEOLIBRARIESA wide variety of human activities could benefit from the services of
distributed geolibraries. The activities include many for which the timely

provision of information could minimize loss of life or result in more timely and

effective use of existing information resources.
The contents of a distributed geolibrary are not limited to information
normally associated with maps or images of the Earth's surface but include any

information that can be associated with a geographic location. In this sense the

vision thus extends far beyond the context of the National Spatial Data

Infrastructure (NSDI).New technological developments make it possible for people to gather data
germane to their own needs more readily, extract data from online and other

electronic repositories, develop the information products they need, use the

products for decision making, and contribute their locally gathered

geoinformation and derived products to libraries or other repositories. Developing

the technical and institutional means to support incorporation of local knowledge

into networked repositories presents a novel challenge.
Although many projects currently exhibit elements of the vision of
distributed geolibraries, the lack of a clear statement of that vision impedes

coordination and leads to duplication of effort. A clear statement can provide a

sense of common purpose.
New technological initiatives such as the Next Generation Internet and
Internet II are likely to provide extensions to Internet and World Wide Web

(WWW) protocols and orders-of-magnitude increases in bandwidth. Many of

these developments are expected to be relevant to distributed geolibraries.
THE NATIONAL SPATIAL DATA INFRASTRUCTURE
The vision of the NSDI as expressed by the Mapping Science Committee in
1993 (NRC, 1993) did not anticipate the
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.enormous impact and potential of the Internet and WWW. By emphasizing the

problems of production of digital geoinformation, it underemphasized the

importance of effective processes of dissemination to users. User communities

are growing rapidly and are likely to grow even more rapidly if current

difficulties associated with finding geoinformation on the Internet can be

addressed.Distributed geolibraries provide a useful framework for discussion of the
issues of dissemination associated with the NSDI in addition to organization and

access issues. The vision is readily extendible to a global context.
An essential component of a distributed geolibrary is a comprehensive
gazetteer, linking named places and geographic locations. A national gazetteer

would be a valuable addition to the framework data sets of the NSDI. These

framework data sets are being coordinated by the Federal Geographic Data

Committee (FGDC), which also has the responsibility for associated standards

and protocols. Production and maintenance of the national gazetteer could be

through the National Mapping Division of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in

collaboration with other agencies and could be an extension of the USGS's

Geographic Names Information System.
CONTENTS, SERVICES, AND FUNCTIONS OF DISTRIBUTED
GEOLIBRARIESA distributed geolibrary would allow users (and computers) to specify a
requirement, search across the resources of the Internet for suitable information,

assess the fitness of that information for use, retrieve and integrate it with other

information, and perform various forms of manipulation and analysis. A

distributed geolibrary would thus integrate the browsing functions of the WWW

with those of geographic information systems and related technologies.
In addition, a distributed geolibrary would support collaborative work, such
as multidisciplinary research by teams, decision making by groups of

stakeholders, and classroom projects by
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.groups of students. It would provide mechanisms for capturing the knowledge

that results from such work and making it accessible to others as appropriate. It

could also provide mechanisms for storing and archiving such knowledge.
Many important applications of distributed geolibraries are best located in
the field, using portable systems and wireless communications. Delivery of

services to the field is important in emergency management, agriculture, natural

resource management, and many other applications.
The United States possesses vast archives of information that could be
incorporated into distributed geolibraries and made accessible to users whose

need for information is defined by geographic location. Linking much of this

information to geographic locationŠin other words, to transform it to

geoinformationŠwould be valuable within a geolibrary context.
Significant research problems will have to be solved to enable the vision of
distributed geolibraries. Research needs include problems of indexing,

visualization, scaling, automated search and abstracting, and data conflation. In

addition, there are a variety of social and institutional issues that need further

investigation. Research on these issues targeted to improve access to integrated

geoinformation might be pursued by the National Science Foundation and other

agencies sponsoring basic science, as well as by the National Mapping Division

of the USGS, and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency.
ARCHITECTURE OF DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES
There are several alternative architectures for distributed geolibraries,
including a single enterprise sponsored by a well-resourced agency, analogous to a

national library; a network of enterprises with their own sponsors, analogous to a

network or federation of libraries; and a loose network held together by shared

protocols, analogous to the WWW.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES
The development of distributed geolibraries will need to consider issues
related to intellectual property rights. These need to be considered in the broader

international debates about the nature of electronic information and databases as

intellectual property. A distinction with respect to intellectual property rights

needs to be drawn between raw data and knowledge works as they appear very

differently from the perspective of the functions and services of a library. Strong

arguments are presented for focusing distributed geolibraries on knowledge,

rather than merely providing access to raw data.
ORGANIZATIONAL ISSUES
While traditional production of geospatial data has been relatively
centralized, the vision of distributed geolibraries represents a broadly based

restructuring of past institutional arrangements for the dissemination of

geospatial data, one that is much more bottom-up, decentralized, and voluntary.
Many prototypes that include elements of a distributed geolibrary already
exist, but it will take many years to realize the full vision, and it will be important

to be able to measure and monitor progress. The vision of distributed geolibraries

has distinct aspects that may not be addressed effectively by current programs

aimed at digital libraries in general. The success of a distributed geolibrary is

largely dependent on the ability to integrate information available about a place.

That ability is severely impeded today by differences in formats and standards,

access mechanisms, and organizational structures. Integration is a formidable

problem for today's users of geospatial data.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY6
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1IntroductionThe Internet and World Wide Web (WWW) provide users with
unprecedented access to information resources. In many ways they emulate the

functions of traditional libraries, by making it possible to search and locate

information using simple tools. But the potential is far greater in areas such as

electronic commerce and in supporting new ways of finding information that go

far beyond the services of the traditional library. One such possibility is the

distributed geolibrary, the subject of this report. A distributed geolibrary would
allow its users to search the resources of the WWW for information about a

place,1 to evaluate the information, and to retrieve and work with it as
appropriate.A geolibrary is a digital library filled with geoinformation and for which
the primary search mechanism is 
place. Geoinformation is information
associated with a distinct area or footprint on the Earth's surface. A

geolibrary is distributed if its users, services, metadata, and information

assets can be integrated among many distinct locations. 
Chapter 2
develops a more detailed vision for geolibraries.
This report begins with a series of four examples to illustrate the range and
importance of the practical problems that could be addressed by the services of

distributed geolibraries. The following
1 The term 
place 
is used throughout this report to refer to a location of interest on or
near the Earth's surface. It might be a single point or an extended area or a volume above

or below the surface; it might be defined by name or by coordinates, and it might be exact

or ill-defined.INTRODUCTION7Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.chapters discuss the full vision, social and institutional context, and steps that

will need to be taken to make distributed geolibraries a reality. Because this is the

first discussion of the topic, it falls short of a complete blueprint, and much more

exploration will be needed. But this report is perhaps the first step in that

direction.Place 
is a common theme in many events, activities, emergencies, and
issues. Terrorist acts like the World Trade Center bombing and natural disasters

like Hurricane Andrew affect specific locations on the Earth's surface and call for

relief efforts that must occur quickly and that are sharply focused in space.

Accurate knowledge of the place at which an emergency occurs and of

surrounding conditions is of critical importance in dispatching ambulances and

other forms of relief. Place is important in learning about the world and in

understanding its environment.
Distributed geolibraries are intended to provide new kinds of place-based
information services that are not available from the traditional library or from the

current WWW. The user of a distributed geolibrary should not be required to be

an information retrieval expert, to be proficient in computer technology, or to live

in a metropolitan area. The distributed geolibrary envisioned in this report could

be an information service for every AmericanŠ for students and teachers,

scientists, community members, government officials, business men and women,

and familiesŠby allowing ready access to available information about any place

on the Earth's surface. The following hypothetical examples illustrate some of the

potential uses and the critical importance of distributed geolibraries.
EXAMPLESEmergency Response
A tanker truck carrying hazardous chemicals is traveling on the highway
around a major metropolitan area. Just as the driver approaches a bridge his truck

collides with the car in front of him. The truck flips, pinning both drivers inside

their vehicles and
INTRODUCTION8Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.rupturing the tanker. From the debris a plume slowly rises from the chemical

spill and is carried by the wind into the surrounding neighborhood. A liquid

chemical drips over the bridge into the water below.
To deal with the emergency, metropolitan officials need to alert schools,
residences, and businesses in the neighborhoods nearby. There has been a recent

building boom, and new roads have been constructed. Local maps are out of date.

Evacuations must be discussed and planned; routes need to be determined and

reassessed; and the effects of weather on the plume need to be monitored

continuously. Will it drift to the nearby airport as well? Meanwhile the spill must

be contained, the traffic rerouted from the accident scene, and the way cleared for

medical assistance. What human health hazards might be related to the

contaminant? Hospitals and medical centers in the affected area must be put on

alert.Dealing with the potential contamination of the river requires considerable
attention as well. What is the current rate of flow and level of the water? Who and

what will be affected? Information is immediately required on towns, public and

private sites, and beaches and harbors along the river. What access to these sites

is possible? How can containment be achieved? The fast-running river passes

many small communities and runs between two states. Data from many sources

must be integrated and used in order for officials to deal with the effects of the

accident. Other needs will emerge after the emergency is contained, such as

dealing with the effects on wildlife habitat along the river and the fishing interests

that flourish in the area.
But the immediate information needs are critical. Although emergency
officials have access to their own local sources, they know some of their own

maps are not current, so other data should also be checked. And the small towns

along the river have limited information resources. The officials need services

that allow them to access and browse available imagery, thematic maps, current

public and private data resources, and even services available through

commercial subscriptions. They need to reach other libraries
INTRODUCTION9Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and online sites that specialize in key information, including contaminants. They

need to identify personnel in other cities who have dealt with similar spills. In

short, they need access to the best information available to cope with the

emergency.Information resources through distributed geolibraries could greatly assist
rapid response to such emergencies and longer-term efforts aimed at prevention

and mitigation. Moreover, it is important that information be available where it is

needed most, which in many instances will be at the location of the emergency or

in a local command center. The tools to access and work with information may

have to operate in difficult environments using specialized field computers

(palmtops, portables, or pen computers) and wireless communication. New

sensors may be brought to the site, supplying data that will have to be integrated

with existing data. Decision makers will want access to powerful aids for decision

support and for rapid simulation of future scenarios.
Housing Relocation
A family is relocating to Southern California. They want to find a home in a
suitable environment. They are concerned about earthquake hazards and want

information that might help them avoid vulnerable areas and fault lines. After

having identified several possible home sites, they further refine their search by

excluding undesirable areasŠsuch as high-crime districts or hazardous materials

storage sites. They have read newspaper stories about brush fires. Has there been a

history of such brush fires in any of the neighborhoods they are considering?

They look at maps for the locations of churches, schools, shops, and parks.

Special medical services are needed for one family member. What services are

close? They consider distances to workplaces. They also worry about the wisdom

of such a large investment. Will their home retain value? What are the

neighborhood's economic trends?
The family wants to know about the 
place 
where they will live, work, and
play. As responsible citizens they want to be informed about issues affecting their

neighborhood. If such information is readily accessible, it could make a

significantINTRODUCTION10
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.difference in their choice of where to live. Today they might not have the

resources, skills, or special education to find the answers to all of these questions,

whereas most of this information would be available through the services of

distributed geolibraries. In the future, however, they may be able to access

information using wireless links directly to their vehicle as they explore potential

neighborhoods.Public Health
A researcher begins the task of analyzing the association of environment and
disease in a particular urban area. She needs access to housing information and

population characteristics, as well as health and medical histories in the

geographic area of interest. She needs to examine health care facilities, types of

buildings, disease rates, even summer heat fatalities, as well as environmental

aspects, all over several decades. Incidents with contaminants and pollutants in

the area must be located, assessed, and factored into her research. Finding the

information will require searches through countless government institutions,

media reports, and scientific journals.
She begins her work by visiting the local library; contacting responsible
local, state, and federal agencies, talking with colleagues; and using search

engines on the WWW. Finding the appropriate information, dealing with issues

of confidentiality of health data, and putting the information into a form that can

be integrated with other data about a given place can be time consuming;

eventual success depends heavily on her background, technical training, and

experience. Paradoxically, a request that can be expressed in very simple terms

("give me everything available about environment and disease 
in this place"
)turns out to be enormously and unreasonably complex, using the limited tools

available today, and to consume the vast majority of the resources available to the

project. Better tools for data access and management would allow more time to

be spent on data analysis.
INTRODUCTION11
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Natural Resource Planning
The year is 2010. More than 1,000 summer homes have been built within 10
miles of the boundaries of Yellowstone National Park, Grand Teton National

Park, and the Bridger-Teton Wilderness Area. Numerous pets have been killed by

grizzly bears, wolves, and coyotes, particularly in the early summer of 2009,

when heavy snowpacks kept many wild animals from moving into the high

country. The conflicts were capped by the deaths of a brother and sister, ages 7

and 8, following an attack by a grizzly bear, which was subsequently killed by

wildlife authorities.
The National Park Service and the Fish and Wildlife Service are concerned
about ever-increasing conflicts between wildlife and humans. Pressure from new

residents and from ranchers has led to the death of 20 percent of the reintroduced

wolves. Counties, once hungry for the economic growth brought by the

construction of luxury summer homes, are now concerned about degradation of

water quality and the demands of new residents that their assets be protected from

wildlife. Fire management has become an increasing concern at multiple levels of

government; officials recognize the need for frequent exposure of forests to fires

in order to reduce fuel load, but with greatly increased private property near the

forest they have found it increasingly difficult to allow fires to burn without risk

to structures.Local and federal agencies recognize the need to draw on common data
resources that describe terrain, vegetation, and wildlife habitat in order to solve

common problems of resource management. These data must be integrated across

many different themes, topics, and disciplines and must be readily available to

users needing to assess and plan effectively based on 
place.The distributed geolibraries available to these stakeholders in 2010 allow
them to assemble quickly information in the archives of the various levels of

government, nongovernmental organizations, and citizen groups that are relevant

to an issue centered at a particular 
place 
on the Earth's surface. Through
distributed geolibraries, decision makers also may learn quickly what
INTRODUCTION12
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information is not available elsewhere and therefore may need to be collected.

Additional tools support the decisions and choices that need to be made. With

these new tools, development of long-range plans that allow growth while

minimizing conflicts with fire and wildlife is progressing after long delays.

Several developments have now been completed in places where fire and wildlife

conflicts are minimized and where drainage and sewage management have

provided excellent protection of water quality.
A COMMON THEME
A common theme in these examples is the current inability to locate and
integrate information quickly and simply based on 
place. 
Although place is the
definitive element in many issues, it is currently easier to find information about a

named individual, an agency, or a field of scientific knowledge than about a place

on the Earth's surface. This report explores opportunities that will improve our

ability to find, access, integrate, and use information by exploiting the

technologies of the Internet, the WWW, geographic information systems, and

digital computers.FINDING 1
A wide variety of human activities could benefit from the services of
distributed geolibraries. They include many where the timely pro-vision of

information could minimize loss of life or result in more timely and effective

use of existing information resources and others where the costs of bad

decisions could be avoided.
Distributed geolibraries could provide information services directed
specifically at the needs of communities. In a speech given at the Brookings

Institution on September 2, 1998, Vice President Gore argued that increased

public access to information through mechanisms such as those discussed in this

report will put "more control, more information, more decision-making power

into the hands of families, communities, and regions, to give them all the freedom

and flexibility they need to reclaim their unique
INTRODUCTION13
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.place in the world." The services of distributed geolibraries that are discussed and

elaborated in this report could enhance education, improve the quality of day-to-

day living, and provide economic benefits. They could support scientific research

by furnishing new tools for search, analysis, data fusion, and visualization. They

could provide the means by which officials cope with emergencies, address

issues of health and social services, troubleshoot crime, and accomplish urban

planning. They could help provide economic benefits by enabling people to

research, manage, market, and grow their business ventures.
Many of the components of distributed geolibraries already exist or are being
developed, and many existing WWW sites offer some limited form of distributed

geolibrary services. This report goes beyond the present to articulate a vision of

what might be, with the objective of providing a common target and of pulling

disparate threads together into a unified effort to achieve that vision in the not too

distant future.INTRODUCTION14
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2A Vision for Distributed Geolibraries
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
The past two decades have seen rapid developments in information
technology. Hardware components have become smaller and more powerful,

enabling the development of the personal computer and bringing the ability to

process information to field environments that are far removed from the office

and desktop. Software has grown more sophisticated, empowering individuals

with little technical training to make effective use of computers in ways that

would have been inconceivable 25 years ago. Developments in wireless

communications allow networked access virtually anywhere. Most recently,

applications of the Internet and World Wide Web (WWW) have captured the

popular imagination and spawned entire industries of electronic commerce and

information dissemination.These developments have in turn driven massive changes in the way society
disseminates and accesses information of various types. The role that information

plays in everyday activities is changing, as people come to rely on access to up-

to-the-minute information on weather, markets, politics, and entertainment via the

Internet. Changes seem especially challenging and profound in the area of

information that is tied or related to a geographic 
place, 
that is, a location at or
near the surface of the Earth. Millions of people access such WWW sites as

MapQuest (www.mapquest.com) or Microsoft's Terraserver
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES15
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(www.terraserver.com) each day, which offer maps, driving directions, satellite
images, and other forms of raw or processed information and related services (see

Appendix D for examples). Similar changes are reflected in the proliferation of
geospatial data clearinghouses, digital spatial data libraries, geographic

information system software, and new high-resolution imaging satellites.
Several factors help explain the high level of interest in the Internet and
WWW as technologies for disseminating these particular types of information

and related services. First, the methods of storage and dissemination of

traditional productsŠpaper maps, atlases, and photographic imagesŠare

cumbersome in comparison to digital data products and often require special

cabinets and awkwardly shaped shipping packages. Digital methods make it as

easy to store or send a map as it is to handle text. Second, geoinformation is often

related to a specialized interest, and it may be hard to justify maintaining an

extensive collection in a local library or bookstore; the WWW is ideally suited to

the distribution of such information in response to specialized needs because the

costs of maintaining a server are low, and universal access to the Internet means

that only one server is needed. Finally, geoinformation needs to be timely, but it

can take years for a paper map to be produced, printed, and disseminated; the

WWW allows users to access information as soon as it is posted.
At the same time there are potential disadvantages to use of the WWW as a
mechanism for storing and disseminating geoinformation that will have to be

addressed. Little of the information now available via the WWW has been

subjected to the mechanisms that ensure quality in traditional publication and

library acquisition: peer review, editing, and proofreading. There are no WWW

equivalents of the library's collection specialists who monitor library content. But

it is easy to be misled into believing that quality control problems of the WWW

and distributed geolibraries are somehow different from conventional ones. Users

of distributed geolibraries will tend to trust data that come from
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES16
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.reputable institutions, with documented assurances of quality, and to mistrust data

of uncertain origins, just as they do today.
A common theme in all of these efforts to exploit the Internet and the WWW
has been the enabling role of technology; many people with an interest in

geoinformation and an awareness of the potential of the WWW and related

technologies like the Java programming language have begun exploring their

use. Five years after the first explosion of interest in the WWW is an appropriate

time to pause and ask some basic questions:
Ł   Is there a vision that drives the efforts to build clearinghouses and other
WWW-based access and dissemination mechanisms for

geoinformation?  What need are these efforts satisfying, from the perspectives of the users
and producers of geoinformation and the providers of related services?
  What problems impede progress, and on what problems should efforts be
expended? high-priority research needs exist?

  How should public resources best be expended, and what new forms of
collaboration are needed?
The Mapping Science Committee convened a workshop
1 in June 1998 toexplore these issues. The Workshop on Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial

Information Resources was designed to explore long-term visions of how ongoing

activities may evolve, to explore possible development strategies, and to identify

common needs (see Finding 2
). Workshop participants were selected to represent
a number of communities with interests in these issues:
1 The workshop (and this report) focused on the discovery, access, integration, and use
of geoinformation. Other technical issues (e.g., archiving, quality control and assurance,

standards development, telecommunications and computational capabilities), although

critical in the development of the distributed geolibrary concept, were not extensively

considered.A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES17
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.experts in dissemination of geoinformation; leaders of current activities;

specialists in the relevant technologies; and specialists in the associated

institutional, legal, social, and economic issues. A list of participants is provided

in Appendix A
.FINDING 2
Although many projects currently exhibit elements of the vision of
distributed geolibraries, the lack of a clear statement of that vision impedes

coordination and leads to duplication of effort. A clear statement can provide

a sense of common purpose.
Prior to the workshop, participants were asked to contribute a "white paper"
on issues they found relevant to the topic. These papers, which provided useful

background to the meeting, are listed in 
Appendix B
 and are available on the
WWW.This report was prepared by the panel that organized the workshop (a list of
panel members appears in the beginning of this report). Thus, it reflects the

consensus of the panel, regarding the discussions that took place at the workshop,

the issues that arose there and in the white papers, and the workshop's broader

context.The workshop did not attempt to bound the scope of distributed geolibraries
precisely, and even if that were possible it would have been unreasonable to

expect it in a workshop of such limited duration. Many basic questions remain

unanswered, and this report should be read as a first effort in this area and as a

stimulus for further work and discussion, rather than as a precise blueprint.
The workshop participants were almost entirely from the United States, and
this report necessarily adopts a U.S. perspective. Nevertheless it is hoped that it

will be read by non-U.S. researchers and developers interested in distributed

geolibraries and that it will help to achieve a greater degree of convergence in

research and development at the international level.
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES18
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A LIBRARY VISION
The organizers of the workshop chose to frame the discussion by reference
to the functions, services, and institutional arrangements of the library, for two

major reasons: first, to engage the library community, with its long experience in

providing access to information, in the development of a vision for a new kind of

library and, second, to provide a familiar and concrete starting point for the

discussion. It is possible that libraries will be the principal means whereby

citizens gain access to the services of the distributed geolibraries of the future; it

is also possible that libraries will play no significant part in that process.
The metaphor of the library is powerful because it immediately suggests a
number of important issues. For example, one way to think of a library is as a

storehouse of the intellectual works of society, and millions of people from all

walks of life have contributed works to our current library system. Can we expect

to see a similar diversity of contributors in the distributed geolibraries of our

future? What incentives are needed to motivate people to make their works

accessible? If a library exists to serve a community, its first responsibility should

be to provide the information needed by the community. How important is

geospatial information about the community itself, produced perhaps within the

community, compared to information about areas outside the community perhaps

produced by others? Will a local geolibrary, responsible to a local community,

acquire and make available very different works and databases than a university-

based geolibrary, state geolibrary, federal agency geolibrary, or a private

geolibrary?There are many types of libraries and much variation in the functions they
perform. Some of the comments in this report refer to all types of libraries, and

some are more appropriate for the research library, the institution maintained by a

university, or similar organization for the use of its community of scholars. In

general, it is the research library that provides the model of services discussed in

this report.
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES19
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.However, the metaphor of the library should not be taken too far, and not all

aspects of the operation of a library will be useful in envisioning distributed

geolibraries. Many of these will be generic and of no specific relevance to the

geoinformation that is the focus of distributed geolibraries. Such issues have

already been discussed at length in the library and digital library literatures, and

no attempt is made to replicate those discussions here. For example, it is assumed

that distributed geolibraries will need to address issues of archiving and

preservation (particularly serious issues given the rate of technological change in

the digital world), but these are generic to all libraries and are not discussed at

length in this report.
DEFINING A DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY
Three ideas help to define the concept of a distributed geolibrary: it is
distributed, modeled on the concept of a 
library, 
and concerned with information
about the Earth. 
The next three sections discuss these ideas in detail and build an
outline of a vision for distributed geolibraries.
A Distributed Library
The term 
distributed refers to the locations of the physical and functional
parts of the library and the locations of its users. In a traditional library the

various stages of putting useful information into the hands of users occur largely

in one place, in the physical structure known as the library. Books arrive in an

acquisitions department; they are cataloged by specialists employed by the library

in a cataloging department, placed on shelves within the library in locations

designed to make it easy for patrons to browse through holdings on similar

topics, retrieved by librarians and users, and signed out of the library at the

circulation desk operated by a circulation department. Because these functions

occur in one institution, it is sometimes difficult for an observer to separate
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES20
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.them and difficult to distinguish the functions of the library from its physical

assets.In today's digital world it is possible for functions to occur in multiple
locations, held together and coordinated by communications networks like the

Internet. Catalog staff may work in locations far removed from the reference

librarians who eventually use the catalog to help users find the information they

need. Moreover, today's technology is advancing to the point where patrons (or

users) can employ library services to combine data sets located in different

places. For many purposes the Internet provides almost infinite connectivity, such

that a user may conceive of a single database that is in reality distributed over

many different servers under different jurisdictions. Users have the option of

processing data on their own computers or sending data to remote locations

where processing capabilities are more powerful. Wireless technologies provide

for communication to virtually everywhere, and computing technology can now

be packaged into electronic units that are readily transportable and in some cases

wearable.Libraries have responded to this new networked environment by establishing
coordinated, collaborative, and multi-institutional relationships. The library

building no longer houses all of the services it provides to its users; instead, the

institution of the library obtains those services in whatever ways maximize

effectiveness and minimize costs, by using resources in the building or from a

myriad of sites distributed around the globe.
Traditionally, libraries have made a clear distinction between 
general  andspecial collections, using the latter term to refer to assets that need special
treatment or that are unique in some way to a particular library, such as the

papers of a particular literary or scientific figure. Maps and images form special

collections in many libraries, in part because they are difficult to handle and in

part because much of the collection may be unique. The transition to a digital

world will mean that many of the difficulties of 
handling 
special media
disappear, allowing such collections to become part of a library's information

mainstreamA VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES21
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(although working with maps and images will always demand specially designed

interfaces and large monitors because of their visual content and broad bandwidth

and powerful processors to deal with voluminous data). But the 
uniqueness of the
special collection will become increasingly important in the digital world, in

which any item in any collection is potentially accessible from anywhere.
In this report the term 
custodian 
refers to the person or agency responsible
for maintenance of a given data set. The custodian may be far removed from the

server on which the data set is mounted and from which it is disseminated, but

nevertheless it is the custodian who holds the definitive version of the data and

updates it to account for changes. The custodian may have some form of

responsibility for qualityŠfor example, the custodian may decide which data are

to be acquired and held based in part on quality or may provide assurances of

quality to users. The function of a custodian is different from that of a

repository or 
archive, 
which is where data are preserved in static form.
GeoinformationGeoinformation is information that is specific to some part of the Earth's
surface or near surface. It includes maps, of course, which abstract and present

information about the locations of phenomena on the surface; it also includes

images from the air or space (aerial photos or remotely sensed images) that

capture the appearance of the surface using energy (either visible or invisible)

radiated from it in some part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Such data were

earlier defined as 
geospatial. In addition, geoinformation includes the contents of
guidebooks, reports on specific areas, data sets with a geographic dimension, and

any other information assets that serve to differentiate one geographic area from

another. Finally, it includes information about the atmosphere above the surface,

the geology below the surface, and the oceans that cover two-thirds of the planet's

surface.All of these information assets are characterized by having some form of
associated geographic 
footprint, a boundary defining
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES22
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the geographic extent of the information, which is the defining characteristic of

geoinformation as the term is used here. A map sheet has a footprint defined by

its edges, whereas a guidebook to Moscow has a footprint of the city limits (or

the city and the surrounding region). A photograph might have a footprint,

defined as the area shown in the photograph; a piece of music (George

Gershwin's "An American in Paris," for example) might also be associated with

some particular location on the Earth's surface. Moreover, 
the footprint provides a
useful way of finding information. 
Just as author, subject, and title are ways of
finding information assets in a traditional library, so the footprint of

geoinformation gives the library the ability to identify all those assets that fit a

given geographic query. For example, if information assets in the library had a

footprint, it would be possible to identify those assets relevant to a user wanting

information on the state of Missouri, or the Caspian Sea, by determining whether

the footprint of the asset matched the footprint of the query in whole or in part. It

would be possible to ask the library to provide all available information about a

given place that is relevant to a defined need, in other words "everything relevant

about there."While the space of a search based on author or subject is discrete,
geographic space is continuous and multidimensional, and there is no limit to the

number of distinct, unique footprints that exist. Any degree of overlap is possible

between a footprint and a query, making search by place inherently more complex

than search by other keys. Geographic location is sometimes recorded in the

subject fields of library catalogs (for example, the Melvyl catalog of the

University of California library system includes a place-related subject in about

30 percent of all records), and it is included in the Dublin Core standard

(purl.org/dc). But distributed geolibraries would prioritize place as the primary
key and thus would require that footprints be explicit in all cases.
Two distinct methods are available for specification of footprints. An area of
interest may correspond to one or more 
place names, 
or recognized terms for
describing location. Alternatively, the area may be defined by one or more

boundingA VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES23
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.coordinates, in some recognized system such as latitude and longitude. To be

compatible, the two methods require the services of a 
gazetteer, 
 or an index that
relates named places to coordinates. Gazetteers are commonly used to index

atlases, though as the name suggests they typically include only places whose

names have some level of official recognition.
The issues surrounding place as a search key are to some extent similar to
those surrounding time, or date. All of the examples in 
Chapter 1 require search
by place, in many cases qualified by relevant intervals or points in time; perhaps

it is possible to devise parallel examples that would require search by time,

possibly qualified by place, to motivate the development of 
chronolibraries. Similarly, an important but less compelling case can be made for a three-

dimensional approach to space, based on examples of data that relate to points

substantially above or below the Earth's surface.
Spatial keys are not unique to geoinformation, and there are parallels to
other domains that may be useful and informative in the development of

distributed geolibraries. For example, the Hytime hypermedia document

structuring language (Newcombe 
et al., 
1991) includes standards for specification
of spatial windows in arbitrary coordinate systems within documents.
Geoinformation can be cumbersome for the traditional library because it
comes in many forms, on different media, and because there is no simple basis

for cataloging it. Instead, map libraries and other stores of geoinformation have

had to maintain expensive and highly trained staffs to help users navigate through

their information resources, and users have had to look to numerous sources to

meet their geoinformation needs. Users of geoinformation were often highly

trained experts, knowledgeable about sources, data quality, acronyms, and other

tools of the geoinformation trade. In short, there has been no way for an average

person to address a library with the query "tell me everything you have about that

place that is relevant to me." Yet such queries are common and immensely
important to a wide
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES24
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.range of human activities, as the examples in the opening chapter illustrate.
Although it is helpful to think of a distributed geolibrary as a container of
the digital equivalent of maps, that metaphor may also be unduly limiting.

Geoinformation is not restricted to information that is static, or two-dimensional,

but includes information on the dynamic processes and changes happening at a

place, and three-dimensional data about the atmosphere and subsurface. But as

noted earlier, the two horizontal dimensions are most likely to be the basis for

search, possibly refined by time and the vertical dimension.
Characteristics of a Distributed Geolibrary
One way to think about a geolibrary (in a world of paper documents) is to
imagine walking into a library building and being confronted not with a card

catalog, or its modern digital equivalent, but with a giant physical globe. Suppose

what is needed is information about a particular part of Patagonia, the southern

extremity of Argentina, for a project on Charles Darwin, who visited Patagonia,

or on the people of Welsh descent who live there, or on the works of author Bruce

Chatwin, who wrote about his travels there. The library user finds Patagonia on

the globe, points to it, and asks a nearby librarian about the relevant assets of the

library. Some minutes later the librarian produces a list of those assets, with

enough information to allow the user to evaluate their importance to the project.

After the user narrows the list, the librarian disappears again, to return with the

requested holdings.
Several aspects of this concept ensure that it has remained in the realms of
fiction for as long as libraries have existed. Some aspects are technological. There

is no way to build a physical globe that can be repositioned at will or magnified

on demand to display greater and greater detail. Zooming would need to be

possible over several orders of magnitude; a large globe might reasonably be

expected to show features on the Earth's surface that are 10 km in size, including

large lakes and large cities, but not features as small as a neighborhood; but the

user of a geolibrary
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES25
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.might well want to consider a single city block, which requires a resolution finer

than 10 m, or a factor of 1,000 finer than the initial coarse view. Such resolutions

are increasingly common in geospatial data.
In addition to resolution, a physical geolibrary would be difficult to build
because many of its users would not be able to find their areas of interest on the

globe. Not every user would be able to reposition and zoom to identify his or her

own neighborhood, without the assistance of an expert. There are not enough

resources to support the necessary expert librarians and no way to transform

automatically a specified location into a list of assets. Finally, there is no way to

shelve the many different types of information so that they can be easily retrieved

and so that two sources of information on similar topics or areas are located near

each other in the library. In other words, a physical geolibrary cannot be built.
In a digital world, however, all of these objections disappear, apparently
without exception. It is possible to present the digital library user with a picture

of a globe; search for locations by name, address, or any other suitable and

convenient method; allow repositioning and zooming; search distributed archives

for information assets whose footprints match the query, present them to the user

in sufficient detail to permit evaluation; and deliver them for further examination

and analysis. But although a geolibrary is possible in principle, there are

countless technical, practical, economic, and institutional problems that will have

to be overcome. Moreover, it is unclear how a geolibrary would deal with issues

of intellectual property and how it could be paid for and whether the costs would

be outweighed by the benefits. These issues are explored in greater detail in

Chapter 3.A distributed geolibrary would provide a much more sophisticated and
powerful layer of services above the Internet and the WWW (
Figure 2.1). TheInternet provides the means of communication between computers, using the

TCP/IP standard. The WWW is supported by the Internet, providing services that

allow any user to access information provided by any server. But
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES26
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the combination of the two technologies falls far short of the services of a

distributed geolibrary:
Figure 2.1.
Distributed geolibraries as a third layer 

of services above the WWW and the Internet.
  The WWW does not have an equivalent of the library's carefully
constructed catalog of assets. Search services such as AltaVista, Yahoo,

and eBLAST that substitute for the services of a WWW catalog are

crude imitations of the sophisticated skills of information abstraction

possessed by the professional librarian.
  The number of WWW servers is now on the order of 10
7 and increasingrapidly. Even the most powerful of today's search engines can access no

more than one-third of what is currently available, and this proportion

decreases daily (National Public Radio report dated 3 April 1998 in a

recent article in 
Science).  Footprints and other essential information are not normally present in
WWW information resources, and there are limited tools to look for them

or to determine them automatically. 
Chapter 4 of this report discusses
existing efforts to develop some of these services, and 
Appendix Dincludes examples of current projects
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES27
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and sites that offer some of the services of distributed libraries, such as

the University of California's Alexandria Digital Library.
Ł   Users must rely on personal knowledge to find sites that contain needed
information assets and must learn the specific protocols used by each

site.  There are no generally available services for combining information from
multiple sources or for support of analysis, visualization, and

interpretation of geoinformation by the user, although such services have

been developed in limited contexts, including U.S. Department of

Defense applications.In other words, a distributed geolibrary would constitute a level of services
above those provided by the Internet and the WWW, geared to specific user

needs. Distributed geolibrary services offer the potential for more intelligent

organization and access, for the creation of new knowledge through analysis of

raw data, and for the solution of practical problems. As such, distributed

geolibraries are one of a number of new types of Internet services that exploit

previously impractical ways of organizing and presenting information.
DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES AND THE NATIONAL
SPATIAL DATA INFRASTRUCTURE
"The National Spatial Data Infrastructure is the means to assemble
geographic information
2 that describes the arrangement and attributes of features
and phenomena on the Earth. The infrastructure includes the materials,

technology, and people necessary to acquire, process, 
store, 
and distribute suchinformation to meet a wide variety of needs" (National Research Council, 1993,

p. 2, emphasis added). The concept emerged in the
2 The term 
geographic information 
here is synonymous with 
geospatial data as definedin Chapter 1. But as noted earlier in this chapter, many additional types of information
qualify as geoinformation by virtue of having a geographic footprint.
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES28
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.early 1990s in response to a number of potentially critical trends that were

affecting the nation's supply of geospatial information and related services and

institutions:  Budgets in the federal public sector were declining and were no longer
able to meet the nation's growing needs for high-quality, current

geospatial data at minimal cost to users.
  Improved and cheaper mapping technology was empowering local and
state governments to produce their own geospatial data to meet local

needs and stimulating a growing private-sector industry.
  Advances in digital technology were making it possible to integrate and
analyze geospatial data and support decisions in more powerful ways.
The Mapping Science Committee's report 
Toward a Coordinated Spatial
Data Infrastructure for the Nation 
(National Research Council, 1993) and the
efforts of many other individuals and agencies led in 1994 to Executive Order

12906, by which President Clinton ordered the development of the National

Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI). Since then, several other committee reports

and extensive efforts by the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC),

National States Geographic Information Council (NSGIC), National Association

of Counties (NACO), and other groups have refined the concept of the NSDI and

demonstrated its power and effectiveness (Tosta and Domaratz, 1997; Moeller,

1998; Rhind, 1999).
FINDING 3
The contents of a distributed geolibrary are not limited to information
normally associated with maps or images of the Earth's surface but include

any information that can be associated with a geographic location. In this

sense the vision extends far beyond the context of the NSDI.
When the NSDI was defined in 1993, few users or producers of geospatial
data made much use of the Internet, and
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES29
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the WWW was virtually unknown; the first popular browser, Mosaic, was

released by the National Center for Supercomputer Applications early that year.

Although there was much emphasis on digital geospatial data, the primary

method of dissemination was by magnetic tape; there were virtually no digital

online catalogs of geospatial data and no methods for searching for data across

computer networks. Moreover, since most useful geospatial data were produced

by a small number of federal agencies, there was little problem locating the

appropriate source. WAIS (Wide Area Information Service) was the first of

several network-based technologies that rapidly changed the nature of geospatial

data dissemination over the next few years. Today, applications on the WWW

have grown into an enormously successful tool, and have had a profound impact

on the entire environment for geoinformation acquisition (National Academy of

Public Administration, 1998). At the same time, the WWW has presented a

growing problem in its inability to deal effectively with the problems of

discovering what geoinformation exists and locating an appropriate source, as the

number of potential suppliers has mushroomed.
FINDING 4
The vision of the NSDI as expressed by the Mapping Science
Committee in 1993 (National Research Council, 1993) did not anticipate the

enormous impact and potential of the Internet and WWW. By emphasizing

the problems of production of digital geoinformation, it underemphasized the

importance of effective processes of dissemination to users of

geoinformation. User communities are growing rapidly and are likely to grow

even more rapidly if the current difficulties associated with finding

geoinformation on the Internet can be addressed.
This report and related efforts in general can be understood therefore as an
updating of the Mapping Science Committee's concept of the NSDI in the era of

the WWW. In organizing this effort and producing this report, the committee is

expressing its
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES30
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.view that the WWW has added a new and radically different dimension to its

earlier conception of the NSDI, one that is much more user oriented, much more

effective in maximizing the value of the nation's geoinformation assets, and much

more cost effective as a data dissemination mechanism. Distributed geolibraries

reflect the same basic thinking about the future of geospatial data, with its

emphases on sharing, universal access, and productivity but in the context of a

technology that was not widely accessible prior to 1993.
FINDING 5
Distributed geolibraries provide a useful framework for discussion of the
issues of dissemination associated with the NSDI. The vision is readily

extendible to a global context.
The NSDI fits well with the description of infrastructure provided by Star
and Ruhleder (1996, pp. 111-112):
"It is both engine and barrier for change; both customizable and rigid; both

inside and outside organizational practices. It is product and process. . . . With

the rise of decentralized technologies used across wide geographical distance,

both the need for common standards and the need for situated, tailorable and

flexible technologies grow stronger."
Their defining dimensions of infrastructure provide useful guidance to the
development of distributed geolibraries: they would be 
embedded  in other
structures, social arrangements, and technologies; their 
reach or scope 
wouldextend beyond a single site or practice; their procedures would be 
learned as part
of membership 
of an organization or group; they would be 
linked with
conventions or practice 
of day-to-day work; they would be the 
embodiment of
standards and would 
build upon an installed base; 
and they would be 
visible onbreakdown, 
since we would be most aware of them when they failed to work.
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES31
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES AND DIGITAL EARTH
Distributed geolibraries bear a strong resemblance to certain aspects of the
concept of Digital Earth, a concept that was defined by Vice President Gore in

January 1998 and summarized in a speech given in Los Angeles. The vision is

aptly summarized in the following extract:
"Imagine, for example, a young child going to a Digital Earth exhibit at a local

museum. After donning a head-mounted display, she sees Earth as it appears

from space. Using a data glove, she zooms in, using higher and higher levels of

resolution, to see continents, then regions, countries, cities, and finally

individual houses, trees, and other natural and man-made objects. Having found

an area of the planet she is interested in exploring, she takes the equivalent of a

'magic carpet ride' through a 3-D visualization of the terrain. Of course, terrain is

only one of the numerous kinds of data with which she can interact. Using the

system's voice recognition capabilities, she is able to request information on land

cover, distribution of plant and animal species, real-time weather, roads,

political boundaries, and population. She can also visualize the environmental

information that she and other students all over the world have collected as part

of the GLOBE project. This information can be seamlessly fused with the digital

map or terrain data. She can get more information on many of the objects she

sees by using her data glove to click on a hyperlink. To prepare for her family's

vacation to Yellowstone National Park, for example, she plans the perfect hike to

the geysers, bison, and bighorn sheep that she has just read about. In fact, she

can follow the trail visually from start to finish before she ever leaves the

museum in her hometown.
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES32
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.She is not limited to moving through space, but can also travel through time.

After taking a virtual field-trip to Paris to visit the Louvre, she moves backward

in time to learn about French history, perusing digitized maps overlaid on the

surface of the Digital Earth, newsreel footage, oral history, newspapers and

other primary sources. She sends some of this information to her personal e-mail

address to study later. The time-line, which stretches off in the distance, can be

set for days, years, centuries, or even geological epochs, for those occasions

when she wants to learn more about dinosaurs.''
Digital Earth is also the title of a project
3 of several years' standing at
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, which also contains elements of the Vice

President's vision. It is also associated with a plan to place a satellite (tentatively

named "Triana") between the Earth and the Sun to deliver real-time images of the

sunlit Earth to a global audience.
Like distributed geolibraries, Digital Earth is about making use of the vast
but uncoordinated masses of geoinformation now becoming available via the

Internet and about presenting it in a form that is readily accessible to the general

user. Like distributed geolibraries, its central metaphor for the organization of

information is the surface of the Earth and 
place as a key to information access.
In a similar vein the U.S. Geological Survey is exploring the Earth's surface as

the organizing metaphor for public access to its data resources, and similar ideas

are surfacing in other agencies (see 
Appendix D
).Learning about places on the Earth is a strong theme in Vice President
Gore's vision for Digital Earth and a strong motivation for distributed

geolibraries. While the prevailing metaphor for human-computer interaction is

the office or desktop, that metaphor may not be particularly helpful in organizing

information about the Earth. Instead, access to a distributed geolibrary could be

through the visual metaphor of the Earth's surface itself; a student
3 http://holodeck.gsfc.nasa.gov/digitalearth/digitalearth.html
A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES33
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.interested in Thailand would manipulate a globe on screen until it centers on

Thailand and then zoom in for more detail, as in the Digital Earth vision.

Distributed geolibraries might make a useful contribution to the educational

opportunities of digital libraries, as outlined, for example, in previous reports on

digital libraries for science, mathematics, engineering, and technical education

(see Corporation for National Research Initiatives, 1998; National Research

Council, 1998).The library service model that underlies the concept of distributed
geolibraries provides a useful way of structuring discussion and of thinking about

the resources and research that will be needed to make the vision a reality.

Chapter 3 discusses some of the societal and institutional challenges to realizing
distributed geolibraries. Addressing many of these policy issues is crucial to

creating a conducive atmosphere for considering the potential services and

functions of distributed geolibraries (see 
Chapter 4) and the technical
developments needed to build distributed geolibraries (see 
Chapter 5).A VISION FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES34
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3The Distributed Geolibrary in Societal and
Institutional Context
Implementation of a distributed geolibrary presents a host of challenges,
ranging from the technical to the societal and institutional. The latter are

discussed in this chapter; technical issues are discussed in 
Chapter 4.The policy challenges presented by distributed geolibraries include the
following:  What are the legal, ethical, and political issues involved in creating
distributed geolibraries? What problems must be addressed in the area of

intellectual property rights? How will these issues affect the technical

development of distributed geolibraries?
  Who will pay for the creation and maintenance of distributed
geolibraries? What components might be in the public domain versus

those provided by the commercial sector?
This chapter addresses many of these issues from the perspective of
geoinformation at the local level, how distributed geolibraries might build off the

library model (and how traditional libraries have addressed or handled some of

these societal and institutional issues), and some of the additional issues

introduced by the digital context of distributed geolibraries. These issues are not

necessarily unique to distributed geolibraries as many have been discussed

extensively within the context of recent digital library programs. The intention

here is not to review or paraphrase excellent surveys of the social context of

digital libraries, such as that of Borgman 
et al. (1996), which readers interested in a
broader perspective should consult.
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT35
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOCAL FOCUS
Five years ago discussions regarding geospatial data in the United States
focused on the rapidly increasing use of such data throughout society and the

need to create a more formal infrastructure to coordinate geospatial data coverage

across the nation, minimize redundant data collection at all levels, and create new

opportunities for use throughout the nation (National Research Council, 1993).

Much has been accomplished. Concepts such as metadata standards, standard

framework databases, and thematic databases have been developed and pursued

(see www.fgdc.gov). The federal government in cooperation with state and local
governments has been and continues to be well positioned to lead the

development of the basic concepts and public domain databases upon which the

NSDI is being built.
The NSDI now involves many stakeholders as a result of activities over the
past five years. Its basic data will be assembled from diverse institutions

throughout the nation, with institutions contributing those parts that are most

relevant to their roles (Tosta and Domaratz, 1997; Moeller, 1998; Rhind, 1999).

At the core of this vision is the concept of local generation of geoinformation.

Geoinformation is inherently local in nature and of greatest importance to those in

that local area. It makes sense that the tens of thousands of units of local

governments in the United States understand their own geoinformation assets and

needs far better than do higher levels of government.
New developments in technology make it possible for local people to gather
local data germane to their own needs more readily, extract data from online and

other electronic repositories, develop the information products they need, use the

products for decision making, and contribute their locally gathered

geoinformation and derived products to libraries or other repositories. Developing

the technical and institutional means to support incorporation of local knowledge

into networked repositories presents a novel challenge.
Stakeholders across the nation are beginning to think and act around more
common visions for the NSDI. A library service model
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT36
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.provides an initial way to consider the organizational and institutional

arrangements for finding and accessing the geoinformation assets and digital

products being generated by numerous stakeholders across the nation.
LIBRARY CONSIDERATIONS
The Library as an Institution
In considering possible institutional arrangements for distributed
geolibraries, we begin with the assumption that libraries are social institutions

that will continue to change but will not be made obsolete by the advent of

electronic publishing. Indeed, distributed geolibraries and digital libraries in

general will complement the traditional activities of libraries and related

institutions. Libraries respond to many complex societal needs. They are used for

research, teaching, self-learning, and entertainment. They serve as social and

activity centers for many communities, whether these be small towns,

neighborhoods, or institutions. The opportunities that libraries provide range from

learning about practical matters to exploring science, art, history, or literature for

the sheer pleasure of doing so. They are places for children to learn how to read

and places for disadvantaged members of communities to seek solutions and

solace (Crawford and Gorman, 1995, p. 118). The library system serves as a

repository and by doing so preserves most aspects of our culture. Libraries range

from small to large, urban to rural, and public to private but cooperate through a

common professional culture and set of procedures, sharing information for

mutual benefit. In short: "libraries exist to acquire, give access to, and safeguard

carriers of knowledge and information in all forms and to provide instruction and

assistance in the use of the collections to which their users have

access" (Crawford and Gorman, 1995, p. 3).
Libraries have incorporated information technologies in all aspects of library
services. Most recently, libraries have embraced network-based programs that

support collaboration among
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT37
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.institutions and the sharing of resources. In addition, consortia have been

established on state, regional, and library-type bases throughout the United States

to share information, negotiate licenses, engage in collection development, and

for many other purposes. A useful distributed geolibrary of the future will need to

participate in these activities as an entity that will accumulate, make available,

and conserve electronic carriers of georeferenced knowledge.
Economic Considerations
Existing public libraries do not buy most books or subscribe to most
magazines or journals, yet they are highly valued by the estimated two-thirds of

American adults who use them (Crawford and Gorman, 1995, p. 127). A typical

robust public library will lend out 10 items per person per year based on the

population served by the library and will answer two questions per person per

year for its service population. Typical circulation of a robust library is twice its

content (i.e., a library with a collection of 1 million volumes will lend out 2

million volumes during the year). In-library use of volumes in poor and rural

communities often exceeds circulation, and in-library use at academic libraries

often exceeds circulation by two to three times.
Public libraries provide these high use and service rates at a cost of
approximately five cents per day per capita for their service population, while

public libraries in economically healthy areas aspire to 10 cents per day per capita

as a reasonable starting point for funding a robust library (Crawford and Gorman,

1995, p. 139). These expenditures appear to be a bargain for the access and

services provided, and any proposal for supplanting current library services with

electronic services would need to compare costs realistically.
Conversely, would an electronic digital library be available to at least the
two-thirds of American adults who currently use existing libraries? Would it

serve children and the disadvantaged to the same extent or greater than existing

library facilities and resources?THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT38
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.There is an economic conundrum that in the face of a proportionately higher
demand some communities might not have the available resources to support

distributed electronic delivery services, even though the delivery technology is

dropping in price. In terms of distributed geolibraries, this may be an issue, as a

recent survey of public libraries in Colorado (Gayon, 1998) indicates that rural

libraries receive a larger than expected proportion of requests for geographic

information (maps, images, and digital data).
Libraries have the effect, although not a priority purpose, of introducing
library users to works, authors, and publishers. Libraries thereby serve the

economic function of creating markets for intellectual works. Would a geolibrary

have the same effect? These are some of the institutional questions that will need

to be addressed as the technological capabilities for distributed geolibraries are

built over time.Distributed Geolibraries and the Existing Library Institution
Might distributed geolibraries develop as part of existing library
arrangements or complement them? Although the possibility exists that

distributed geolibraries might develop in tandem with libraries and be

interconnected with them, the duplication of all the roles of libraries in a new

institutional environment would make little sense. A useful analysis of these

issues is presented by Hawkins (1994) in the context of digital libraries. Indeed,

the way distributed geolibraries evolve will depend in large part on access to

resources in existing library institutions.
Some of those things that traditional libraries have never been able to do
well might be better done by digital means. One of these functions might be the

provision of access to geoinformation. The size and shape of the sheets on which

paper maps are produced often depend on the information or the story that the

cartographer is attempting to convey graphically, the scale required to present

information adequately, and the shape of the geographic area being addressed.

Owing to the wide variability in map sizes and the nonstandard placement of

information on them, the classification, cataloging, and storage of maps have

been far
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT39
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.more problematic for librarians than handling books, journals, magazines, and

recordings. Thus, in some instances, maps may be ineffective uses of print on

paper, and many maps might be better represented, accessed, and used in digital

form.Thus, the advent of distributed geolibraries is likely to alter the relative
advantages of paper and electronic map production. Paper map collections in

libraries are unlikely to be completely eliminated. Because of the increasing user

friendliness of mapping software and the ready availability of digital

geoinformation, the ability to produce sophisticated maps and communicate

through them is now available to many more people. As a result, we may witness

substantial increases in both paper and digital maps that may be of interest to

members of communities and made available in their local libraries.
Although a geolibrary is defined earlier in this report as digital in nature, any
practical or useful geolibrary from an institutional perspective will need to be

able to accommodate a multiplicity of forms for conveying knowledge. The

various means and forms for conveying geographic knowledge each have

weaknesses and strengths. Diversity in the means for conveying knowledge is a

good thing. The institutional geolibrary must maintain a complex

multidimensional web of mixed media, knowledge sources, collections, and

services (Crawford and Gorman, 1995, p. 78). The expectation is that this will be

accomplished by merging and embedding geolibrary technological advancements

into the existing library information infrastructure of the nation.
DATA, INFORMATION, AD KNOWLEDGE
Geolibraries should play a key role in providing access to carriers of
geographic knowledge. In addition, some geolibraries also will want to focus on

providing access to the ability to process geographic data. In one sense, all a

distributed geolibrary need consist of is a good gazetteer in which users can look

up information based on location. The "look up" might be accomplished by

drawing a box around an area on a computer screen or by indicating a name
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT40
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of a place or specifying other information contained in the metadata for a

particular item of geoinformation. This would allow a user to find out whether

geoinformation covering an area of concern exists in the geolibrary network. If

databases exist, the system returns metadata on them so the user can further

assess the nature and utility of the databases. Performing this role is consistent

with the traditional role of libraries. In addition, gazetteers are one of the prime

examples of library documents that were never very efficient in paper form.

Conversion to electronic form makes sense since both searching of the gazetteer

and updating are made much easier.
If it is legal to copy the databases located through the electronic gazetteer
(e.g., public domain geographic databases) or to "check them out" from the

holdings within the distributed geolibrary (e.g., the conditions of lending might

be determined by licensing agreements), the distributed geolibrary as an

institution should be capable of supporting these functions. That is, direct access

to the library's holdings should be provided. Again, this function is parallel to and

compatible with the traditional roles of the library as an institution.
The level of services and functions (see 
Chapter 4) provided by the
traditional library can be different in geolibraries. Should the services and

functions of distributed geolibraries extend beyond providing users with efficient

access to the geoinformation in the library's holdings? Or do the technologies that

could be provided by distributed geolibraries extend the services and functions in

an attempt to provide answers to complex questions rather than guide users to

resources where answers may (or may not) be found?
To place this concern in context, we should first define some terms, although
no attempt is made here to add to the extensive literature on the nature of

information (see, for example, Buckland, 1991; Losee, 1997). The terms listed in

the following order are sometimes used to describe an ascending continuum:

data, information, knowledge, understanding, and wisdom. Crawford and Gorman

(1995, p. 5) define these terms as follows:
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT41
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DataFacts and other raw material that may be processed into useful

information.InformationData processed and rendered useful.
KnowledgeInformation transformed into meaning through action of the human

mind, such that it can be recorded and transmitted.
Understanding
Knowledge integrated with a world view and a personal

perspective, existing entirely within the human mind.
WisdomUnderstanding made whole and generative within the human mind.
Whereas the substantive content and focus of geographic infrastructure
building have focused on data and information (e.g., the NSDI), the substantive

content of traditional libraries has focused on collections of knowledge and to a

lesser extent collections of information. Traditional libraries collect and catalog

primarily knowledge works for good reason. The reading and contemplation of

works of knowledge such as books and journals provide context and convey

meaning. Currently, such works are one of the best means by which we are able

to acquire understanding. "Works of knowledge" are largely synonymous with

"intellectual works" and are thus the primary expressions protected by our

intellectual property laws.
Intellectual Property Concerns
The goal of copyright law, and the effect of copyright law in library
settings, has been to strike a balance between giving authors sufficient incentive

to make their works available on the one hand and supporting the rights of users

to use the intellectual works of others for socially constructive purposes on the

other. This balance is complex, but the balance in interests supported by our

current intellectual property laws has made libraries highly successful and valued

social institutions. A similar balance of interests has not yet been achieved in the

online world. A background discussion of current intellectual property and

copyright issues
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT42
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.possibly related to distributed geolibraries appears at the end of this chapter.
There is a growing collection of geoinformation available online that is in
the public domain because no copyright can exist in some databases due to their

nature (e.g., those with no creativity or originality in the arrangement of facts).

Claims of copyright in some databases have been rescinded by the authors, and

the copyright for other works has expired. Additionally, there are the equivalents

of online bookstores and online mapstores that sell or license databases to

customers. For the commercial products, libraries have explored several licensing

arrangements that attempt to bring together commercial interests and public

rights interests to arrive at solutions that support the interests of all stakeholders

(see, for example, Barker et al., 1995, and Gladney and Lotspiech, 1998).
In the vision of distributed geolibraries, there is a possibility of creating
knowledge and making it available through the distributed geolibrary itself; this

raises additional concerns about the status of such derivative knowledge from the

perspective of rights and intellectual property. Collections of information, by

contrast, gain very little protection under copyright law principles.
FINDING 6
Developers of distributed geolibraries will need to consider issues
related to intellectual property rights. There are significant differences in

both the public access library model and the commercial bookstore model

that need to be considered in the broader international debates about the

nature of electronic information and databases as intellectual property.
Uses of Data, Information, and Knowledge
Suppose a student wishes to know more about Yosemite National Park and
has access through a distributed geolibrary to two different types of information: a

digital elevation model (DEM), giving the elevations of points spaced 30 m apart

across the park; and a landscape description by John Muir. In principle both are

descriptions of terrain, but one is a raw database of measurements
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT43
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in the public domain, and the other is a creative knowledge work. In another

example the couple searching for a home in 
Chapter 1 might access either a
database of socioeconomic statistics or a collection of news reports on the

changing characters of neighborhoods.
Both types of information are valuable, depending on the circumstances and
the skills and requirements of their users. To a distributed geolibrary they both

look like collections of bits with footprints, and both are retrievable using the

same mechanisms. Traditionally, one might have looked for the raw data in a data

archive, such as the EROS Data Center of U.S. Geological Survey, or a Census

data center, and for the description in a library. But distributed geolibraries would

provide a unified means of access.
In doing so, however, geolibraries raise issues concerning the relative value
of the two types of information. To a specialist equipped with sophisticated tools

of analysis, the raw data may be more useful than the landscape description and

more acceptable as a source of information for scientific understanding. To a

student without sophisticated tools, only the description may be of value.

Moreover, the work of the scientist may result in the production of new data, to

be fed back into the distributed geolibrary for use by others (such as estimates of

solar radiation based on topography combined with a suitable numerical model)

or the production of knowledge works in the form of journal articles, which

might also be added to the distributed geolibrary. In this sense a distributed

geolibrary would be much more than a repository of knowledge because it would

support the creation of new knowledge by individuals or groups, in addition to

the dissemination of existing knowledge. A student might wish to create personal

knowledge as a result of investigation and use a geolibrary to share that

knowledge with others in the class.
Both forms of information seem indispensable. There are many questions of
a geographic nature that cannot be answered by a 
right answer but require careful
reflection based on both data and prior knowledge works. Providing new data

query, search, and display capabilities and services may be important in 
some distributedTHE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT44
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.geolibraries but providing access to digital works of knowledge is likely to be

important in all distributed geolibraries.FINDING 7
A distributed geolibrary would support collaborative work, such as
multidisciplinary research by teams, decision making by groups of

stakeholders, and classroom projects by groups of students. It would

provide mechanisms for capturing the knowledge that results from such

work and making it accessible to others as appropriate.
In summary, a distinction needs to be drawn between raw data and
knowledge works because they appear different from the perspective of the

functions and services of a library and with respect to intellectual property rights.

Although the NSDI is concerned primarily with the production and dissemination

of raw geospatial data, distributed geolibraries could also provide an effective

mechanism for the dissemination of knowledge.
ACCESSThe concept of access in an institutional distributed geolibrary environment
has two major aspects. One involves technical efficiency and effectiveness in

finding desired geoinformation, determining its appropriateness and authenticity,

linking to and acquiring it, and electronically processing it if needed. To enable

such access, knowledge works and databases must exist somewhere on the

network with sufficient metadata and tools available in the system to allow these

tasks to be accomplished.
The second major aspect of access involves the legal and economic ability
of the distributed geolibrary as an institution to provide the geoinformation

resources desired by its users, either directly or through the network. If access to

intellectual works is barred by legal or economic constraints, powerful

computational capabilities and user-friendly search software will not be of any

use to the user. Legal rights to materials may alone be an insufficient condition,

but they are a critical and necessary condition for access. Acquiring legal rights to

intellectual works
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT45
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and databases can cause a financial burden on the distributed geolibrary and the

community it serves.
Although distributed geolibrary collections might be anywhere, they must be
somewhere. Those institutions or people with the greatest vested interest in

ensuring that specific geoinformation is available, maintained, and accessible are

logical candidates for providing those specific collections and resources for

distributed geolibraries. For instance, local libraries typically focus on the needs

of the local community, and therefore local geolibraries would likely be the

primary collectors and maintainers of local geographic information of relevance

to local culture.
Another major assumption in the traditional library model is that acquisition
or access to commercially provided geoinformation will be through institutional,

not individual, payments (Hawkins, 1994). Equity is a fundamental principle of

library access. To uphold this principle, the community rather than the individual

typically pays for the library and its services (Crawford and Gorman, 1995, p.

101). Just as the poorest Americans can freely borrow books from public

libraries, so too should they have equitable access to geolibrary services if a

community library chooses to provide those services.
An unanswered issue that will be continually debated in the distributed
geolibrary vision is that of access to geoinformation in the public domain and

traditional library services versus access to geoinformation and services that are

only available on a commercial basis. Embedded in this issue are additional

issues of public and private rights and intellectual property. These issuesŠmost

of which are not unique to distributed geolibrariesŠare being debated in the

broader library community and the digital information arena (see, for example,

two 1997 National Research Council reportsŠ
Bits of Power: Issues in Global
Access to Scientific Data 
and More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every Citizen
Interfaces to the Nation's Information Infrastructure).
In pursuing solutions there is a pressing need to develop new legal,
economic, and institutional models that support the public goods benefits of

traditional libraries while providing sufficient incentives for private individuals,

private publishers, and
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT46
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.government publishers to make their geoinformation available through distributed

geolibrary settings. The practical benefits and drawbacks of institutional models

will need to be thoroughly explored from economic, legal, and organizational

perspectives. Prototype models will need to be developed and tested. It is highly

likely that the most appropriate incentive models for private-sector firms will vary

from the incentive models that might best encourage local, state, and federal

agencies to make their databases available through distributed geolibrary

environments.SUMMARY AND ADDITIONAL ISSUES
This chapter discussed many institutional and societal issues that will have to
be addressed by distributed geolibraries, especially if they attempt to replicate

many of the services and functions of the traditional library. The major issues are

summarized in this section, together with other issues that appear important but

were not discussed at length at the workshop.
1. How will local needs for and production of geoinformation be
accommodated in a library system that has traditionally emphasized

access to books and information with a more general than local

focus?2. Libraries are addressing the need for access to electronic information
by developing consortia and networks. How will these new

institutional arrangements accommodate and affect the development

of distributed geolibraries?
3. Traditional libraries play a significant role in archiving and
preserving information. Can this role be accommodated by

distributed geolibraries?
4. How can distributed geolibraries deal with inequities of access to
electronic systems?
5. Will distributed geolibraries have the effect of enhancing more
conventional markets for the information they disseminate?
6. Will distributed geolibraries develop as part of existing library
arrangements or complement them?
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT47
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7. Should the services and functions of distributed geolibraries extend
beyond providing users with efficient access to geoinformation to

include tools to process and analyze information and create new

knowledge?8. How will distributed geolibraries find an appropriate balance
between supplying data and supplying knowledge works?
9. How will each custodian site acquire, give access to, and safeguard
the geoinformation in its own collections?
10. How will the distributed geolibrary provide instruction and assistance
in the use of digital geographic products and databases? Should users

from schoolchild to scientist be expected to be their own reference

librarians in the distributed geolibraries of the future?
11. As greater numbers of geographic knowledge works and databases
are accumulated in the system over time, will it become increasingly

difficult to mine useful information from the available flood?
12. How will the records of humankind be conserved in the distributed
geolibrary as an institution?
13. While inclusion of traditional works such as maps in library
collections caused few personal information privacy concerns in the

past, would the geolibrary's provision for access to detailed databases

provide a much greater likelihood for personal information privacy

intrusions? What are the principles by which distributed geolibraries

would operate in order to protect privacy? How may the principles be

enforced and what are the means by which safeguards may be

provided in distributed environments?
14. If the generation of knowledge works depends on the resources and
intellectual contributions of many persons and institutions, how

might intellectual property rights in these works be appropriately

accounted for and how might each custodian manage such rights?
15. How can distributed geolibraries assure that geographic knowledge
works and databases are not rewritten or revised by government,

private firms, or others to their own benefit? That is, how may one

assure that databases are authentic?
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT48
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16. What incentives other than or in addition to future economic rewards
could be effective in convincing individuals, businesses, universities,

government agencies, and others to make their geographic

knowledge works and databases available over a distributed

geolibrary network?
17. Who should decide what is in and what is out of a distributed
geolibrary? Should there be a gatekeeper, modeled on the function of

a library subject specialist, or should distributed geolibraries operate

on the principle of 
caveat emptor
?Intellectual Property and Copyright Issues: Background and
Context for Distributed Geolibraries
Over the past several years there have been discussions nationally and
internationally regarding how to best update the copyright and intellectual

property laws to reflect the networked environment. Internationally, the

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has taken the lead in

initiating debate on these extremely important yet contentious issues.

Nationally, the U.S. Congress has considered a host of intellectual property

and copyright issues, many of which originated in WIPO forums.
In December 1996, WIPO member delegates from 160 countries met to
consider proposed changes to copyright law with a particular focus on the

digital environment. Three draft treaties sought to update copyright law

concerning works delivered in digital form, to enact protections for

performers in and producers of sound recordings, and to enact a new

intellectual property regime to protect databases.
At the close of this diplomatic conference, the delegates adopted two
new versions of the three draft treaties originally proposed: one relating to

copyrighted works in digital form and the second to enact protections for

performers in and producers of sound recordings. Consideration of the third

treaty regarding database protection was deferred with the recommendation

that WIPO convene another session at a later date to consider a schedule

for future discussions on database protection. WIPO failed to move forward

on the draft treaty for additional database protection for a number of

reasons: lack of time to fully consider the draft treaty within each member

country prior to the diplomatic conference, lack of time during the

conference to adequately address the
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT49
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.draft treaty, and most importantly, deep concerns, indeed opposition,
by many delegations to the draft treaty.
Responding to WIPO's actions, members of the U.S. Congress
introduced legislation that would implement the WIPO treaties. A series of

hearings and ensuing negotiations between concerned stakeholders on a

number of issues such as online service provider liability, fair use,

preservation, distance education, and more were undertaken throughout

1997 and 1998. On October 28, 1998, President Clinton signed into law the

Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998.
WIPO's decision to defer action on a draft database treaty did not deter
members of the House of Representatives from considering additional

intellectual property protections for databases. Rep. Coble (chair, House

Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property) introduced H.R. 2652,

the Collections of Information Antipiracy Act. This legislation addresses

several concerns of certain parts of the information industry, in particular,

legal publishers such as Reed-Elsevier and Thompson. They were

concerned with the 1991 Supreme Court decision, Feist v. Rural

Telephone, which held that comprehensive collections of facts arranged in

conventional formats were not protected under copyright and could not

constitutionally be protected under copyright. The decision rejected the

notion that a compiler's ''sweat of the brow" could ever substitute for the

"original authorship" that the statute and the constitutional copyright clause

require as the condition of copyrightability.
In addition, some members of the information industry were concerned
with a 1996 European Union directive on the legal protection of databases.

This directive calls for each member nation to implement a database law by

the end of 1997. The directive includes the notion that databases created in

non-EC countries will not be granted legal protection; thus, a fear of lack of

reciprocity is also prompting segments of the industry to advocate new

protections.During two hearings on H.R. 2652 in the House of Representatives,
widespread opposition to the proposal surfacedŠfrom the library

community, segments of the commercial sector, the scientific and research

communities, the education community, and more. Some of the concerns

include the following:

  Provisions in the bill would prohibit a transformative use of information
Šreuse of information to create a new type of product or information

resource.THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT50
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The exceptions for scientific and educational use are circular and
ineffective, and because the legislation is outside the scope of copyright

fair use, related library and education exemptions would not apply.
  Overall the bill would fundamentally threaten the basic paradigm of data
exchange by providing unprecedented new legal protection for

information.  Provisions in H.R. 2652 would likely increase the costs of research
significantly, as scientists and researchers would have to pay for data

they now receive for minimal cost.
  Certain provisions would prevent the creation of "value-added"
databases by substantially increasing the cost of the information included

in the databases. As a consequence, the elimination of competition from

value-added publishers would reduce the incentive for established up-

stream publishers to innovate and contain prices.
In a letter to Sen. Hatch (chair, Senate Committee on the Judiciary), the
Presidents of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of

Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine expressed "deep concerns about

the proposed changes to intellectual property law" and noted that the

legislation "would grant owners of information unprecedented rights in the

control of digital information while severely restricting the rights of scientists

and engineersŠand everyone elseŠto access and use that information."

Moreover, the anticompetitive nature of H.R. 2652 "may have other

negative economic impacts on our information economy by raising prices

for data consumers, by stifling important activities of commercial users who

add value to existing data, and encouraging the unproductive independent

recompilation of the same or similar data."
Other significant concerns were noted by the U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, which raised serious questions regarding

the constitutional basis of H.R. 2652. The Federal Trade Commission noted

serious reservations with the legislation, commenting that certain provisions

could have "deleterious effects on competition and innovation." Finally, the

U.S. Department of Commerce speaking to the concerns of the

Administration stated that the legislation as drafted could "increase

transaction costs in data use, and . . . that legislation not create

inappropriate opportunities of incentive to 'capture' government information

or government-funded data with relatively small investments in

maintenance, organization, or supplemental data."
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT51
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Although H.R. 2652 was passed by the House of Representatives, it
was not considered by the Senate. Members of the House and Senate

judiciary committees have commented that legislation that increases

intellectual property protection for databases will be a priority in the 106th

session of Congress.
A common theme throughout the copyright and intellectual property
debates in the United States has been the importance of focusing on

appropriate public policy choices for the United States, even though this

may conflict with the need for harmonization with other countries'

intellectual and copyright laws. According to this argument, the pressure

from the European Union directive on databases, for example, should not

dictate U.S. information policies with regard to the need for additional

protection for databases. Given that the United States is the leader in the

information industry, there is an appreciation that legislating in this arena

could have significant economic consequences if not done correctly.
THE DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY IN SOCIETAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT52
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Services and FunctionsLIBRARY SERVICES
Digital library developments are redefining the nature of the library, its
services, and its limitations. The traditional library focuses on making it easy for

the user to identify, find, browse, and retrieve the contents of a book or journal,

but its responsibilities end when the item is in the user's hands. Although the

contents of books and journals are essentially immutable, in a digital library the

information provided is digital and readily manipulated. Many libraries today

have holdings of geoinformation, or provide the means to obtain such data from

other sites. Some provide geographic information systems and other tools for

users who wish to manipulate or analyze data. Users who access data remotely

over the Internet now often have a choice between downloading the data to be

analyzed by their own software or sending queries and instructions for execution

directly on the data's host. When applied to geospatial data, this remote

processing is termed the 
GIServices model to distinguish it from the more
traditional local processing of the 
GISystems model. For example, sites such as
MapQuest (www.mapquest.com) use the GIServices model in providing driving
instructions based on geospatial data because the analysis is performed by the

host and no data are transmitted to the user. On the other hand, sites such as

Microsoft's www.terraserver.com and various U.S. Geological Survey sites aim to
provide data for local processing, following the GISystems model.
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS53
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The WWW has made everyone a potential publisher and distributor of
information, blurring old distinctions between authors, publishers, distributors,

and librarians. The important library function of 
collection building, 
whichinvolves the library staff in making careful decisions about what should or should

not appear in the library, has no equivalent on the WWW, where there are no

gatekeepers or custodians of quality.
If library information assets can be accessed from anywhere, how will each
library determine what to collect or acquire, if anything? In a digital world and

barring direct control and restriction on access, a library will be able to leave

more general resources to others and to emphasize those information assets that it

alone is best qualified to provide. There would be little value, for example, in

serving recent issues of a journal if the journal's publisher and other libraries

already provide the needed service at no charge. Unique assets might include the

products of the parent institution's own research and scholarship, unique

information resources donated to the library by bequests, or information on the

library's own local region.
In short, the library of the future will be able to make a clear distinction
between the services it provides in helping its users find, access, and use

information and the information assets that it collects, builds, and maintains

itself. Metadata, or data about data, are likely to become much more important, as

libraries seek to refine the services they provide by including more and more

tools designed to assist in search, evaluation, and use. Just as today's library

needs a catalog that tells users where to look in its stacks for given information

resources, so tomorrow's digital library will need the tools (cataloging, indexing,

abstracting) that help users navigate the vast communications networks and

distributed information resources of the future.
This chapter addresses the services and functions of distributed geolibraries
against this background of traditional and novel library services. As noted in

Chapter 2, the functions and services of a library are often less obvious than and
confused with its physical structure. Some, like information abstraction and
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS54
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.collection building, are less obvious than others, like the physical stacks or

circulation desk. Some of the services discussed here have long historical

antecedents, while others are entirely novel.
DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY SERVICES
A service can be defined generally as a provision of whatever is necessary
for installation and maintenance of a machine, organization, or operation.

Services for a machine such as a car include those found at a gas station or a

mechanics shop. A small consulting organization might provide sales services to

its clients, payroll and training services for its employees, and marketing or

research services to maintain steady growth.
The services of a distributed geolibrary fall into several categories, including
services for search and retrieval of items of particular interest, item description

and display services, data-processing services, and services for collection

maintenance and growth. These classes of service relate to the four types of

activity that go on in any library: (1) looking for specific books or other reference

information by author, title, subject, or identifying code; (2) creation of the library

catalog; (3) using various library tools to manipulate or interpret information; and

(4) taking care of or improving the library collection.
The nature of these services differs dramatically in a distributed geolibrary,
however. The ability to manipulate data, and to integrate data from a number of

sources, is greatly enhanced because all data are in digital form. While location

was handled as one of a number of possible forms of subject in the traditional

library, it is the primary basis of search in a distributed geolibrary. The distributed

nature of the geolibrary also makes collection building far more challenging

because there are no gatekeepers and no one is in charge of the entire collection.
Moreover, a distributed geolibrary would offer something that is not possible
in the traditional library, with its traditional form of catalogŠthe ability to search

based on geographic location.
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS55
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The power of this concept has already mobilized many individuals, groups,
and agencies. For example, the Open GIS Consortium (
www.opengis.org) issued a
Request for Proposals in March 1998 on the subject of catalogs for geospatial

data, anticipating that by doing so it would help move the community toward the

development of interoperable catalog specifications. The consortium includes

roughly 150 vendors, integrators, educators, and users, from both public and

private sectors.
THE NEED FOR DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY SERVICES
There are three reasons for developing distributed geolibrary services. The
first is economic. Traditionally, geospatial data have been distributed in the form

of paper maps, disks, and tapes, which are costly to produce, slow and

cumbersome to distribute, and difficult to update. To meet the national mandate

to make data collected at public expense available to the public, federal agencies

are looking for new ways to disseminate data more widely and effectively,

primarily via the Internet (Jones, 1997). By utilizing the Internet and network

communications, a distributed geolibrary could deliver online information

services quickly and economically. Agencies and companies can also sell data

and recover income more effectively using the Internet's growing and

increasingly reliable tools for electronic commerce. Finally, encryption

technologies could provide assurance against unauthorized use and distribution.
The workshop was not an appropriate forum for the development of a
comprehensive economic model of geoinformation dissemination or for detailed

analysis of the costs and benefits of implementation. These are important issues

and could be the focus of a useful and productive research effort. A good starting

point would be a recent study by the National Academy of Public Administration

(1998), which includes a comprehensive summary of what is known about the

economics of geospatial data production and dissemination.
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS56
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The second reason involves the decentralization of geoinformation
management. In a distributed geolibrary there is no need for data to be collected

in one place; instead, data can be held by a custodian until needed. Because the

Internet provides universal access, it is sufficient that there be a custodian serving a

given data set, and with a single server there are no problems maintaining

consistency across copies if data must be updated. Ideally, the custodian would

also be the person or agency responsible for updating the data and for assuring

their accuracy. In practice, however, some mirroring of data may be needed to

overcome the effects of network delays and server downtime (Worboys, 1995).
A third reason for a distributed framework for geolibrary services is the
demand for access. Public access to geoinformation, particularly by students, can

support improvements in national levels of geographic literacy by making it

possible for classes to obtain information quickly and easily about any part of the

Earth's surface. Ready access to geoinformation about local areas (neighborhood,

city, county, region) can help to develop a more informed citizenry and improve

opportunities for participation in the democratic process (Adler, 1995; Craig,

1995).SERVICES AS COLLECTIONS OF FUNCTIONS
Services have been described using broad categories of response to
demands. Functions are the actual commands or activities that implement

services, and a given function may contribute to more than one service. A

function can deliver all or part of a service. Functions that make up car services

at the gas station include changing fluids, changing filters, inspecting brakes or

tires, and so forth. At the mechanic shop, the service known as a tune-up would

be comprised of functions such as changing spark plugs, adjusting engine timing

or belt alignment, and so forth.
Various efforts over the past few years have implemented limited functions
of a distributed geolibrary. They include two of the projects of the National

Science Foundation-National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)-

Defense Advanced Research
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS57
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Projects Agency Digital Library Initiative (at the University of California's

Berkeley and Santa Barbara campuses), efforts of the Federal Geographic Data

Committee (FGDC) under the rubric of the NSDI, various state and local

government projects; dissemination mechanisms developed by suppliers of Earth

imagery, and numerous efforts in other countries. Some selected examples of

these prototypes are described in 
Appendix D
. Although there are sharp
differences in approach and scope, there is now a degree of consensus on the

functions that can best deliver the services of a distributed geolibrary.
NECESSARY DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARY FUNCTIONS
Necessary functions for search and retrieval include searches by
geographical location, searches by geographical place name, and searches by

secondary requirements such as subject theme or time. Retrieval functions require

a workspace to hold the items, criteria for sorting and ranking items depending on

their assessed relevance to the user's needs, a tagging mechanism to select and

retrieve specific items, and links to other functions for display and description.

The following sections describe these in more detail.
Search by Geographical Location
The basemap provides the image of the Earth on which a user can specify
areas of interest. Its level of geographic detail defines the most localized spatial

search that is possible. It should include all of the features likely to be relevant to a

user wanting to find and define a search area, including major topographic

features and place names. The importance of such features will vary between

users, as will levels of detail, so it will be necessary to establish protocols that

allow use of specialized basemaps for particular purposes. For example, a

hydrologist might want the basemap to emphasize hydrological features such as

rivers and watersheds,SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS58
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.whereas a climatologist might want to see weather stations and topography.
This function would first display a basemap, allowing users to point at a
place to target either a specific point or a footprint. Users would be allowed to

zoom to greater detail and to pan across the Earth's surface. Widgets such as the

"rubber rectangle" would allow users to specify footprints in a number of ways.

There should also be support for "fuzzy" footprints that are not precisely or

crisply defined, allowing users to define approximate areas of search.
There are many current examples of sites that support search by geographic
location based on standard WWW browser software (e.g., Microsoft's Internet

Explorer or Netscape's Navigator). Many (see, for example, the archive of digital

orthophoto quadrangles at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

(ortho.mit.edu); other examples are listed in Appendix D) present the user with a
map divided into tiles; by pointing to a tile the user accesses data for that tile's

geographic area. The Alexandria Digital Library project's current prototype

(alexandria.ucsb.edu) uses a Java application, including rubber rectangles and
other tools. These prototypes use projected basemaps and do not yet implement a

sense of interacting with the curved surface of the Earth, as suggested by the

vision of distributed geolibraries, which would require three-dimensional

visualization technologies such as VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language).

The current Alexandria browser includes the ability to "paint" data onto the

basemap; in Vice President Gore's vision of Digital Earth the user is able to "fly"

through a full three-dimensional rendering of the Earth's physical environment.
Several suitable sources of data exist for basemaps:
  Digital topographic data, available for the entire land area of the planet
at 1:1,000,000 in the Digital Chart of the World, and for smaller areas at

larger scales. For the continental United States the
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS59
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USGS provides digital topographic data at 1:100,000 and for limited

areas at 1:24,000.1  Imagery from space, available from the Landsat satellite at 30m
resolution, from the French SPOT satellite at 10-m resolution, from

Russian satellites at 2-m resolution, and anticipated in 1999 commercial

satellite imagery for selected areas at 1-m resolution.
  Digital elevation data, available for parts of the United States. at 30-m
resolution, and for the entire planet at 5-km resolution. Global coverage

at 30-m resolution is planned.
The costs of these data vary enormously; those from federal sources are
available at the cost of reproduction, but other sources operate on a commercial

basis.Search by Place Name
Gazetteer is a technical term for an index that links place names to
locations. As often found associated with published atlases and city maps,

gazetteers provide links to map sheets and locations within map sheets. In the

context of distributed geolibraries, a gazetteer connects place names to

geographic coordinates. This connection allows the user of the distributed

geolibrary to define a search area using a place name, instead of by finding the

area on a basemap, which may be difficult to many users. The gazetteer may

include place names that are not well defined. For use in a geolibrary a gazetteer

must include 
extents, or digital representations of each place name's physical
boundary. Links between place names allow searches to be expanded or

narrowedŠthey can be 
vertical,1 This ratio or 
representative fraction 
compares the distance between two points on a
paper map with the distance between the same pair of points on the surface of the Earth.

Digital data created from paper maps by digitizing and scanning are also characterized by

this ratio, which also defines the set of features shown on the map and the degree of

geometric generalization of those features. In rough terms a database created from a map

with a given representative fraction depicts features larger than 0.5 mm across on the map

and achieves a similar positional accuracy.
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS60
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.identifying places that include or are included by other places, and also

horizontal, identifying neighboring places.
Because a gazetteer is an essential building block of the distributed
geolibrary and something that can be shared between large numbers of users, its

availability is a critical factor in progress toward the vision of distributed

geolibraries. At this time no one agency is identified as being responsible for

production and maintenance of a common national or global gazetteer. Most

gazetteers that exist, such as the USGS Geographic Names Information System

(GNIS) or equivalent commercial products, provide in most cases only a central

point for each feature, and their coverage of the world's place names is uneven.

Progress would be aided by identification of the gazetteer as a fundamental

component of the NSDI framework. Progress would also be aided by the

development of a standard gazetteer protocol to ensure that users or groups of

users who create their own specialized gazetteers could use them to access

distributed geolibraries in place of general-purpose gazetteers. Additionally, there

are significant problems to be overcome in dealing with varied alphabets,

diacritical marks, ambiguities of spelling, place names with indeterminate

boundaries, and so forth.
Search by Subject Theme or Time Period
In a physical library the card catalog indexes library holdings by subject
domain. An electronic catalog may include a thesaurus, which matches synonyms

of search topics, providing associations in a search query, for example, between

"slough" and "swamp" and "wetland." For cataloging functions to work, items

must be stored in a standard format, following an agreed protocol. Likewise,

users must also specify searches in an agreed protocol; this is often accomplished

by a query dialogue function, which converts a form-based user search request

into whatever protocol is required. The basis of such protocols already exists in

standards, e.g., MARC (MAchine Readable Cataloging, see 
lcweb.loc.gov/marc/)and the FGDC's Content Standards for Digital Geospatial Metadata

(www.fgdc.gov), and in projects such as the Alexandria Digital
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS61
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Library. The FGDC has also made progress in standardizing conventions for

naming geographic features, and similar progress has been made in other

countries.Distributed geolibraries should allow their users to narrow specifications of
need by including subjects, dates, and other identifying characteristics, as well as

needed level of geographic detail, and imposing them on the search in addition to

geographic location. Although location is the primary key in searching a

distributed geolibrary, other aspects allow the user to limit the number of items of

geoinformation identified in a search to reasonable levels. Distributed

geolibraries also should be capable of ranking items identified in a search by their

suitability to the user's needs. They also should inform the user of the number of

hits, and provide other ways of summarizing them in readily understood ways.
Item Display and Description
These functions include visualization tools and metadata browsing tools.
Visualization tools are useful for displaying items retrieved from the archive.

Geoinformation data sets are often massive, creating problems for users who may

need to browse through many data sets to find one that is suitable for use, given

the limited bandwidth of many Internet connections. In such cases it is clearly

impossible to examine the full contents of each data set, and some system must be

devised to allow users to examine a summary or generalized sketch of the

contents that can be retrieved quickly. Display functions also make it possible to

create a visual index (the base map and the map browser, described above) for

patrons to search the library for information about a particular place.
In general terms, metadata describe the content, quality, condition, and other
characteristics of data. The major uses of metadata include (1) managing and

maintaining an organization's investment in data, (2) providing information to

data catalogs and clearinghouses, (3) providing information to aid data transfer

and use, and (4) providing information on the data's history or lineage.
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS62
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Although the second use is essentially the function performed by the
traditional library catalog, it is clear that the functions of metadata in the

distributed geolibrary extend well beyond this (FGDC, see 
www.fgdc.gov). Under(3), metadata provide the essential information necessary to allow a data set from

some distant archive to be recognized and opened at the user's site. In general,

geoinformation data sets are not 
interoperable 
in this way, especially if the
archive and the user have adopted different geographic information systems

(GIS). Problems of interoperation between GIS are addressed by Goodchild 
etal. (1998), and much recent work by the GIS industry has gone into
improvements in interoperability in GIS, through the efforts of the Open GIS

Consortium (www.opengis.org). Note, however, that the problems of distributed
geolibraries in this area go well beyond those of GIS interoperability because

distributed geolibraries are not just limited to geospatial data.
In the context of distributed geographic information services, metadata
include information that supports the exchange of processing operations between

client and server (Open GIS Consortium, see 
www.opengis.org ). To date, little
research has reported on formalization of such metadata to describe distributed

geographic information services, though Tsou and Buttenfield (1998) showed

that they should include two major parts: 
system metadata 
and data operationrequirements. The system metadata describe methods and behaviors for system
controls and program specifications, whereas data-operation requirements specify

the requirements for data input to, and output from, specified operations.
Collection Creation and Maintenance
A range of tools are needed to support the creation and publication of
geoinformation. Most new geospatial data are either published in digital form or

go through a digital stage during production. But the predigital legacy of

geospatial data is largely in the form of paper maps and photographic images,

which must be laboriously digitized or scanned to be suitable for distributed

geolibraries. Although massive investments have been made in
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS63
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.recent years, by such organizations as the Library of Congress, which has made

much of its historical map collection available over the WWW, it is doubtful that

the vast majority of the larger legacy residing in scattered collections and

archives will ever be digitized because anticipated levels of use of most

individual items cannot justify the cost.
The nation currently possesses vast stores of data about or associated with
geographic locations but for which no locational footprint is readily available.

These stores include large archives of information on health, the economy, social

conditions, and demographics, broken down in some cases to very fine levels of

geographic detail. Such data could be incorporated into distributed geolibraries,

and place 
 could provide a very effective search mechanism, particularly when
such data need to be integrated with other geoinformation. A coordinated plan is

needed to link as much of this information as possible to geographic location. For

example, use of census data could be considerably enhanced if the names and

extents of its reporting zones (census tracts, counties, metropolitan areas) could

be organized in gazetteer form for use in distributed geolibraries.
Effective description of geoinformation can be difficult, and the FGDC's
Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata extends to several hundred

fields. While federal agencies are mandated to create such metadata and have

access to extensive resources, there is often little incentive for a local agency to

create metadata for its own holdings. Many agencies have suggested

simplifications of the FGDC standard; the Alexandria Digital Library

(alexandria.ucsb.edu), for example, uses a subset of 35 fields to describe its
holdings. Dublin Core is another effort to simplify the description of information

using standard fields (
purl.org/dc).The WWW makes it possible for virtually anyone to contribute information
by creating and maintaining a WWW site. Distributed geolibraries could take

great advantage of this potential by making it possible for users to double as

providers of information, especially information that is the result of abstraction,
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS64
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.manipulation, interpretation, or synthesis of other information. For example,

papers written based on distributed library resources could be contributed back to

distributed geolibraries. The distinction being made here between raw data and

derived knowledge is discussed at greater length in 
Chapter 3.Searching over Distributed Assets
In a traditional library the catalog provides an index to the library's contents.
In a distributed geolibrary the contents and the users are distributed, and five

options can be identified for the catalog:
1. 
A unified catalog 
exists in one place and can be searched by users. In
this option each custodian of data submits metadata describing each

available data set to a central site, where the records are assembled

into a searchable database. Each record directs users to the

appropriate location of the data set. For geoinformation, which tends

to use specialized formats, this option requires the strongest central

control and the highest level of cooperation from participating

custodians.2. Each custodian of data assembles metadata describing each data set
according to a standard, forming a 
distributed catalog. Users submit
requests to a central site, and these are then automatically executed

by search agents that examine each custodian's metadata.

Performance of this solution degrades as the number of custodians

increases.3. A 
collection-level catalog 
exists that identifies the generalcharacteristics of each custodian's holdings and uses them to direct

searches. For example, searches for data on some part of New York

state might be directed to a custodian in Albany known to have a

large collection of that state's data. The efficiency of this option

depends on how precisely custodians' holdings can be differentiated.

In effect it implements the kinds of expert knowledge that allow

users to find data on the WWW in the absence of effective

cataloging.SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS65
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4. Use a catalog built by a 
search service. Search services such as
AltaVista and Yahoo build catalogs automatically by using

intelligent agents or 
web crawlers, 
but they do so strictly on the basis
of words found in text and are not effective ways of building a

catalog for a distributed geolibrary. Nonetheless, it may be possible

to build a new generation of specialized agents capable of

recognizing geoinformation and extracting its important metadata

descriptors. Such agents have been built on a prototype basis in the

case of imagery; they successfully recognize the formats of imagery,

open them, and compute such indices as shape, texture, and color for

use in catalogs.
5. 
No catalog exists. This reflects the situation on the WWW before
WWW search services became available (and even today substantial

parts of the WWW's resources remain unindexed by search

services). Search for geoinformation without a catalog relies on the

user's personal knowledge of the WWW's resources. Whereas a user

of a research library can assume with some confidence that any

research library will contain a copy of a major monograph or a

popular journal, the principle of the WWW is almost exactly the

opposite: a given item of information is most likely available at only

one site. Search under these circumstances can be like looking for the

proverbial needle in a haystack, with order 10
7 sites to search. In the
case of geoinformation, the likelihood that a given item will be on a

server increases with proximity to the item's footprint for several

reasons: interest in the item is likely to be higher near or within the

footprint; custodians in proximity to the footprint are more likely to

have responsibility; and sponsorship of the data's collection and

acquisition is more likely closer to the footprint. But the effect is

likely to be weak and as such will provide an unreliable strategy for

search.Integration, Analysis, and Manipulation
Unlike books, which exist largely to be read, much geoinformation is raw in
nature and is obtained for purposes that include detailed interpretation, analysis,

and manipulation. A user requesting a remotely sensed image, for example,

might submit it
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS66
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to extensive operations that include correction for various known distortions,

classification, and integration with other data obtained through similar processes.

The end result of obtaining a Landsat image from an Internet site might be a

statistical assessment of the amount of change that has occurred in an area over

the past 10 years, following several months of detailed analysis and

manipulation.Digital libraries differ from their traditional predecessors in the potential to
support extensive manipulation of information once it has been retrieved. This

manipulation might include:
 correction for known distortions;

 to obtain statistical summaries;

  rubber sheeting to register geospatial data sets to known locations or to
each other; projection changes, and datum changes;

  use as input to complex environmental models for purposes of
calibration or prediction;
  use in complex decision-making processes involving many stakeholders;
or  generalization, classification, interpretation, and other forms of
information abstraction.FINDING 8
A distributed geolibrary would allow users to specify a requirement,
search across the resources of the Internet for suitable geoinformation,

assess the fitness of that information for use, retrieve and integrate it with

other information, and perform various forms of manipulation and analysis.

A distributed geolibrary would thus integrate the functions of browsing the

WWW with those of GIS and related technologies.
Over the past three decades there has been enormous progress in the
development and adoption of technologies for manipulating geoinformation,

including GIS and image-processing systems. Today, most users of such systems

rely heavily on the
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS67
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ability to obtain input data from Internet resources, despite the lack of effective

tools such as those envisioned for distributed geolibraries. Five steps characterize

this gathering process:
1. 
Specification 
of requirements, including coverage area, date, theme,
level of detail, and other important characteristics.
2. 
Search 
over known or likely sources, using a combination of
personal knowledge and the limited capabilities of Internet search

services.3. 
Assessment 
of the fitness for use of possible data sets, by comparing
their documented characteristics with the specified requirements.
4. 
Retrieval of suitable data sets.
5. 
Opening of retrieved data sets on the user's system, including
necessary changes of format and other steps needed to integrate data

effectively.Many uses of geoinformation involve group activityŠmultidisciplinary
research projects involving several investigators, planning projects involving

several stakeholders and decision makers, group classroom projects involving

several students. Distributed geolibraries should provide services to support such

collaborative work (see Finding 7
, Chapter 3).Many of the activities that could benefit from distributed geolibraries are
best carried out away from the office desktop in the field. Emergency relief

operations call for decisions that are best made in the presence of the emergency,

where the emergency and its context can be observed directly. Access to

distributed geolibraries could usefully augment the power of other field-based

technologies, including the Global Positioning System, and mobile computing.

Wireless connections could be used to search for and download information from

distant servers and to upload new information gathered in the field.
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS68
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDING 9
Many important applications of distributed geolibraries are best located
in the field, using portable systems and wireless communications. Delivery

of services to the field is important in emergency management, agriculture,

natural resource management, and many other applications.
Assisting Users
Although the demand can never be fully satisfied, libraries provide large
amounts of assistance to their users, funded through library budgets. The Internet

provides limited assistance, and users of the WWW are very much on their own,

forced to rely on the limited assistance of online help, manuals, and other

devices. If distributed geolibraries are to function as a more powerful evolution

of the library model, effective ways must be found to help users navigate through

their complexities and ambiguities. The problem is, if anything, more severe for

geoinformation, which has always required a disproportionately high level of

human assistance and user expertise.
We have little experience with the problems that are likely to occur when
inexperienced users begin to make widespread use of geoinformation. Problems

posed by the important metadata variable 
level of geographic detail 
are discussedin this context by Goodchild and Proctor (1997), who conclude that new

metaphors are needed to make it possible for general users to conceptualize their

needs. For example, the metaphor of height of viewpoint above the surface of the

Earth (move higher for less detail, descend for more detail) can be readily

understood and used by children.
Assessment and Feedback
Libraries also employ staff who 
listen 
to their users, another function that is
difficult to replicate in the impersonal digital environment of the Internet. On the

other hand, many new and exciting mechanisms for eliciting feedback have been

developed on the WWW, and distributed geolibraries would do
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS69
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.well to exploit these. For example, each custodian site might invite comments on

its geoinformation from users and make these remarks available to others.

Extensive assessment will be needed of the designs of user interfaces, to evaluate

whether they achieve the objectives of distributed geolibraries, before they are

widely released and adopted. Such designs should evolve through procedures

familiar in the field of human-computer interaction, including evaluation studies

and interactive refinement.OPTIONS FOR THE DELIVERY OF DISTRIBUTED
GEOLIBRARY SERVICES
Ideally, we see a distributed geolibrary functioning as a single homogeneous
entity capable of responding to a single query from a user, just as AltaVista is

capable of responding to a query about some combination of key words. In

practice, however, a number of configurations are possible, combining aspects of

the following extremes:1. 
One-stop shopping. 
One server provides a one-stop shopping
service, perhaps to a limited user base via an Intranet or to a

universal base via the Internet. Either the entire catalog is mounted

on the server or a query to the server results in transparent access to a

distributed catalog. Similarly, geoinformation resources are served

either directly or transparently through automated access to

distributed resources. The agency operating the central server also

maintains it, develops and enforces standards and protocols, and

directs future development. Several servers currently approximate

this mode of operation over substantial thematic and geographic

domains, including the USGS's EROS Data Center, and NASA's

EOSDIS. This option works well in areas where the resources to

create geoinformation come from a single source that can also fund

dissemination. Problems arise when jurisdictions or thematic areas

overlap significantly. For example, are data about the city of Atlanta

more likely to be found in a server operated by the city, county,

state, or
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS70
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.federal government, or by the United Nations? Are data about soils

most likely to be found on a server operated by the U.S. Department

of Agriculture or the USGS?
2. 
Distributed responsibility. 
This option follows the example of the
WWW, for which policies are established by volunteer grassroots

organizations that recognize need, devise solutions, and make them

freely available to the user community. Protocols and standards allow

any individual or group to participate in distributed geolibraries,

subject to very loosely defined constraints. Whereas this model

approximates the WWW, it differs sharply from the mode of

operation of the traditional library, with its substantial resources,

gatekeepers, and quality control. The function of cataloging on the

WWW, for example, which is approximated by the search services,

exists because certain companies saw business opportunities in

providing a service that was compatible with WWW standards and

met an obvious need. Similarly, quality control in distributed
geolibraries might be achieved not by a central gatekeeper authority

but by independent groups analogous to the Good Housekeeping

Institute that assess and certify geoinformation on a for-profit or

nonprofit basis.FINDING 10
There are several alternative architectures for distributed geolibraries,
including a single enterprise sponsored by a well-resourced agency,

analogous to a national library; a network of enterprises with their own

sponsors, analogous to a network or federation of libraries; and a loose

network held together by shared protocols, analogous to the WWW.
Geolibrary services can be freely combined and used based on application
needs. For geolibraries to operate in a distributed (client-server) computing

environment, services and functions must operate on a network of servers and

clients. The availability of services must take into account server characteristics,

such as file sharing and application serving, and whether there is a "thin" or

"thick" client. In networking terminology a thick client is
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS71
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.defined as having operations and calculations executed on the client, consistent in

this context with the GISystems model. A "thin" client may require that selected

functions run on the server, consistent with the GIServices model. Whether the

client should be thick or thin will depend on the task and associated performance

requirements. For example, it may be appropriate to use thick clients for map

display services, allowing the patron to take over the many intuitive decisions of

graphic design, layout, and so forth, as well as to accommodate whatever output

devices are available.
Still other functions may deliver services best by avoiding transmission of
large amounts of repetitive data across a network. For map browsing and place

name searches, a geolibrary might use a "hybrid" approach by storing the

basemap and gazetteer on the client but leaving the catalog functions on the

server. Basemap information is voluminous and not likely to change frequently,

so rather than transmit it repeatedly from a server it may be more efficient to store

it locally in a specialized hybrid browser. Suitable basemaps include digital

topographic maps and also images of the Earth's surface. Additional detail can be

provided by digital elevation data, so the basemap provides a close resemblance

to the actual surface of the Earth. "The role of client and server components

should be dynamic and changeable. The balance of functionality between client

services and server components will be a critical issue for the success of . . .

distributed systems" (Tsou and Buttenfield, 1998).
SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS72
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Building Distributed Geolibraries
REQUIREMENTSPrevious sections of this report outline the vision of distributed geolibraries,
discuss the problems and issues related to their social and institutional context

and define their services and functions. This chapter addresses the process of

building distributed geolibraries, the steps that will need to be taken to implement

the vision, and related issues. It is impossible to be precise, of course, because of

uncertainties surrounding future technologies, because the outcomes of research

are in principle impossible to anticipate, and because many issues can only be

resolved by constructing and working with prototypes. Given these constraints,

this report attempts to address a number of key questions and to find answers

where possible: will it take to build distributed geolibraries?

  What economic incentives can be put in place such that stakeholders in
all sectors of the community (business, education, government) can and

will participate?  What arrangements need to be put in place in the form of institutions,
regulations, standards, protocols, committees, and so forth?
  What research needs to be done to address problems and issues for which
no methods or solutions currently exist? How long will this research

take?BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES73
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  What data sets need to be constructed, and what mechanisms might be
used? software needs to be written, and who is likely to write it?
At a higher level one might ask how it is possible to know the answers to
these questions. Complex software systems and new institutions arise through an

iterative process in which the end result may not be apparent until the process has

been under way for some time. Creating a vision is part of that process, but the

vision may be wrong or unachievable. Large-scale prototypes are sometimes

built in part because it is difficult or impossible to know what is possible without

such large-scale experimentation. Without building a distributed geolibrary

prototype, it may not be possible to identify exactly what it will do successfully

and what it will not do. It may be difficult to know at an early stage how much a

distributed geolibrary will cost or whether its costs will be exceeded by its

benefits.The Panel' vision of distributed geolibraries views them as a primary
distribution mechanism for getting geospatial data and geographic knowledge

resources into the hands of all stakeholders. Traditionally, the primary source of

geospatial data in the United States, as in many other countries, has been the

national mapping agency. Dissemination has been predominantly a one-to-many

operation, as a single source provided information to a distributed user base. The

vision of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) is very different and

reflects an increasing degree of empowerment of individuals and agencies as

significant producers of geospatial data. This vision is many-to-many, replacing a

single source with a much more complex array. It is also complicated by the fact

that the user/producer distinction is no longer as clear. Many users of geospatial

data add value and become producers, and many users serve their own networks

of clients. Many users of geospatial data are producers of geographic knowledge,

which they may want to publish or make available through the mechanism of

distributed geolibraries.
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES74
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The many-to-many paradigm is familiar to librarians, who have traditionally
acted as brokers between the publishers and the users of information. Thus, the

paradigm shift that is occurring in geospatial data dissemination, in part through a

process of technological empowerment, provides a strong reason to look to the

library as a metaphor for new dissemination models and suggests that the library

is a good place to look for models of distributed geolibraries and for solutions to

problems and issues that may arise in building them. On the other hand, the

timescale of library operations has been far slower than is normal with digital

data dissemination. It may take years for information to pass fully through the

complex process of publication and cataloging until it is finally available to the

traditional library user. Users of the WWW are accustomed to delays on the order

of minutes not years. Thus the library model will be useful only if its customary

timescales can be compressed by many orders of magnitude.
The following sections address the needs of distributed geolibraries in terms
of standards and protocols, data sets, georeferencing, cataloging, visualizations,

and knowledge creation. Later sections discuss research needs and institutional

arrangements. The final section of the chapter discusses the measurement and

assessment of progress in building distributed geolibraries.
Standards and ProtocolsGeospatial applications are already supported by a large number of
standards and protocols, and many more are in various stages of development.

The set of particular relevance to distributed geolibraries includes:
  The metadata standard developed by the Federal Geographic Data
Committee (FGDC) and known as the Content Standards for Digital

Geospatial Metadata (
http://www.fgdc.gov). This standard allows
catalogs of geospatial data sets to be constructed using well-defined

content. It is elaborate, and substantial effort is needed to achieve

compliance. A very similar general metadata standard is in
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES75
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) review process

under the ISO Technical Committee 211 (ISO-TC 211).
  General file format standards for geospatial data. These include
standards mandated under FIPS 173 and known as the Spatial Data

Transfer Standard (SDTS), the scientific data standards HDF and

netCDF, the imagery standards TIFF and GeoTIFF, the military standard

DIGEST, and many more.  Interoperability specifications. The Open GIS Consortium
(www.opengis.org ) is developing a wide range of specifications for
geospatial objects to support interoperation and is strongly supported by

the GIS software industry.
Other standards of relevance to distributed geolibraries include those under
discussion on intellectual property rights in digital data, standards of geospatial

data quality, definitions of geographic feature types, and general mapping

standards. They are being developed through a multitude of standards

organizations, including, for example, the ISO, the American National Standards

Institute (ANSI), the FGDC, and the International Cartographic Association.
The Internet and the WWW are built on a series of standards and protocols
that have been widely accepted not because of any compulsion or mandate but

because they clearly work and enable interesting applications. They include

TCP/IP and HTTP. In the coming years it is likely that these standards will be

extended repeatedly, and it appears that the architecture of the Next-Generation

Internet will be significantly enhanced. Although none of these developments

have been driven or are likely to be driven by the special needs of distributed

geolibraries, as in the past we can expect them to be exploited in whatever ways

are interesting, valuable, and appropriate.
FINDING 11
New technological initiatives such as the Next-Generation Internet and
Internet II are likely to provide extensions to Internet and WWW protocols

and orders of magnitude increases in bandwidth. Many of these

developments are expected to be relevant to distributed geolibraries.
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES76
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Data SetsLibraries assist their users in many ways; some of the most important are the
mechanisms of abstraction employed to help users find relevant information. The

process of cataloging is assisted by a number of data sets known as 
authorities 
that provide essential indices and lists.
In distributed geolibraries an essential authority is the gazetteer. A
distributed geolibrary's gazetteer will differ in several key respects from the

traditional version found in the back pages of atlases:
  Support for 
extents, 
defined as the bounding coordinates of place-names.
Traditional gazetteers, and their digital equivalents such as the

Geographic Names Information System provide only point references

for most features. In contrast to point locations, extents are needed to

resolve the relevant discrepancies between the given footprint of an

asset and the footprint of a user query. Because there is only marginal

value in a highly precise footprint (since adding additional precision to a

boundary's location will only marginally increase the effectiveness of a

search), it may be sufficient to provide only bounding coordinates (e.g.,

minimum and maximum latitude and longitude).
Extensibility, 
defined as the ability of a user to insert additional place
names of interest into a local copy of a standard authority gazetteer.
Specialization, 
defined as the ability of a user to define gazetteers for
special applications. Many application domains have their own

equivalents of recognized place names. Hydrologists use standard ways

of indexing watersheds, for example, and remote sensing specialists use

standard numbering systems for the images derived from satellites such

as Landsat. Translations from these systems to standard coordinates will

be important data sets in support of the functions of distributed

geolibraries.  Support for 
fuzziness. Traditional gazetteers literally provide authorityonly for officially recognized place names. While the
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES77
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.footprint of a city name may vary depending on context and usage, the

official footprint is most often defined by the city limits. Users of

distributed geolibraries will want to be able to search based on place

names that are not officially recognized but nevertheless in common

usage, such as "downtown."
FINDING 12
A comprehensive gazetteer, linking named places and geographic
locations, would be an essential component of a distributed geolibrary. A

national gazetteer would be a valuable addition to the framework data sets

of the NSDI. These framework data sets are being coordinated by the

FGDC, which also has the responsibility for associated standards and

protocols. Production and maintenance of the national gazetteer could be

through the National Mapping Division of the U.S. Geological Survey

(USGS) in collaboration with other agencies and could be an extension of

the USGS's Geographic Names Information System.
Another type of authority used by libraries is the thesaurus. In the
geoinformation case, various kinds of authorities would be useful: lists of

standard feature types, standard data themes, standard attribute definitions. For

example, it would be useful if the meaning of 
vegetation  and associated terms
could be standardized, and much effort by the FGDC has been devoted over the

past few years toward this end. In a world in which everyone can be a data

producer, it is no longer possible to rely solely on the federal government to

define essential mapping terms.
At the same time it is important that distributed geolibraries reflect the
contemporary social norms of their users. The very term 
authority 
 suggests acommand-and-control philosophy that may be orthogonal to the prevailing

culture of the Internet and the WWW, which is dominated by individual

empowerment and voluntary consensus. An authority for a distributed geolibrary

is clearly something different from a traditional library authority, and digital

technology must be used to serve different ends. Instead of a single authority

created by a central agency and enforced 
top-down on the community through
regulation, mandate, or incentive, digital
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES78
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.technology should be used to support translation and interoperability between a

variety of different meanings and interpretations in a 
bottom-up 
process thataccommodates diverse communities and groups and their associated

terminologies. If the term 
downtown means something different to user A than to
user B, distributed geolibraries should use the power of digital technology to

make the two meanings interoperable, rather than to support the imposition of a

single interpretation on all users.GeoreferencingThe system of latitude and longitude has been subject to international
standards since the late nineteenth century. However, the definitions of latitude

and elevation are dependent on the mathematical function used to approximate

the shape of the Earth, and many such functions are in use. Thus, latitude is not

fully interoperable, and two points near each other on the Earth and measured

from opposite sides of certain international boundaries do not converge perfectly.

Additional complications occur in the use of other world coordinate systems, such

as UTM (Universal Transverse Mercator coordinate system) and between the

U.S. State Plane coordinate systems. If distributed geolibraries are to be useful to

people who do not understand the complexities of geodetic datums and

cartographic projections, it will be necessary for systems to be developed that are

capable of hiding such details or making them fully transparent to the user. Thus, a

user ought to be able to access data sets in different projections and based on

different datums and expect the system to handle the differences automatically.

Such transparency is not yet available in standard geospatial software products

and data sets, and its feasibility has not been demonstrated.
Other general ways of referencing the surface of the Earth are gaining
popularity because of interest in global environmental change and other processes

that operate at the global level. These include standard hierarchical grids such as

QTM (Dutton, 1984) and the sampling grids used by the EMAP program (White

et al., 
1992).BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES79
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Such hierarchical systems may be important internally as indexing schemes
for distributed geolibraries (Goodchild and Yang, 1992).
CatalogingReference was made earlier to the need to compress the traditional
timescales of the library world. Nowhere is this more important than in

cataloging, which serves the critical function of abstracting the information users

need to find, examine, assess, and retrieve data. In effect, metadata are the key to

the many-to-many structure that allows many users to search across many

potential suppliers, and its timely creation will be crucial if distributed

geolibraries are to function. Unfortunately, the process of metadata creation for

digital geospatial data can be as lengthy and labor intensive as its traditional

equivalent. The task of creating a full metadata record for a geospatial data set

using the FGDC metadata standard can be much greater than the task of

cataloging a simple book. The geospatial data community appears to have

accepted the notion that metadata creation is largely the responsibility of the

producer, whereas the prevailing notion in the library community is that

cataloging is the responsibility of the librarian. This reflects a distinct difference

in philosophy, since the library practice is based on the notion that the librarian

may be 
more skilled in abstracting information on behalf of the user than is the
producer of the information.
If time is of the essence in the digital world of the Internet, it makes good
sense to try to replace the labor-intensive cataloging process with automated

methods. The Internet world's solution to this problem has been the WWW search

service, exemplified by AltaVista, Yahoo, and Excite. To be successful, a search

service designed to help the user of distributed geolibraries find geospatial data

and geographic knowledge would have to place heaviest emphasis on the

determination of an information object's geographic footprint, either by detecting

or inferring coordinates or by identifying an appropriate place name, to be

converted to coordinates using a gazetteer. Such tools would perform the

functions of abstracting and metadata creation automatically. 
SuchBUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES80
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.automated discovery, indexing, and abstracting tools do not yet exist and will

require extensive research and development. 
Three models that provide
alternatives to the search service are described in 
Chapter 4. They are technically
much simpler, but require practices that appear to be incompatible or only

partially compatible with the culture of the Internet.
VisualizationOne of the most powerful advantages of the concept of distributed
geolibraries is the ability for the user to interact with a representation of the

surface of the Earth. Information 
about the Earth's surface is naturally
conceptualized as belonging to the surface, and globes, which are actual scaled

representations of the Earth, provide a familiar and easily understood information

source. The notion of doing the same in the digital world, of presenting

information as if it were actually located on the surface of the globe, is termed the

Digital Earth metaphor, and lies behind the idea described earlier in 
Chapter 2.Some types of geoinformation illustrate close approximations to actual
appearance and can be rendered by draping onto a curved surface. These include

optical imagery and false-color imagery, where colors are used to render

information that corresponds to some other possibly invisible part of the

spectrum.Other information in distributed geolibraries is not rendered so easily. How,
for example, would one portray economic information such as average household

income using the Digital Earth metaphor? In some cases there may be clever

ways of making visible what is normally invisible; in other cases it may be

necessary to represent the presence of information using symbols that exploit

some other metaphor, such as books or library shelves. 
This is a novel area with
no obvious guideposts, and research will be needed to determine how best to

make the user of distributed geolibraries aware of the existence of information

and of its important characteristics. 
In particular, we know almost nothing about
how to render dynamic geospatial data or how to indicate
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES81
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.availability, yet we anticipate that such data will be increasingly available to the

users of distributed geolibraries.
Knowledge Construction
Users of distributed geolibraries will need tools for analysis, modeling,
simulation, decision making, and the creation of new geographic knowledge. An

important component will be the workspace in which the user can process data

using many of the functions found in today's GIS, along with other functions such

as those described earlier in 
Chapter 4. Given the massive investment in GIS, the
easiest way to achieve this will be through collaboration between the builders of

distributed geolibraries and the developers and vendors of GIS software.

Compatibility and interoperability between GIS products and distributed

geolibraries will be needed. For example, the metadata used to discover, assess,

and retrieve data should be processed and updated by the GIS as data are

manipulated and used to create new data sets. Metadata should be generated

automatically when new knowledge is created by analysis and modeling. 
Currentsoftware products are generally incapable of these functions, and much research

remains to be done to make them generally available.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Many of the topics discussed in this report fall under the heading of ''things
we do not yet know how to do." In some cases, such as the building of a

distributed geolibrary itself, there may be no obviously missing piece of theory or

understanding; rather, it may be that we have not yet tried and that given

sufficient resources the necessary knowledge will be available. But other items

require more focused research. Among them are the following:
Scalability. 
We have no experience with building and operating data-
handling systems on the massive scales envisioned here.
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES82
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interface design. 
Most information technologies are designed for skilled
users. Distributed geolibraries will be used by everyone, over a wide

range of levels of cognitive understanding, and will require new

methods of interface design that embody sound principles, some of

which have yet to be discovered.
Merging data. We have very little experience with the massive
redundancy anticipated in distributed geolibraries, where many sources

of the same data will be available. We do not have techniques for

merging data from different sources, across different scales and levels of

accuracy, or across different data models or ontologies, or for combining

or conflating the desirable properties of sources. Distributed geolibraries

will be one of a growing number of applications that depend on the

ability to register multiple data sets quickly and easily and to remove

obvious discrepancies.Indexing. 
Our methods of indexing data have been developed for the flat
two-dimensional world of maps and images. Distributed geolibraries

will require comprehensive approaches to indexing that are capable of

supporting "drilling down" over a wide range of scales.
Visualization. While techniques for visualizing static two-dimensional
data are well understood, particularly in cartography, we do not have the

same level of understanding of appropriate ways to visualize data on the

curved surface of the Earth, especially when the data are time

dependent. Much more research is needed into appropriate metaphors,

techniques, and user responses before these will be as easy as traditional

cartographic visualization.
FINDING 13
The success of a distributed geolibrary will be largely dependent on the
ability to integrate information available about a place. That ability is

severely impeded today by differences in formats and standards, access

mechanisms, and organizational structures. Removal of impediments to

integration should become a high priority of government agencies that

provide geospatial data.
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES83
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDING 14
Significant research problems will have to be solved to enable the
vision of distributed geolibraries. Research is needed on indexing,

visualization, scaling, automated search and abstracting, and data

conflation. Research on these issues targeted to improve access to

integrated geoinformation might be pursued by the National Science

Foundation and other agencies sponsoring basic science, as well as by the

National Mapping Division of the USGS, and the National Imagery and

Mapping Agency.
Many mechanisms and programs already exist to move this research agenda
forward. Examples include the following:
The Digital Library Initiative. Funded first in 1994 by NSF, NASA, andDARPA, this program was recently reannounced (
www.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf9863/nsf9863.html), and is expected to fund research through 2003.Among the six projects funded by the first round, those at the University

of California's Berkeley (
elib.cs.berkeley.edu) and Santa Barbara(alexandria.ucsb.edu) campuses are particularly relevant to distributed
geolibraries.Digital Earth. As discussed in 
Chapter 2, Vice-President Gore described
a vision of Digital Earth that bears substantial resemblance to distributed

geolibraries. In the next few years this vision may develop into a

substantial funded research program.
Digital Government. NSF recently announced research opportunities in a
new program to build stronger ties between the research community in

computer and information science and engineering and various

government departments with very significant investments in systems

and data integration (NSF Program Announcement 98-121). This

program may be a suitable vehicle for promoting the research needed to

support distributed geolibraries.
Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence (KDI). 
NSF's KDI program
announcement (NSF Program Announcement 98-55) has strong

relevance to the vision and issues of distributed geolibraries.
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES84
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The August 1998 Interim Report of the President's Information
Technology Advisory Committee (www.ccic.gov/ac) called for
substantial increases in federal information technology research and

development and for a series of virtual 
expeditions in specific areas. An
effort in distributed geolibraries seems to fit the intent of the report well.
In addition to these formal mechanisms, significant research and
development activities are under way in the private sector among vendors of GIS

software and among defense and intelligence contractors that can be expected to

push in the direction of distributed geolibraries over the next few years. For

example, the vendors of new commercial space imagery could use systems like

distributed geolibraries for the dissemination of their data products to the broad

user community. The FGDC is also a potential source of research initiatives in

this area, given its relevance to the future dissemination mechanisms of the

NSDI.Many of the research needs identified here are basic in nature, and it may be
many years before solutions can be found. On the other hand some issues such as

the need for better methods of data integration, are so widely recognized,

technical in nature, and strongly motivated that significant progress can be

expected in a comparatively short period.
INSTITUTIONAL NEEDS
Although elements of a distributed geolibrary already exist in the form of
prototype clearinghouses and other projects, it is easy to lose sight of the broader

concept and the degree to which it represents a radical departure from current and

past practices as reflected in our institutions and their accepted functions. More

specifically:  Traditional production and dissemination of geoinformation have been
centralized, 
as functions of the upper levels of government. These
arrangements made good sense in the past, but the empower
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES85
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ment that has occurred as a result of the almost universal adoption of

information technologies, especially geographic information

technologies, over the past two decades has called them into question.

Yet such institutions as the national mapping agencies still reflect this

legacy. 
The vision of distributed geolibraries represents a broadly based
restructuring of past institutional arrangements for the dissemination of

geospatial data and one that is much more bottom-up, decentralized,

and voluntary. 
The institutional arrangements of the WWW provide an
excellent model.  The implications of distributed geolibraries for intellectual property
rights, the library as an institution, and the economics of information use

are discussed at length in 
Chapter 3.  Traditional production and dissemination practices for geoinformation
have emphasized the 
horizontal integration of information at the expense
of 
vertical 
integration. Today it is much easier to obtain and make use of
the same type of data for different areas 
than it is to obtain and make use
of 
different types of data for the same area. 
A distributed geolibrary
would prioritize vertical integration to obtain responses to such queries

as "What have you got about 
there ?" Producers and distributors of
geospatial data could make it much easier to integrate different types of

data. The USGS, for example, could make it easier to obtain digital

elevation data, digital topographic data, and digital orthophoto data for

the same area. Today that ability is severely impeded by differences in

formats and standards, access mechanisms, and organizational

structures, as well as in the basic geometric and positional problems

associated with varying accuracy and varying definitions of shorelines

and other features.FINDING 15
While traditional production of geospatial data has been relatively
centralized, the vision of distributed geolibraries represents a broadly based

restructuring of past institutional arrangements for the dissemination of

geospatial data and one that is much more bottom-up, decentralized, and

voluntary.BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES86
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some of these issues are specific to geoinformation and geospatial data, but
others are generally applicable to the emerging information society, which is

being driven by technological change and by the desire for greater access to

information. Lopez and Larsgaard (1998) discuss this relationship between the

needs of the geospatial data and the broader institutional setting of the evolving

digital library. That relationship is complex, and it is clear that distributed

geolibraries are part of a larger vision of the digital library of the future. But the

central role they give to searches based on location makes them clearly distinct,

as do the research problems identified in the previous section. The development

of distributed geolibraries will require a unique set of partnerships between

developers of information technologies, geographic information scientists,

application domain specialists, and user communities. It is unlikely, therefore,

that the vision of distributed geolibraries will be realized through broadly based

efforts to research and develop digital libraries in general; instead, efforts are

needed that are directed specifically at distributed geolibraries and

geoinformation. Funding and coordination are needed to develop prototypes,

stimulate basic research, and build partnerships that specifically address the

vision of distributed geolibraries.
MEASURING PROGRESS
The workshop convened by the Mapping Science Committee (see 
preface)was designed to help identify a vision of distributed geolibraries and the steps

needed to realize that vision. An important element of building distributed

geolibraries is, therefore, the measurement of progress: how will we know how

much progress has been made and how much remains to be done? In this section

we offer some possible bases for measurement.
Query-based. 
If the objective of distributed geolibraries can be expressed
in the ability to issue the query "What information is available about

there?", a simple measure of progress can be based on the amount of
information available to a user of the WWW in
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES87
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.response to queries of that nature. Some of the sites listed in 
Appendix Dcan already respond to that type of query. A simple measure would be

complicated by the various conditions under which information is

available, such as cost, intellectual property restrictions, and quality.
Analysis-based. Rather than base progress on the availability of data, a
more sensitive and powerful measure might be one based on the ability

of the user to obtain services that involve analysis. Information that

involves processing in its creation from raw data, and information that

represents knowledge, can be of more value that the raw data

themselves. If distributed geolibraries are to involve a vision of services

rather than simple data supply, measures based on the complexity of

analysis will be important indicators of progress.
Cost-based. One way to assess a traditional library is on the basis of
cost: How much does it save its users to have access to resources such as

books or databases via libraries in lieu of the user purchasing them? If

economics is the real driver of the library system, the same argument can

be made about distributed geolibraries: specifically, how much is saved

when data are shared rather than re-created in multiple archives?
Abstraction-based. Another view of the traditional library is that it is a
successful abstraction mechanism, allowing its users to find and retrieve

information objects (books) without direct knowledge of their contents,

through the mechanisms used by the library to abstract and catalog. One

might measure the progress of a distributed geolibrary on this basis, by

developing indicators of the amount of work required on the part of the

user to find a given item of information. The library has clearly failed if

this can be done only by inspecting the contents of every information

object in the library.
In addition, progress toward the vision of distributed geolibraries could be
measured through the volume of accumulated research results, the sophistication

of prototypes, and the lessons learned from each.
BUILDING DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES88
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6ConclusionsREVISITING THE RATIONALE FOR DISTRIBUTED
GEOLIBRARIESChapter 1 presents a limited set of examples for which the ability to access
information by place from distributed resources would be useful. In the first

example, a truck accident has caused the potential for major environmental

disaster and possibly loss of life. The accident's impact is directly dependent on

the ability of those responding to gather the necessary information on which an

effective response strategy can be based. Knowing exactly where the accident

occurred can reduce the time taken to make the first response. Knowing what is

likely to happen to the spilled liquids or gases can reduce their impact, lead to

more rapid cleanup, and avert many possible costly outcomes.
Actual benefits of improved access to information in such circumstances are
extremely difficult to estimate. Many of them are intangible and thus difficult to

express in dollar terms. Outcomes of such events vary enormously in severity,

yet the difference between a life lost and a life saved is immense. In the case of

the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, for example, it has been suggested that the use

of a computer-based model of the Murrah federal building, along with

simulations of how the explosion modified the structure and of where the

occupants were likely to be found, shortened the total duration of the rescue

effort by several days and significantly increased the probability that victims

would be found alive.
CONCLUSIONS89Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the other examples in 
Chapter 1, the value of improved access to
geoinformation lies in the intangible benefits of a better-informed citizenry and

of improved access by stakeholders to the information resources of governments

and other agencies. In these examples, 
place 
 provides by far the most effective
means of searching for information when the issue is localized to a

neighborhood, city, or region and when it spans many different themes,

disciplines, and areas of responsibility. Location is the 
only 
way to link
information from diverse themes in such circumstances, and our current inability

to do that is a major impediment to informed debate on many of the issues that

concern society.If a distributed geolibrary in some form is not developed, a major
opportunity made possible by recent developments in information technology

will be lost. With a geolibrary the time needed to respond to emergencies could

be reduced, as those responsible for dealing with emergencies would have vastly

improved means to assemble needed information. And with distributed

geolibraries the average citizen and stakeholder will have a greater opportunity to

be better informed about many local and regional issues.
DISTRIBUTED GEOLIBRARIES IN CONTEXT
Chapter 2 describes a physical geolibrary as a building containing a large
globe with which users would specify their areas of interest; in response, the

library would provide all of the information relevant to that area. The concept

was presented as a thought experiment, since clearly such a physical geolibrary

could not be built. However, the concept suggests two questions that should be

addressed: (1) To what extent is the geolibrary an extension of the traditional

library with its card catalog and search mechanism based on author, title, and

subject? (2) How will the geolibrary complement traditional libraries?
The workshop and this report have focused almost exclusively on queries
defined primarily by location, arguing that
CONCLUSIONS90Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for many reasons such queries have been difficult to handle in the traditional

library and that the kinds of materials best found through such queries are

consequently less likely to be found in the traditional library. Thus, the geolibrary

is distinguished by both a distinct search mechanism and a somewhat distinct

collection.It is important not to give exclusive emphasis to place-based searches, even
in the case of geospatial data. Consider, for example, the following query "Do

you have a picture of a hurricane?" Queries of this form are common in

education, for example, or the news media, and although they require geospatial

data in response, such as an image from space, the data's footprint on the Earth's

surface is actually irrelevant to the search.
The Panel suggests that the geolibrary is complementary to the traditional
library in the sense that it adds a new search mechanism to the traditional one. By

adding place-based search to searches based on author, title, and subject, the

distributed geolibrary allows users with needs defined by place to search the

distributed archive of the WWW in new ways. In turn it encourages producers

and custodians of geoinformation to make their information assets accessible

through the WWW. Whether a distributed geolibrary evolves into a distinct set of

software, protocols, and institutions or whether it becomes fully integrated into

the distributed digital library of the future remains to be seen.
The ability to search by place should provide a strong stimulus to the
producers and custodians of geoinformation to add specifications of footprints

and to make use of metadata formats that include such information, including the

FGDC's Content Standards for Digital Geospatial Metadata (
www.fgdc.gov  ) and
suitably extended versions of the Dublin Core (
purl.org/dc). Governmentagencies could take a lead in this direction by developing a coordinated plan to

link as much information as possible to geographic footprints. This is already

under way in those agencies represented on the FGDC, since such agencies are

mandated to produce metadata according to the FGDC standard for all of their

geospatial products. But the United States possesses vast archives of information

that could be incorporated in a
CONCLUSIONS91Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.distributed geolibrary collection and made accessible to place-based search if it

could be linked to a footprint. Linking much of this information to geographic

locationŠin other words, to transform it to geoinformationŠwould be valuable

within a geolibrary context.
Several programs discussed in 
Chapter 5
 might provide support for the
development of the distributed geolibrary, although none is targeted to the

specific research problems associated with place-based information resources.

Funding will be needed to stimulate the development of prototypes, support

research, and build partnerships directed specifically at distributed geolibraries, so

that the vision outlined in this report can become a reality and the problems of

data access identified at the outset in 
Chapter 1
 can be addressed effectively.
CONCLUSIONS92Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferencesAdler, P. S. (1995). Geographic information systems and academic libraries: An introduction , 
TheJournal of Academic Librarianship (Special Issue) 21(4): 233-235.
Barker, J., et al. (1995). Rights Manager System: Permissions Manager Subsystem (Version 2 draft),
Library Collections Services, Case Western Reserve University.
Borgman, C. L., M. J. Bates, M. V. Cloonan, E. N. Efthimiadis, A. Gilliland-Swetland, Y. Kafai, G.
L. Leazer, and A. Maddox (1996). 
Social Aspects of Digital Libraries, 
Final report to the
National Science Foundation; Computer, Information Science, and Engineering Directorate;

Division of Information, Robotics, and Intelligent Systems; Information Technology and

Organizations Program. http://www.gslis.ucla.edu/dl/Buckland, M. K. (1991). Information as thing, 
Journal of the American Society for Information
Science 42(5), 351-360.
Corporation for National Research Initiatives (1998). 
NSF SMETE Lib Study: Report of the SMETE
Library Workshop. 
Washington, DC. 
http://www.dlib.org/smete/public/report.html
Craig, W. J. (1995). Public data access: Another side of GIS data sharing, in 
Sharing GeographicInformation, 
H. J. Onsrud and G. Rushton, eds., Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, N.J., pp. 107-118.Crawford, W., and M. Gorman (1995). 
Future Libraries: Dreams, Madness and Reality, 
AmericanLibrary Association, Chicago.Dutton, G. H. (1984). Geodesic modeling of planetary relief. 
Cartographica 21(2,3), 188-207.
Gayon, T. (1998). Local Geographic Information and Technology in Colorado Public Libraries,
Master's thesis, Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder.
REFERENCES93Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Gladney, H. M., and J. B. Lotspiech (1998). Safeguarding digital library contents and users: storing,
sending, showing, and honoring usage terms and conditions, 
D-Lib Magazine, 
May 1998.http://www.dlib.org/Goodchild, M. F., and J. D. Proctor (1997). Scale in a digital geographic world. 
Geographical and
Environmental Modeling 1(1), 5-23.Goodchild, M. F., and S. Yang (1992). A hierarchical spatial data structure for global geographic
information systems, 
CVGIP: Graphical Models and Image Processing
 54(1), 31-44.
Goodchild, M. F., M. J. Egenhofer, R. Fegeas, and C. A. Kottman, eds. (1998). 
InteroperatingGeographic Information Systems, 
Kluwer, New York.
Hawkins, B. L. (1994). Creating the library of the future: Incrementalism won't get us there! 
TheSerials Librarian 24 
(3-4), 17-47.Jones, J. (1997). Federal GIS projects decentralize. 
GIS World
 10(8), 46-51.Lopez, X. R., and M. Larsgaard (1998). Towards a California geospatial digital library: a strategy for
networked knowledge. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems
 25(3), 133-141.Losee, R. M. (1997). A discipline independent definition of information, 
Journal of the American
Society for Information Science
 48(3), 243-269.
Moeller, J. (1998). The National Spatial Data Infrastructure: An Overview, 
Office ofIntergovernmental Affairs Newsletter 5, 
U.S. General Services Administration, Washington,
D.C., pp. 12-13. 
http://policyworks.gov/intergovNational Academy of Public Administration (1998). 
Geographic Information for the 21st Century:
Building a Strategy for the Nation, 
Washington, D.C., 358 pp.
National Research Council (1993). 
Toward a Coordinated Spatial Data Infrastructure for the
Nation. 
Mapping Science
REFERENCES94Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 171 pp. 
http://pompeii.nap.edu/books/0309048990/html/index.htmlNational Research Council (1997). 
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data
 , Committee on Issues of Transborder Flow of Scientific Data, National Academy Press,

Washington, DC, 235 pp. 
http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/BitsOfPower/National Research Council (1997). 
More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the
Nation's Information Infrastructure, 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 
http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/screen/National Research Council (1998). 
Developing a Digital National Library for Undergraduate
Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education: Report of a Workshop, 

Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Education National Academy Press,

Washington, D.C. 
http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/dlibraryNewcomb, S. R., N. A. Kipp, and V. T. Newcomb (1991). The Hytime hypermedia/time-based
document structuring language, 
Communications of the ACM
 34(11), 67-83.
Perritt, H. H. (1996). 
Law and the Information Superhighway. 
John Wiley & Sons, Somerset, N.J:
Rhind, D. W. (1999). National and international geospatial data policies, in 
Geographical Information
Systems: Principles, Techniques, Applications and Management, 
P. A. Longley, M. F.
Goodchild, D. J. Maguire, and D. W. Rhind, eds., Wiley, New York, pp. 767-787.
Star, S. L., and K. Ruhleder (1996). Steps toward an ecology of infrastructure: Design and access for
large information spaces, 
Information Systems Research 7(1), 111-134.Tosta, N., and M. Domaratz (1997). The U.S. National Spatial Data Infrastructure. in 
GeographicInformation Research: Bridging the Atlantic, 
M. Craglia and H. Couclelis, editors, Taylor
and Francis, London, pp. 19-27.
REFERENCES95Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Tsou, M., and B. P. Buttenfield (1998). Client/server components and metadata objects for distributed
geographic information services, 
Proceedings, GIS/LIS '98, Fort Worth, TX, November.
White, D., A. J. Kimerling, and W. S. Overton (1992). Cartographic and geometric components of a
global sampling design for environmental monitoring, 
Cartography and GeographicInformation Systems 19(1), 5-22.
Worboys, M. F. (1995). 
GIS: A Computing Perspective, 
Taylor & Francis, London.
REFERENCES96Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesAPPENDIXES97Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES98Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Workshop ParticipantsPrudence S. Adler, 
Assistant Executive Director, Association of Research
LibrariesTimothy M. Alexander, 
Consultant, Washington, D.C.William Y. Arms, 
Vice President, Corporation for National Research
InitiativesJames Barrett, Space Imaging Corporation
Gerald S. Barton, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Francis P. Bretherton, 
Director, Space Science and Engineering Center,
University of Wisconsin
Don Buhler, 
Bureau of Land Management
Barbara P. Buttenfield, Department of Geography, University of. Colorado
Nicholas Chrisman, 
Department of Geography, University of Washington
David J. Coleman, 
Chairman, Department of Geodesy and Geomatics
Engineering, University of New Brunswick, Canada
Donald F. Cooke, 
President, Geographic Data Technology, Inc.
Frederic W. Corle II, 
Partner, Potomac Research Group
Max J. Egenhofer, 
Department of Spatial Information, Science and
Engineering, University of Maine
John D. Evans, 
Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology
Christos Faloutsos, Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon
UniversityGary Fitzpatrick, Library of Congress
Michael J. Folk, 
National Center for Supercomputing Applications,
University of Illinois
Kenneth E. Foote, 
Department of Geography, University of Texas
APPENDIX A
99Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Alan M. Gaines, 
Earth Sciences Division, National Science Foundation
Kenn Gardels, 
Director, Research Program in Environmental Planning and
Geographic Information Systems, University of California, Berkeley
Henry L. Garie, 
Department of Environmental Protection, State of New
Jersey (President, National States Geographic Information Council)
Barry J. Glick, 
President, GeoSystems Global Corporation (MapQuest)
Michael F. Goodchild, 
National Center for Geographic Information and
Analysis, University of California, Santa Barbara
Stephen Griffin, 
Digital Libraries Initiative, National Science Foundation
Wayne A. Hallada, 
Defense Intelligence Agency
Linda L. Hill, 
Alexandria Digital Library, University of California, Santa
BarbaraThomas M. Holm, 
EROS Data Center, U.S. Geological Survey
Sally Howe, Associate Director, National Coordination Office for
Computing, Information, and Communications
Robert E. Kahn, 
President, Corporation for National Research Initiatives
Thomas A. Kalil, Senior Director, National Economic Council, Executive
Office of the President
Karen Kemp, 
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis,
University of California, Santa Barbara
Annette J. Krygiel, 
Institute for National Strategic Studies, National
Defense UniversityNand Lal, 
Digital Libraries Initiative, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Nina S-N. Lam, 
Department of Geography, Louisiana State University
Roberta E. Lenczowski, 
Deputy Director for Operations, National Imagery
and Mapping AgencyMichael E. Lesk, 
Director, Division of Information and Intelligent
Systems, National Science Foundation
Clifford A. Lynch, 
Executive Director, Coalition for Networked
InformationDavid M. Mark, 
Department of Geography, State University of New York,
BuffaloPatrick McGlamery, 
Map and Geographic Information Center, University
of Connecticut
Eric Miller, 
Online Computer Library Center, Inc.
John Moeller, 
Executive Director, Federal Geographic Data Committee,
U.S. Geological Survey
Joel Morrison, 
Geography Division, Bureau of the Census
APPENDIX A
100Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Douglas D. Nebert, 
Federal Geographic Data Committee, U.S. Geological
SurveyRobert Neches, 
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern
CaliforniaHarlan J. Onsrud, 
Department of Spatial Information Science and
Engineering University of Maine
Hedy C. Rossmeissl, 
National Mapping Division, U.S. Geological Survey
Walter Senus, Chief Scientist, National Imagery and Mapping Agency
Ben A. Shneiderman, 
Department of Computer Science, University of
MarylandKaren C. Siderelis, 
Director, North Carolina Center for Geographic
Information and AnalysisTerence Smith, 
Alexandria Digital Library, University of California, Santa
BarbaraGale TeSelle, 
Information Technology Division, Natural Resources
Conservation Service
Rex W. Tracy, 
Vice President, GDE Systems, Inc.
Robert Tufts, 
TASCA. Keith Turner, 
Department of Geology and Geological Engineering,
Colorado School of Mines
Ferris Webster, 
College of Marine Studies, University of Delaware (Chair,
ICSU Panel on World Data Centers)
Frederick Weingarten, Computing Research Association
James F. Williams II, 
Dean of Libraries, University of Colorado
Maria Zemankova, 
Division of Information and Intelligent Systems,
National Science FoundationNRC Staff
Thomas M. Usselman, 
Study Director, Mapping Science Committee,
National Research Council
Jennifer T. Estep, 
Administrative Assistant, Mapping Science Committee,
National Research Council
Molly Vogt, 
Workshop Assistant, National Geographic Society
APPENDIX A
101Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
102Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BContributed White Papers
The following white papers were prepared and distributed to the workshop
participants as provocative authored articles; they were designed to stimulate

thought and were not peer reviewed. Authors did not have the opportunity to

make revisions after the workshop. The papers (generally two to three pages

long) are available on the World Wide Web at 
http://www4.nas.edu/cger/besr.nsffollowing hyperlinks to Mapping Science Committee, reports, distributed

geolibraries, white papers. This web site will be maintained at least through the

end of 2000.
What Is a Geolibrary? 
Michael F. Goodchild, University of California,
Santa BarbaraWhat Is a Geolibrary? 
Clifford A. Kottman, Open GIS Consortium
Making the Case for Distributed GeoLibraries 
Barbara P. Buttenfield,University of Colorado, Boulder
Confidence in Distributed Digital Geolibraries 
Roberta E. Lenczowski,National Imagery and Mapping Agency
Data Quality in Distributed GeoLibraries 
Rex W. Tracy, GDE Systems,
Inc.National Satellite Land Remote Sensing Data Archive: "A National
Asset" Thomas M. Holm, U.S. Geological Survey EROS Data Center
APPENDIX B
103Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Possible Research Topics Related to Geolibraries 
Michael F. Goodchild,
University of California, Santa Barbara
Distributed Geolibraries: Challenges and Opportunities from a
Computing and Scientific Data Management Perspective 
Mike Folk, National
Center for Supercomputer Applications, University of Illinois
Geolibrary and Statewide Electronic Atlas, 
Nina Lam, Louisiana State
UniversityPutting The User First: Implications for the Geolibrary 
A. Keith Turner,Colorado School of Mines
Geolibraries 
Walter Senus, National Imagery and Mapping Agency
Producer Rights and Public Rights in Spatial Data Sets in Geolibraries 
Harlan J. Onsrud, University of Maine
Distributed Geolibraries 
Patrick McGlamery, University of Connecticut
Geolibrary Access of Historical Climate Data Publications in the NOAA
Library 
Gerald S. Barton, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Geolibraries: Integration into to the Life Cycle of Information Creation
and Use Linda L. Hill, Alexandria Digital Library Project, University of
California, Santa Barbara
The Geodata Network Kenn Gardels, University of California, Berkeley
What is a Geolibrary? 
Christos Faloutsos, Carnegie Mellon University
APPENDIX B
104Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Workshop Agenda Workshop on
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial
Information ResourcesMapping Science Committee

National Research Council - National Academy of Sciences

Room Green 130, 2001 Wisconsin Avenue, NW

Washington, D.C.
The workshop is intended to address the following:
 of a 
vision 
for geospatial data dissemination and access in
2010.Comparison of 
current efforts in digital library research, clearinghouse
development, and other data distribution and search activities.
  Suggestion of short-term and long-term 
research and development 
needed to achieve the vision.
  Identification of the 
policy and institutional issues, 
particularly for
convergence of efforts to realize the vision.
APPENDIX C
105Monday, June 15, 1998
8:00Registration, Coffee, Continental Breakfast

Plenary
8:30 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSEMike Goodchild, Workshop Chair,University of California, Santa BarbaraDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
1069:00FRAME OF REFERENCEŠDigital Libraries, Internet, Information Sciences
Robert Kahn, 
President, Corporation for National Research Initiatives
Michael Lesk, 
Division Director, Information and Intelligent Systems, National
Science Foundation10:20BREAK10:40POLICY-INSTITUTIONAL-EDUCATIONALEric Miller, 
Online Computer Library Center, Inc.
Harlan J. Onsrud, 
Department of Spatial Information Science and Engineering,
University of Maine12:00LUNCH1:00Breakout Sessions
Each group will discuss the following questions:1. What is a suitable vision for geospatial data dissemination and 
accessin 2010 (code named geolibraries)?  What is a geolibrary?

What types of information might a geolibrary contain?

What services might it offer?

What types of users would there be?

What kinds of access restrictions might be needed?

Should a geolibrary be integrated with other information services?
2. Policy and institutional issuesWhat are the legal, ethical, and political issues involved in creating geolibraries? For
example, what problems could geolibraries raise related to intellectual property rights?

How might such issues affect the technical development of geolibraries?
Who should pay for the creation and maintenance of geolibraries? What components
might be "free" (funded by the public sector or by the private sector as loss leaders)?

What institutional structures would be needed for geolibraries? What organizations

might take a lead in their development?
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
107  What are the cognitive problems associated with using geolibraries? Is it
possible to construct a geolibrary that is useful to a child in grade 3, for

example? What protocols would users need to master, and what

problems would occur in using geolibraries across cultural or linguistic

barriers? What are the implications of a national-level distributed

geolibrary on education? What are the prospects for international

geolibraries?4:00PlenaryRapporteurs will present results of eachbreakout group.5:00                  
ADJOURN5:30                      
RECEPTION; Followed by Dinner at 6:30Tuesday, June 16, 1998

8:00                  
Coffee, Continental BreakfastPlenary
8:30CURRENT ACTIVITIES ANDTECHNICAL ISSUES
Ben Shneiderman, 
Department of Computer Science, University of
MarylandThomas Kalil, 
Senior Director, National Economic Council, The White
HouseTerence Smith, Director, Alexandria Project, University of California,
Santa Barbara10:20BREAK10:30BreakoutsEach group will discuss the following questions:
3. Ongoing Activities
  What components of existing efforts in digital library research,
clearinghouse development, and other data distribution
Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
108and search activities might form a part of a distributed geolibrary

system? KDI? Digital Earth?
the necessary data sets to support geolibraries exist? What initiatives
are needed to develop or compile them?
  How could the geolibraries concept be expanded beyond the national
level to take advantage of international and global information

resources?4. Technical Issues and R&D Needs
 of geospatial data across themes and scales.

generation of search engines

 interoperability

 interface metaphors

metadata

  Which of the R&D needs can be attained in the next few years, and
which ones may take 5 to 10 years?
12:00LUNCH1:30PlenaryResults of the research needs and current activities to realize a "geolibrary" vision

  Overall Workshop Results

4:30AdjournDistributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D
Example PrototypesDetailed in this section is a sample of World Wide Web sites chosen to
illustrate existing elements of the distributed geolibrary vision. Each is largely

isolated from one another and falls short of the full vision. Taken together, the set

illustrates both what is already possible and how far we still are from a distributed

geolibrary.Microsoft's Terraserver (www.terraserver.com)
Terraserver offers digital imagery (
Figure D.1) from the Russian SPIN-2
satellites and digital orthorectified photographs (orthophotos) from the U.S.

Geological Survey. The archive contains over 1 terabyte of information and can

be queried by pointing, zooming, and panning on a basemap or by specifying

place-names. No services are provided for finding or integrating other data based

on place.Figure D.1.
U.S. coverage in the terraserver database in October 1998.
APPENDIX D
109Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MapQuest (www.mapquest.com)The MapQuest site offers a range of services based on its database (see
Figure D.2). The map illustrates the ability to provide services based on specific
collections, in addition to serving unmodified information.
Figure D.2. 
Result of a request to the MapQuest site for

a map centered on an address in St. Louis, Missouri.
APPENDIX D
110Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Environmental Protection Agency ZIP Code Search
(www.epa.gov/enviro/zipcodejs.html)The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) web site offers several
forms of place-based search through the agency's archives, including Maps On

Demand and ZIP code search. From the web site:
The EPA Envirofacts Warehouse is a database that includes information on

Superfund sites, drinking water, air pollution, toxic releases, hazardous waste,

and water discharge permits. Through Envirofacts, you can get lists of which

facilities in your neighborhood are releasing pollutants or are legally handling

hazardous materials, where any Superfund sites are located and what their

cleanup status is, and more. In many cases, you can link to more information

about the chemicals involved at the listed sites, and find out whether they are

potentially harmful.

Through Envirofacts' EnviroMapper feature, you can customize a computer-

generated map of your neighborhood to view the location of EPA regulated

sites, schools, churches, streams, streets, and other geographic features.
APPENDIX D
111Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.U.S. Bureau of the Census TIGER Map Server
(tiger.census.gov)The Bureau of the Census web site supports place-based search for census
data. In 
Figure D.3
 the TIGER Map Server has generated a map of part of
Goleta, California, showing features selected by the user. The main purpose of

the TIGER Map Service project is to provide a good-quality, national scale,

street-level map to users of the World Wide Web. This service is freely accessible

to the public, and based on an open architecture that allows other Web developers

and publishers to use public domain maps generated by this service in their own

applications and documents. We planned to provide high-quality street maps,

with simple GIS capabilities such as point display and statistical choropleth

mapping.Figure D.3.
 The U.S. Bureau of the Census TIGER Map Server will
create maps to user specifications, based on place-based search.
APPENDIX D
112Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.U.S. Geological Survey National Atlas (www.usgs.gov/atlas)
The National Atlas web site creates and delivers maps on demand from the
National Atlas database. 
Figure D.4 shows the initial stage of specification.
Figure D.4.
The U.S. Geological Survey's National Atlas web site, which allows 

users to specify and create customized maps from the National Atlas database.
APPENDIX D
113Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MIT's Digital Orthophoto Server (ortho.mit.edu)
This Massachusetts Institute of Technology web site serves digital
orthophotos (DOQs) for the area around Boston. 
Figure D.5 shows the index
page; by clicking on a tile it is possible to retrieve the associated data at a user-

defined level of resolution.
FIGURE D.5.
Index page for MIT's Digital Orthophoto server, which 

provides downloadable orthophotography for the Boston area.
APPENDIX D
114Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Alexandria Digital Library (alexandria.ucsb.edu)
The Alexandria Digital Library (ADL) is the product of a research project at
the University of California, Santa Barbara, funded through the Digital Library

Initiative of the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space

Administration, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. 
Figure D.6shows the first screen in ADL's process of defining a place-based search.

Additional properties can be specified to narrow the search, which is then applied

to the order 106 data sets in the current ADL collection.
Figure D.6.
Opening screen of the Alexandria Digital Library's  Java-

based engine for searching its collection based on location.
APPENDIX D
115Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Microsoft's HomeAdvisor (www.homeadvisor.com)
This Microsoft web site is designed to help people searching for homes. It
includes the ability to access demographic and other information about

neighborhoods (see 
Chapter 1), search listings, and estimate payments.Figure D.7 shows the opening screen.
Figure D.7.
Microsoft's HomeAdvisor web site.
APPENDIX D
116Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix EBiographical Sketches of Panel Members
Michael F. Goodchild (Chair) is professor and chair of the Department of
Geography at the University of California, Santa Barbara; director of the

National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis; and associate director

of the Alexandria Digital Library. He received his B.A. in physics from

Cambridge University and Ph.D. in geography from McMaster University. Dr.

Goodchild taught at the University of Western Ontario for 19 years before

moving to his present position in 1988. His research interests focus on the generic

issues of geographic information, including accuracy and the modeling of

uncertainty, design of spatial decision support systems, development of methods

of spatial analysis, and data structures for global geographic information systems.

His publications include the two volume text entitled 
Geographical InformationSystems. Principles, Techniques, Applications and Management 
(1999, Wiley).
He is also chair of the Mapping Science Committee.
Prudence S. Adler is assistant executive director of the Association of
Research Libraries (Washington, D.C.), where she is primarily responsible for

federal relations and information policy activities. Much of her recent emphasis

has been on intellectual property rights in an electronic environment.
Barbara P. Buttenfield 
is associate professor of geography at the
University of Colorado in Boulder. She holds a Ph.D. in geography from the

University of Washington. She has served on the faculty at the State University

of New York, Buffalo; the University of California, Santa Barbara; and the

University of Wisconsin, Madison. Dr. Buttenfield's research interests focus on

cartographic knowledge construction, spatial data delivery on the Internet, and

visualization tools for geographic modeling. A current project to evaluate user
APPENDIX E
117Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.interface tools for the Alexandria Digital Library is funded jointly by NSF,

ARPA, and NASA. She is past President of the American Cartographic

Association, and serves on the editorial boards of 
Computers Environment and
Urban Systems, Transactions on GIS, 
and 
Cartographic Perspectives.  She is alsoa member of the Mapping Science Committee.
Robert E. Kahn 
is chairman, CEO, and president of the Corporation for
National Research Initiatives (CNRI), which he founded in 1986 after a 13 years

at the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). CNRI

provides leadership and funding for research and development of the National

Information Infrastructure. Dr. Kahn earned a Ph.D. degree from Princeton in

1964. He worked at Bell Laboratories and as an assistant professor of electrical

engineering at MIT. He took a leave of absence from MIT to join Bolt Beranek

and Newman, where he was responsible for the system design of the Arpanet. In

1972 he moved to DARPA and subsequently became director of DARPA's

Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO). While director of IPTO he

initiated the United States government's billion-dollar Strategic Computing

Program, the largest computer research and development program ever

undertaken. Dr. Kahn conceived the idea of open-architecture networking. He is a

coinventor of the TCP/IP protocols and was responsible for originating DARPA's

Internet program. Dr. Kahn also coined the term 
national information
infrastructure (NII) in the mid-1980s, which later became more widely known as
the information superhighway. His recent work has been developing the concept

of a digital object infrastructure to provide a framework for interoperability of

heterogeneous information systems, particularly as applied to digital libraries.

Dr. Kahn is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and a 1997

recipient of the National Medal of Technology.
Annette J. Krygiel 
is with the Institute for National Strategic Studies,
National Defense University, Ft. Lesley J. McNair, in Washington, D.C. Dr.

Krygiel has a B.S. in mathematics from St. Louis University, and a M.S. and

Ph.D. in computer science from
APPENDIX E
118Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources, Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Washington University, St. Louis. In her doctoral research she developed

modeling techniques for parallel computing architectures. She began her

government career in 1963, serving with the Defense Mapping Agency (DMA)

until July 1994. While at DMA her areas of endeavor included software

development, software engineering, management of research initiatives in

computer science and telecommunications, and program management of large-

scale systems. Dr. Krygiel rejoined DMA's special program office to manage the

program integration, test and delivery phases of DMA's Digital Production

System, one of the U.S. Department of Defense's (DOD) largest software

developments. Subsequently, Dr. Krygiel served as DMA's chief scientist until

her formal appointment by the Secretary of Defense as the Director of the Central

Imagery Office (CIO), a DOD combat support agency. She remained as Director

for twenty-seven months until that agency merged into the National Imagery and

Mapping Agency in October 1996. She was awarded the National Intelligence

Distinguished Service Medal while CIO Director. Dr. Krygiel was subsequently

appointed to the Institute for National Strategic Studies at the National Defense

University, where she is investigating the problem of large-scale system

integration.Harlan J. Onsrud 
is associate professor in the Department of Spatial
Information Science and Engineering at the University of Maine and chair of the

Scientific Policy Committee of the National Center for Geographic Information

and Analysis. He received B.S. and M.S. degrees in Civil Engineering from the

University of Wisconsin and a Juris Doctorate from the University of Wisconsin

Law School. His research focuses on (1) analysis of legal and institutional issues

affecting the creation and use of digital databases and the sharing of geographic

information, (2) assessing utilization of GIS and the social impacts of the

technology, and (3) developing and assessing strategies for supporting the

diffusion of geographic information innovations. He is also a member of the

Mapping Science Committee.APPENDIX E
119