DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9692A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the PublicInterest in Scientific and Technical Databases158 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06825-3 | DOI 10.17226/9692Committee for a Study on Promoting Access to Scientific and Technical Data forthe Public Interest, National Research CouncilA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee for a Study on Promoting Access toScientific and Technical Data for the Public InterestCommission on Physical Sciences,Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.Private Rights and the Public Interestin Scientific and Technical Databases
AUESTIONOFBALANCE
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy ofSciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the

committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation (under grant no. OCE-9729508), the National Institutes of Health (under purchase order no. 467-MZ-801699), the NationalInstitute of Standards and Technology (under contract no. 43NANB909028), the National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the UnitedStates Geological Survey (through the aforementioned National Science Foundation grant no. OCE-9729508), and the Department of Energy (under contract no. DE-FG02-96ER30277).International Standard Book Number 0-309-06825-8Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 99-68421Additional copies of this report are available from National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Av-enue, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in theWashington metropolitan area); Internet <http://www.nap.edu>.Copyright 1999 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior
achievements of engineers.  Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of

Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination
of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter tobe an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of
medical care, research, and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of
Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both

Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulfare chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE FOR A STUDY ON PROMOTING ACCESS TOSCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATA FOR THE PUBLIC INTERESTRobert J. Serafin, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Chair
I. Trotter Hardy, College of William and Mary, School of Law
Maureen C. Kelly, BIOSIS
Peter R. Leavitt, Consultant
Lee E. Limbird, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Philip Loftus, Glaxo Wellcome
Harlan J. Onsrud, University of Maine
Harvey S. Perlman, University of Nebraska, College of Law
Roberta P. Saxon, Skjerven, Morrill, MacPherson, Franklin & Friel, LLP
Suzanne Scotchmer, University of California at Berkeley
Mark Stefik, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
Martha E. Williams, University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignNational Research Council StaffPaul F. Uhlir, Study DirectorJulie M. Esanu, Program/Research Associate
Pamela Gamble, Administrative Assistant
Barbara Wright, Administrative AssistantA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES, MATHEMATICS,AND APPLICATIONSPeter M. Banks, Veridian ERIM International, Inc., Co-ChairW. Carl Lineberger, University of Colorado, Co-ChairWilliam F. Ballhaus, Jr., Lockheed Martin Corporation
Shirley Chiang, University of California at Davis
Marshall H. Cohen, California Institute of Technology
Ronald G. Douglas, Texas A&M University
Samuel H. Fuller, Analog Devices, Inc.
Jerry P. Gollub, Haverford College
Michael F. Goodchild, University of California at Santa Barbara
Martha P. Haynes, Cornell University
Wesley T. Huntress, Jr., Carnegie Institution
Carol M. Jantzen, Savannah River Technology Center
Paul G. Kaminski, Technovation, Inc.
Kenneth H. Keller, University of Minnesota
John R. Kreick, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company (retired)
Marsha I. Lester, University of Pennsylvania
Dusa M. McDuff, State University of New York at Stony Brook
Janet Norwood, U.S. Commissioner of Labor Statistics (retired)M. Elisabeth Pat”-Cornell, Stanford UniversityNicholas P. Samios, Brookhaven National Laboratory
Robert J. Spinrad, Xerox PARC (retired)Norman Metzger, Executive Director (through July 1999)Myron F. Uman, Acting Executive Director (as of August 1999)A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
viiIn response to a request from several federal science agencies, the Commit-tee for a Study on Promoting Access to Scientific and Technical Data for the
Public Interest (see Appendix A) undertook a study to identify and evaluate the
various existing and proposed policy approaches (including related legal, eco-
nomic, and technical considerations) for protecting the proprietary rights of pri-
vate-sector database rights holders while promoting and enhancing access to
scientific and technical (S&T) data for public-interest uses.  Specifically, the

sponsors asked the study committee to address the following issues:1.Describe the salient characteristics and importance of scientific and tech-
nical databases in research, both in general categories and using specific
examples.2.Describe the practices of the production, dissemination, and use of S&T
data in the federal, nonprofit, and commercial contexts.3.Identify the major incentives and disincentives in the production, dissemina-
tion, and use of S&T data in the federal, not-for-profit, and commercial contexts.4.Review the key elements of existing and proposed intellectual property
rights regimes for noncopyrightable databases and other Òcollections of informa-tion,Ó including technical protection measures, with specific emphasis on S&T
databases.  Also review the federal government policies regarding scientific data
production, protection, dissemination, and use, particularly for data produced or
disseminated by nongovernment entities under an agreement with government,
including with government funding.5.Consider the pros and cons of legal, policy, and technical options identi-
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEfied in response to item 4 above, with particular attention to balancing the inter-ests of S&T database providers and disseminators in protecting their investments
with the interests of promoting access to and use of S&T data for research and
other public-interest uses.6.Identify issues that require further analysis and resolution, and how to
address them.7.Provide conclusions and recommendations where possible, or otherwise
provide an assessment of options.In discussing the charge and the scope of the project with the committee, thesponsors asked the committee to focus in particular on the legislative proposals
on database protection then pending in Congress as examples of the kinds of
statutory options that might be adopted.  Both the sponsors and the committee

were well aware of the fact that those pending proposals would change further
and therefore presented Òmoving targetsÓ for the study.  It is for this reason that
the committeeÕs recommendations regarding any potential legislation in this areaare offered as guiding principles rather than as specific language for a specific
bill.The focus of the study was further constrained to domestic, rather thaninternational, issues.  The committee was cognizant of the fact that any new U.S.

legislation would ultimately have substantial significance internationally, both in
the economic and legal domains and in the S&T research community, but it
limited its investigation and analysis of foreign laws and international legal is-
sues, concentrating only on their direct influence on the U.S. domestic legal and
policy situation.  In addition, although the subject matter included all S&T data-

bases, the committee was able to choose only representative examples for discus-
sion and analysis in the report.  For instance, the committee did not include

specific examples from the social sciences or the space sciences, among other
disciplines.  Nevertheless, the committee believes that the relatively broad spec-

trum of S&T databases that it did use captured the most significant issues in the
context of database protection and public-interest uses.In responding to its charge, the committee made significant efforts to obtainbroad input from representatives of the main identified interest groups, primarily
through a workshop that was held on January 14-15, 1999, at the main Depart-
ment of Commerce building in Washington, D.C. (Appendix B gives the agenda
and lists the participants).  The workshop 
ProceedingsÑtaped, transcribed, ed-ited, and published only in electronic form on the National AcademiesÕ Web siteat <www.nap.edu>Ñwere a major source of information for this report (Appen-dix C lists the contents of the published Proceedings).1  The committee also met
1 The views expressed in the committee
Õs workshop Proceedings are solely those of the individual
authors and workshop participants.  The separate 
Proceedings report does not provide conclusions
and recommendations.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixon two other occasions to gather information and to work on this report.  In
addition, the underlying technical factors and developments associated with
digital networked information, and their impact on intellectual property rights
protection, are examined in detail in a concurrent study, The Digital Dilemma:Intellectual Property in the Information Age (National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C., 2000, in press), by the National Research CouncilÕs Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board.The report that follows reflects the deliberative consensus of the study com-mittee.  It is our hope that the committee
Õs conclusions and recommendations willhelp the sponsors of the study, the legislators examining database protection
proposals, and the broader S&T community to understand better the issues in
striking a proper balance between protecting rights in and promoting public-
interest uses of scientific and technical databases.Robert J. Serafin, ChairPaul F. Uhlir, Study DirectorA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiThe study committee wishes to express its sincere thanks to the many indi-viduals who played significant roles in the completion of this study.  The commit-

tee sponsored the Workshop on Promoting Access to Scientific and Technical
Data for the Public Interest:  An Assessment of Policy Options on January 14-15,

1999, at the Department of Commerce in Washington, D.C., and it extends its
thanks to the following individuals who made presentations during the January14,

1999, plenary session:  Q. Todd Dickinson, acting commissioner of Patents and

Trademarks, Department of Commerce, gave the keynote address; Barbara Ryan
of the U.S. Geological Survey and Barry Glick, formerly with GeoSystems Global
Corporation, participated in the geographic data panel; G. Christian Overton of
the University of PennsylvaniaÕs Center for Bioinformatics, James Ostell of theNational Library of MedicineÕs National Center for Biotechnology Information,and Myra Williams of the Molecular Applications Group participated in the
genomic data panel; Richard Kayser of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, James Lohr of the American Chemical SocietyÕs Chemical AbstractsService, and Leslie Singer of the Institute for Scientific Information, Inc. partici-
pated in the panel that discussed chemical and chemical engineering data; Kenneth
Hadeen of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationÕs NationalClimatic Data Center (retired), David Fulker of the University Corporation for
Atmospheric ResearchÕs Unidata Program, and Robert Brammer of TASC par-ticipated in the meteorological data panel; Richard Gilbert of the University of
California at Berkeley discussed economic factors in the production, dissemina-
tion, and use of scientific and technical (S&T) databases in the public and private
sectors; Stephen Maurer, attorney, submitted a commissioned paper for the studyAcknowledgments
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENTS(reproduced as Appendix C of the online workshop Proceedings); Teresa Lunt ofthe Xerox Palo Alto Research Center provided an overview of the current situa-
tion and future prospects with respect to technologies for protecting and also for
misappropriating digital intellectual property rights; Marybeth Peters, Register of
Copyrights in the Library of Congress, provided a summary overview of the
existing and proposed intellectual property rights regimes for databases; and
Justin Hughes, of the Department of CommerceÕs Patent and Trademark Office,summarized the relevant federal government information law and data policies.
The aforementioned data panelists also participated in the January 14, 1999,
discussion sessions on not-for-profit-sector data, government-sector data, and
commercial-sector data.The committee would also like to thank those who participated as panelistsin the January 15, 1999, discussion sessions on the potential impacts of legisla-
tion and assessments of policy options during the workshop.  Jon Baumgarten of
Proskauer Rose, LLP, Peter Jaszi of the American University School of Law,
James Neal of the John Hopkins University Library, and Ferris Webster of the
University of Delaware joined Kenneth Hadeen, David Fulker, and Robert
Brammer in discussing what would happen should Congress decide to enact a
strong property rights model for protecting databases.  Dennis Benson of the

National Center for Biotechnology Information, Jonathan Band of Morrison &
Foerster, LLP, and Thomas Rindfleisch of Stanford UniversityÕs Lane MedicalLibrary discussed, with Chris Overton and Myra Williams, the possible scenarios
should Congress enact an unfair competition model for protecting databases.
Prue Adler of the Association of Research Libraries, Eric Massant of Reed
Elsevier, Inc., Tim Foresman of the University of Maryland, and Kenneth Frazier
of the University of Wisconsin Libraries joined Barry Glick in a discussion
assessing legal and policy options in promoting access to and use of government
S&T data for the public interest.  Finally, Jerome Reichman of the Vanderbilt

University School of Law and R. Stephen Berry of the University of Chicago
discussed possible legal and policy options associated with promoting access to
and use of not-for-profit-sector S&T data for the public interest with Richard
Kayser, James Lohr, and Leslie Singer.  The committee is also very appreciative
of the contributions of more than 100 individuals who attended the workshop.  In

addition, it extends its gratitude to Jean Schiro-Zavela of the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration and to Justin Hughes of the Patent and Trade-
mark Office for helping to make arrangements for the workshop.The committee would also like to express its gratitude to the following exofficio members, who provided liaison with other relevant activities:  Goetz

Oertel of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy and chair of
the U.S. National Committee for CODATA; Shelton Alexander, of Pennsylvania
State University, who is a member of the National Research CouncilÕs ComputerScience and Telecommunications BoardÕs committee studying intellectual prop-erty rights in the networked environment; and Francis Bretherton of the Univer-A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSxiiisity of Wisconsin, chair of the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on Geo-physical and Environmental Data.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical and legal expertise, in accordance with proce-
dures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report Review Committee.The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical com-
ments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound as
possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.  The review comments and

draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative
process.  The study committee would like to thank the following individuals for

their participation in the review of this report:  George Annas of Boston Univer-

sity, Lois Blaine of the American Type Culture Collection, Kenneth Dam of the
University of Chicago School of Law, John Estes of the University of California
at Santa Barbara, Richard Hallgren of the American Meteorological Society,
Michael Keller of Stanford University Library and Highwire Press Inc., Gary
King of Harvard University, Charles McClure of Syracuse University, Roger
Noll of Stanford University, Pamela Samuelson of the University of California at
Berkeley, William Sprigg of the University of Arizona, Hal Varian of the Univer-
sity of California at Berkeley, and Ronald Wigington of the American Chemical
Society (retired).In addition, the following individuals reviewed the workshop Proceedings:Bonnie Carroll of Information International Associates, Inc., David Lide, Jr.,
publishing consultant, and Goetz Oertel of the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy.Finally, the committee would like to recognize the contributions of the Na-tional Research Council staff without whom this report could not have been
completed:  Paul Uhlir, director of International Scientific and Technical Infor-

mation Programs of the Office of International Affairs, who served as study
director and organized the workshop and other study committee meetings; Julie
Esanu, who provided research and program assistance to the committee, as well
as editorial work on the workshop Proceedings; Barbara Wright and PamelaGamble for the staff support to the committee; and Susan Maurizi and Janet
Overton, who edited the final committee report and the Proceedings.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvSUMMARY1
1IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL
DATABASES14

Scientific and Technical Data and the Creation of New Knowledge, 17
Scientific and Technical Databases as a ResourceÑThe CurrentContext, 18Collection of Original Data and Production of New Databases, 19
Dissemination of Scientific and Technical Data and the Issue ofAccess, 30Use of Scientific and Technical Databases, 32The Challenge of Effectively Balancing Private Rights and the PublicInterest in Scientific and Technical Databases, 382INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES AFFECTING THE
AVAILABILITY AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL
DATABASES40

Divergent Objectives of Organizations That Produce and DistributeScientific and Technical Databases, 40Scientific and Technical Database Costs, Pricing, and Access, 43Production and Distribution Costs, 44
Pricing and Access, 45
Stronger Statutory Protection and the Incentives for Investment, 46ContentsA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviCONTENTSMounting Pressures on Government Producers and Distributors ofScientific and Technical Databases for Cost Recovery, 473ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES:  EXISTING
POLICIES AND APPROACHES51

Access to U.S. Government-funded Scientific and Technical Data, 52
Existing Protections for Databases in the United States, 58Legal Protections, 59
Technological Protections, 64
Market-based Database Protection Through Updating andCustomizing, 68Tipping the Balance: The European UnionÕs Database Directive, 694ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS73
Assessment of Legislative Options, with Recommendations onGuiding Principles, 74The Standard of Harm, 78
Scope of Protection, 83
Term of Protection, 84
Exemptions for Not-for-Profit Research and Education, 87
Periodic Assessments of Effects Under Any New Statute, 93
Exemptions for Government Databases, 96Assessment of Policy Options, with Recommendations for GovernmentAction, 100Promoting Availability of Government Scientific andTechnical Data, 100Maintaining Nonexclusive Rights by Not-for-Profits inGovernment-funded Databases, 102Organizing Discussions of Licensing Terms for Not-for-ProfitUses of Commercial Scientific and Technical Databases, 105Improving the Understanding of Complex Economic Aspects ofScientific and Technical Database Activities, 107Promoting International Access to Scientific and Technical Data, 108Recommended Approach for the Not-for-Profit Scientific andTechnical Community, 109APPENDIXESABiographical Sketches of Committee Members, 113
BWorkshop Agenda and Participants, 118

CWorkshop 
ProceedingsÑListing of Contents, 128DEuropean Union Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases, 130
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AUESTIONOFBALANCE
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary1Legislative efforts are currently under way in the United States, the Euro-pean Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) to greatly
enhance the legal protection of proprietary databases.  One of these efforts, the

European UnionÕs 1996 Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases,1 already
has been finalized and is now being implemented by the European UnionÕs mem-
ber states, while other legislative initiatives in the U.S. Congress and WIPO are
still pending action.  As discussed in detail in the 1997 report 
Bits of Power:Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data2 and in subsequent publications,
3these new legal approaches threaten to compromise traditional and customary
access to and use of scientific and technical (S&T) data for public-interest en-
deavors, including not-for-profit research, education, and general library uses.
At the same time, there are legitimate concerns by the rights holders in databases
regarding unauthorized and uncompensated uses of their data products, including
at times the wholesale commercial misappropriation of proprietary databases.1 The E.U. Database DirectiveÑDirective 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the Legal Protection of Databases, 1996 O.J. (L77) 20.  The E.U. Database
Directive is reprinted as Appendix D of this report.2 National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power:  Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.3 See, e.g., J.H. Reichman and Paul F. Uhlir (1999), ÒDatabase Protection at the Crossroads:
Recent Developments and Their Impact on Science and Technology,Ó Berkeley Technology LawJournal, Vol. 14, No. 2, p. 793, and Stephen M. Maurer and Suzanne Scotchmer, ÒDatabase Protec-tion:  Is It Broken and Should We Fix It?Ó 
Science, Vol. 284, p. 1129.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2A QUESTION OF BALANCEFactual data are both an essential resource for and a valuable output fromscientific research.  It is through the formation, communication, and use of facts

and ideas that scientists conduct research and educate students.  Our nation has a

vibrant and demonstrably productive sector of S&T database producers, dissemi-
nators, and users that has led the world.  Advances in computing and communica-

tions technologies make S&T databases and the facts they contain increasingly
valuable for producing new discoveries and for accelerating the growth of knowl-
edge and the pace of innovation.  The same technologies that facilitate the effec-
tive production, dissemination, and use of digital databases, however, can also
expedite their unauthorized dissemination and use, undermining incentives to
create new databases, enabling unfair competition and wholesale misappropria-
tion, and in the most extreme cases, exposing the original database rights holder
to market failure.The institutions, organizations, and individuals involved form a highly com-plex web of interrelationshipsÑsome competing and some complementary, somecreating or using original data collections or derivative productions, and spanning
activities in both public and private, national and international, and scientific and
non-scientific contexts (see Table S.1 for some representative examples of differ-
ent types of S&T database activities).  Although these diverse actors all have their

own goals and motivations, they nonetheless may be broadly characterized in
three fairly distinct groups.  The first is the government sector, which produces

S&T databases as a public good and has a mandate under OMB Circular A-1304to disseminate the fruits of those activities as broadly and openly as possible, and
to provide efficient access.  The second is the commercial sector, which produces

databases as a private good and typically maintains those data on a proprietary
and restricted basis, either for internal purposes or for commercial vending, with
the goal of full cost recovery plus profit.  The third is the not-for-profit sector,

which includes universities, research institutes, and various public-interest orga-
nizations that produce databases in support of their institutional mission and
typically disseminate data on a cost-recovery basis, which can cause them to take
a middle ground in terms of treating their databases as a public or a private good.As users of databases, all three sectors support the public-good approach ofthe federal government to data distribution, and all seek to minimize the costs
they may need to pay for access to and use of data from private-sector sources.  Aprincipal concern of the committee is that the development of any new data-
base protection measures directed toward protecting private-sector invest-
ments take into account the need to promote access to and subsequent use of
S&T data and databases not only by the not-for-profit sector, but by for-
profit creators of derivative databases as well.4 Office of Management and Budget (1993), Circular A-130, 
ÒManagement of Federal Informa-tion Resources,Ó U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY3Numerous legal, technical, and market-based approaches already exist toprotect proprietary rights in databases.  Existing legal measures include (1) copy-

right law, recently updated and strengthened for the online digital environment;
(2) licensing, a subset of contract law, which is increasingly the method of choice
for online vendors of proprietary databases and other information products;
(3)trade secret law, used in conjunction with contract law and various new

technological protections; and (4) unfair competition law in state common law,
which is of limited value for database protection at this time but is viewed as a
potential model for a new federal database protection statute.  These legal mea-

sures are being supported with increasing efficiency online by technological
protections such as digital encryption, watermarks, download limitations, access
controls, and both hardware- and software-based trusted systems.  Finally, there

are important market-based approaches to protecting databases, such as frequent
updating or customizing of database content, that can help prevent stolen data-
bases from undermining the rights holderÕs market for very long or very broadly.For public-sector databases, including S&T databases, there are well-estab-lished laws and policies in place5 that generally prohibit proprietary protections
of databases by the government and that treat those data as public goods and
promote their full and open availability to the public.  While many not-for-profit
S&T database producers and vendorsÑespecially those that receive governmentfunding for their activitiesÑadhere to the policy of full and open data availabilityfor public-sector databases, other not-for-profits seek the full protection of the
law for their proprietary databases.  This division of interests has been further

exacerbated by the enactment of the 1996 E.U. Database Directive, which pro-
vides strong and unprecedented property rights in public- and private-sector data-
bases and the substantial components of such databases.The current efforts to enact statutory federal database protection in the UnitedStates appear to be stimulated by three principal factors: (1) the possibility for
rapid and complete database copying with the potential for instantaneous broad
dissemination; (2) a gap in U.S. law created by the Feist6 decision, which served
as the final blow to invalidating copyright protection on the basis of Òsweat-of-the-browÓ investments alone; and (3) the E.U. Database Directive, which re-
quires non-E.U. nations to pass a similar law in order for their citizens to enjoy
the directiveÕs protections in Europe, thereby providing a potentially unfair ad-vantage to European competitors of the U.S. private sector.The committee believes, however, that the need for additional statutory pro-5 See, e.g., 44 U.S.C., section 3506(d)(1)(A) (Supp. 1995), and Office of Management and Budget
(1993), Circular A-130, note 4.6 Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991). It is important tonote, however, that Feist did not 
ÒoverturnÓ the 
Òsweat-of-the-browÓ doctrine under copyright, which
Congress had actually done already under the Copyright Act of 1976.  Moreover, the sweat-of-the-
brow doctrine under state law was never a prevailing legal approach.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4A QUESTION OF BALANCETABLE S.1Examples of Different Types of S&T Database Activities
Discussed in the January 1999 WorkshopOrganizationInformation and
(Sector)Tools ProvidedData Sources
Geographic and EnvironmentalU.S. GeologicalGeographic data: maps andUSGS, other federal agencies,
Survey (USGS)map productsstate and local governments,

(Government)Data from other programs:not-for-profit researchers,
biologic, geologic, hydrologicpartnerships with private sector
Long-TermSite description database,Ecological researchers at
Ecologicalintegrated climate database,distributed sites belonging to the
Research (LTER)remotely sensed ecological dataLTER network

Network Office(Not-for-Profit)GeoSystemsDigital maps, MapQuest WebFrom the public domain:
Global Corp.site, mapping servicesgovernment-produced maps
(Commercial)(federal, state, local), digital
geographic data, remotelysensed imageryOther sources: commercial and
other countriesÕ maps, digital
data, remotely sensed imagery,other published sourcesGenomicNational Center forGenBank: DNA and proteinDirect contributions from
Biotechnologysequence data; Other genomicscientists; access to other
Informationmapping databases; 3D proteindatabases from government,

(Government)structure database;not-for-profit, other country
bibliographic databases;sources
software toolsCenter forSpecialized biologicalProprietary and public-domain
Bioinformaticsdatabases; softwareexperimental data from

University oftools for integrationacademic researchers; manual
Pennsylvaniaof distributedprocessing and encoding of
(Not-for-Profit)heterogeneous databasesdata from published literature;
online molecular and cellularbiology and genomic databasesMolecularSoftware for storing,>150 online database sites,
Applications Groupmining, and visualizingpublic and proprietary
(Commercial)genomic data; databases
derived from public andprivate data andproprietary softwareA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY5continuedDisseminationUsersModes
USGS, other government agencies,Maps: hard copy (paper, plastic, film) and digital form;
commercial database providers anddistributed by agency directly and through partnerships

value adders, researchers, and thewith private sector, not-for-profit sector
general publicResearchersInternet, some tape and CD-ROM for portability
Commercial clients:Maps: hard copy and digital form
large companies and consumersSoftware products distributed via retail channels
(CD-ROM) and directly to corporate customersMapping services distributed via InternetResearch scientists in academic,Internet access via Web servers and File Transfer
government, commercialProtocol (FTP)
organizationsResearch scientists in academic,Internet access
government, commercialSource code distributed directly

organizations (U.S. and abroad)Research scientists in academic,Some software products downloaded from the Web;
government, commercialothers require on-site expert installation
organizations (U.S. and abroad)A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6A QUESTION OF BALANCEChemical and Chemical EngineeringNational Institute ofSpecialized chemistry andExperimental results from
Standards andchemical engineering databasespublished literature; experiments

Technology (NIST)(extensively evaluated anddone specifically for data
Physical anddocumented)acquisition; published data
Chemical Propertiesevaluations; supplementary data

Divisiondeposits
(Government)Chemical AbstractsChemical Abstracts:Journals, patents, books,
Servicebibliographic databaseproceedings, dissertations
American ChemicalRegistry: registry of chemical

Societysubstances
(Not-for-Profit)Software access tools
Institute forBibliographic databases:Journals, books, proceedings
Scientificcitation indexes, tables of(print and electronic format)
Informationcontents

(Commercial)Information services
Linkages to publishersÕfull-text databasesMeteorological
National ClimaticClimatological summaries fromNational Weather Service, World
Data CenterNational Weather ServiceMeteorological Organization,

(Government)stations; historical long-termNASA, bilateral agreements
climatic databaseswith other countries
Unidata Program,Quasi-real-time atmosphericPublic: National Weather Service,
Universityand related dataNational Environmental Data
Corporation forCase study data setsService

AtmosphericSoftware toolsPrivate: network of lightning
Researchsensors, sensors in commercial
(Not-for-Profit)aircraft
TASCReal-time weather informationPublic: National Weather Service
Ñ(Commercial)downlink directly from U.S. and
international weather satellites,other observational sourcesNOTE:  Although the subject matter of this study included all S&T databases, the committee was
able to choose only representative examples for discussion and analysis in the report.  For instance,
specific examples from the social sciences or the space sciences, among other disciplines, were notincluded.TABLE S.1Continued
OrganizationInformation and
(Sector)Tools ProvidedData Sources
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY7Researchers in academic,Variety of forms: hard-copy publication, CD-ROM or
government, commercialfloppy disk, Internet access; NIST distributes directly

organizations (some databases usedor via agreements with secondary distributors
primarily by industrial users)Researchers in academic,Electronic access, hard copy, CD-ROM
government, commercialorganizations; patent examiners;
studentsAcademic, government lab, andDiskette, CD-ROM, FTP files, Internet access,
corporate libraries; researchershard copy
in academic, government,
commercial organizationsIndividuals, commercial clients,Hard-copy, microfiche, magnetic tape, disks,
government agencies, engineeringCD-ROM, FTP, Internet

usesAcademic departmentsInternet
News media (broadcast and cablePublic and private data communication networks:
TV), aviation, energy and power,satellite broadcasting services and Internet

agribusinessDisseminationUsersModes
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8A QUESTION OF BALANCEtection has not been sufficiently substantiated.  The high level of activity in the
production and use of digital S&T (and other) databases in the United States
serves as prima facie evidence that the threats of misappropriation do not consti-
tute a crisis.  Nor do the existing legal, technical, and market-based measures

provide a chronic state of underprotection for proprietary databases.  The almost
universal use of licensing, rather than sale, of online databases and other digital
information, coupled with technological enforcement measures, on balance po-
tentially provides much stronger protections to the vendors vis-‹-vis their cus-tomers than they enjoyed prior to Feist and under the print media copyright
regime.  While some of the current law providing protection to database rights

holders remains uncertain in terms of scope of applicability, the trend in recent
years has been to broaden, rather than narrow, applicable intellectual property
protections.  Moreover, for the many reasons discussed in this report, strong

statutory protection of databases would have significant negative impacts on
access to and use of S&T databases for not-for-profit research and other public-
interest uses (see Table S.2).  Nevertheless, although the committee opposes the

creation of any strong new rights in compilations of factual information, it recog-
nizes that limited new federal legal protection against wholesale misappropria-
tion of databases may be appropriate.  In particular, a balanced alternative to the

E.U. Database Directive might be achieved in a properly scoped and focused new
U.S. law, one that could then serve as a model for an international treaty in this
area.RECOMMENDATIONSBecause of the complex, interdependent relationships among public-sectorand private-sector database producers, disseminators, and users, any action to
increase the rights of persons in one category likely will compromise the rights of
the persons in the other categories, with far-reaching and potentially negative
consequences.7  Of course, it is in the common interest of both database rights
holders and usersÑand of society generallyÑto achieve a workable balanceamong the respective interests so that all legitimate rights remain reasonably7 The potential for unintended consequences from new 
sui generis intellectual property legislation
and the need for caution were emphasized by the former chairman of the House Committee on theJudiciary, Robert W. Kastenmeier, in Kastenmeier and Remington (1985), ÒThe Semiconductor ChipProtection Act of 1984: A Swamp or Firm Ground?Ó Minn. L. Rev., Vol. 70, pp. 417, 440-442, wherethe authors suggested that any proposal for such legislation should meet a four-point test:  (1)that the
protection would fit harmoniously with other intellectual property regimes; (2) that the new protec-
tion can be defined in a reasonably clear and satisfactory manner; (3) that the new proposal is basedon an honest analysis of all the costs and benefits; and (4) that the legislation should show clearlythat it would enrich and enhance the Òaggregate public domain.ÓA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY9TABLE S.2Summary Comparison of Not-for-Profit Research User Rights
Under Traditional Copyright and Under Online Licensing When Combinedwith Sui Generis Database Protection Legislation
TraditionalLicensing Plus 
Sui Generis Protection Such as
Copyright LawProvided by the E.U. Database Directive
1.  User can immediately use all disparate1.  Even after paying for access to factual data
factual data and information disclosed inand information, which are not copyrightable by

a database; copyright law does not protectdefinition, user faces limitations on use in any
ideas or facts.  Fair-use exception availableways prohibited by the license and as reinforced
for certain additional research orby the legislation; user cannot distribute another

educational uses, even of protecteddatabase, using the same factual data or
expression.information, without either seeking permission
and perhaps paying anotherfee or regenerating

those protected data independently.2.  User can independently create another2.  User can independently create another
version of a database and sell it; copyrightversion of the database. If this is not possible,
law allows independent creation, and alluser needs a license or permission to combine
factual data are in the public domain.legitimately accessed factual data or information
into a derivative data product; the licensor canclaim that the user is violating redistributionand other rights, and the user must guess what
courts will consider to be aquantitatively or
qualitatively insubstantial part of the database;the licensor is under no duty to grant such a
license; and if a sole source, the licensor may not
want any competition from follow-on products.3.  User can combine noncopyrightable3.  User cannot lend, give, or sell data to others
factual data with other data andeven after paying for access (unless permitted
information into a multiple-source orby the license) because there is no first sale,

interdisciplinary database for research oronly a license; user would have to obtain
educational purposes without permissionexpress permission and perhaps pay additional
or additional payment to the originators.afees to avoid the risk of harming the market
(e.g., possibly causing one lost sale).4.  User can make limited or 
Òfair useÓ4.  Because there are no limits on licensing,
of even protected expression for not-for-user is subject to database vendor overriding
profit research or classroom purposes;even those exceptions contained in the
such uses often deemed fair or privilegedlegislation, including exceptions for research,

uses under statutory law or precedents.education, or other public-interest uses.
5.  Following the first purchase of a5.  During the period of protection, user rights
copyrightable database in hard copy, userdepend on the terms of the license supported by
can lend, give, or resell it to anyone elsethe new property right; database would not
under the first-sale doctrine, borrow itenter the public domain for at least 15 years

from a library, use it at any time for(and in Europe possibly never if the rights
virtually any [lawful] purpose, and makeholder continues to invest in maintenance or
a copy of it for personal or scholarlyupdates of a dynamic database).

purposes.NOTE:  This summary table was compiled from a more detailed comparative discussion presented in
an article by J.H. Reichman and Paul F. Uhlir (1999), ÒDatabase Protection at the Crossroads:Recent Developments and Their Impact on Science and Technology,Ó Berkeley Technology LawJournal, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 799-821.a Acknowledgment of sources is an appropriate academic norm, but their express permission is not
required.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10A QUESTION OF BALANCEprotected.  Therefore, 
as a general guiding principle, the committee recom-mends that any new federal protection of databases should balance the costs
and benefits of the proposed changes for both database rights holders and
users.  In addition to this general principle, the committee makes a number ofrecommendationsÑbased on its assessment of legislative options8 and related
policy optionsÑto the government, and it makes one recommendation to the not-for-profit S&T community.Recommended Legislative PrinciplesThe committee recommends that any new federal statutory protection ofdatabases incorporate the following principles:1.Limit any additional protection to prohibition of acts of unauthorizedtaking that cause substantial competitive injury to the database rights holder
in the rights holderÕs actual market.  The standard of harm should be suffi-ciently clear to permit good-faith users to know when they are infringing on a
database rights holderÕs rights and should not undermine the nationÕs capabilitiesfor innovation or competition in the marketplace.2.Constrain the subject-matter scope to databases comprising a collec-tion of discrete facts and items of information, and expressly exclude collec-
tions of copyrightable material, which is already protected.  Protection under
any new statute should extend only to a database that is the product of a substan-
tial investment and not to any idea, fact, procedure, system, method of operation,
concept, principle, or discovery disclosed by the database.3.Limit the term of protection to a period of time sufficient to provideincentives found necessary for the creation of new databases.  If legislationwith a fixed term of protection is adopted, an appropriate term of protection most
likely should be substantially shorter than the proposed 15-year term.  It also

should be based on an analysis of the economics of the database industry, rather
than set arbitrarily.8 In response to its charge, the committee selected the three major legislative models that were
introduced into the Congressional Record by Senator Orrin Hatch shortly after the committee
ÕsJanuary 1999 workshop.  See 
Cong. Rec., Vol. 106, S. 316 (Jan. 19, 1999).  The committee evaluated
and compared the major provisions of these three models in arriving at the consensus principles andrecommendations presented here.  The rationale for each recommended principle or action is con-
tained in Chapter 4.  In evaluating the three legislative proposals, the committee was well aware of

the fact that they would change further and therefore presented Òmoving targetsÓ for the study.  It is
for this reason that the committeeÕs recommendations regarding any potential legislation in this areaare offered as guiding principles, rather than as specific language for a specific bill.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY114.In any new legislation with a fixed term of protection, require data-base rights holders to provide notice of expiration of the term of protection.
Specifically, any such legislation should:a.Require database rights holders to identify the date on which a database
was created so that the user will know when it no longer enjoys statutory protec-
tion (of course, those databases that remain commercially valuable longer than
the statutory period of protection can continue to be protected by other means,
such as copyright, trade secret, contract, and technical and other measures); andb.Require rights holders of databases that are updated continuously, or at
periodic intervals, to identify with reasonable precision those substantial portions
of the database that are and are not subject to protection.  Failure to identify the

date of creation for each new substantial portion of a database should serve as a
basis for a defense against infringement after the expiration of the term of protec-
tion for the original portion of the database.5.Apply protection only to databases created after the effective date ofany new legislation, in recognition that a major purpose of enacting enhancedprotection is to provide additional incentives for the development of new data-
bases.6.Expressly continue to provide legal rights of access to and uses ofproprietary databases equivalent to those that not-for-profit researchers,
educators, and other public-interest users enjoyed under traditional or cus-
tomary practice prior to enactment of any new legislation.  Courts should beallowed to invalidate any non-bargained9 licensing terms that are shown to inter-
fere unduly with otherwise legislatively permitted customary uses by not-for-
profit entities.7.Provide either for a sunset provision with the possibility to renew, orfor periodic assessments of the effects of new statutory database protection
on competition in the database market and on consumers of databases, as well as
on access to and use of dataÑincluding S&T dataÑby not-for-profit, public-interest users, in order to enable timely and appropriate revision of legislation as
needed.8.Although private-sector databases derived from government datashould be eligible for protection, protection should not be extended to data-
bases collected or maintained by the government.  Any new legislation should9 By 
Ònon-bargained termÓ the committee means any term, usually contained in a standard form
contract, over which, as a practical matter, no actual bargaining by the parties to the contract takesplace.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12A QUESTION OF BALANCEexpressly affirm the need for continuation of existing legal norms for wide distri-bution of government data and of data created pursuant to a government mandate
or funding.Recommended Policy Actions for GovernmentAlthough the committee believes that its recommended actions in these areasought to be undertaken whether or not any new statutory database protection is
enacted by Congress, all of these actions will take on an increased urgency and
importance if relatively strong proprietary rights are established by federal statute.1.  Scientific and technical data owned or controlled by the government
should be made available for use by not-for-profit and commercial entities
alike on a nonexclusive basis and should be disseminated to all users at no
more than the marginal cost of reproduction and distribution, whenever
possible.  While the private sector
Õs creation of derivative databases fromgovernment data should be encouraged, the source of the original govern-
ment data must ensure that those data remain openly available.  Any infor-

mation product derived from a government database also should be re-
quired to carry an identifier stating the government source(s) used.2.  Federal funding agencies should require university and other not-for-
profit researchers or their employing institutions that use federal funds,
wholly or in substantial part, in creating databases not to grant exclusive
rights to such databases when submitting them for publication or for incor-
poration into other databases.3.  The Copyright Office should sponsor discussions between the repre-
sentatives of private-sector producers of databases and user stakeholder
representatives from government agencies and not-for-profit groups to help
develop a common understanding and optimal terms for the licensing of
S&T databases and data products.4. Federal government agencies, including federal science agencies as
appropriate, should undertake and fund external research that investigates
the changing and complex economic aspects of S&T database activities, par-ticularly in the context of any new legislative database protection measures that
may be enacted and in support of legislative principle number 7 recommended
above.5.  All departments and agencies of the federal government should con-
tinue to adopt international S&T agreements that include provisions to
facilitate access to S&T data across national boundaries and should conductA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY13periodic reviews of international policies and agreements to promote confor-mity to the above principles.6.  The U.S. government should negotiate with the Commission of the
European Communities to revise its highly protectionist E.U. Database
Directive.Recommended Approach for the Not-for-Profit S&T CommunityThe not-for-profit S&T community should continue to promote andadhere to the policy of full and open exchange of data at both the national
and international levels.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141Importance and Use of Scientific and
Technical Databases
14Modern technology has propelled us into the information age, making itpossible to generate and record vast quantities of new data.1  Advances in com-
puting and communications technologies and the development of digital net-
works have revolutionized the manner in which data are stored, communicated,
and manipulated.  Databases, and uses to which they can be put, have become

increasingly valuable commodities.The now-common practice of downloading material from online databaseshas made it easy for researchers and other users to acquire data, which frequently
have been produced with considerable investments of time, money, and other
resources.  Government agencies and most government contractors or grantees in

the United States (though not in many other countries) usually make their data,
produced at taxpayer expense, available at no cost or for the cost of reproduction
and dissemination.  For-profit and not-for-profit database producers (other than

most government contractors and grantees) typically charge for access to and use
of their data through subscriptions, licensing agreements, and individual sales.Currently many for-profit and not-for-profit database producers are con-cerned about the possibility that significant portions of their databases will be
copied or used in substantial part by others to create ÒnewÓ derivative databases.
If an identical or substantially similar database is then either redisseminated
broadly or sold and used in direct competition with the original rights holderÕs
database, the rights holderÕs revenues will be undermined, or in extreme cases,1 Box 1.1 provides definitions of 
data and of several other key terms used in this report.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES15Box 1.1Definitions of Key Terms Used in This ReportData are facts, numbers, letters, and symbols that describe an object, idea,
condition, situation, or other factors.  A data element is the smallest unit of informa-
tion to which reference is made.  This report is concerned primarily with digital

data, although a large portion of raw data is recorded as analog data, which alsocan be digitized.  For purposes of this report the terms 
data and 
facts are treated
interchangeably, as is the case in legal contexts.Data in a database may be characterized as predominantly word oriented (e.g.,
as in a text, bibliography, directory, dictionary), numeric (e.g., properties, statistics,
experimental values), image (e.g., fixed or moving video, such as a film of mi-
crobes under magnification or time-lapse photography of a flower opening), orsound (e.g., a sound recording of a tornado or a fire).  Word-oriented, numeric,
image, and sound databases are processed by different types of software (text or
word processing, data processing, image processing, and sound processing).Data can also be referred to as raw, processed, or verified.  Raw data consist
of original observations, such as those collected by satellite and beamed back to
Earth, or initial experimental results, such as laboratory test data.  After they are
collected, raw data can be processed or refined in many different ways.  Process-ing usually makes data more usable, ordered, or simplified, thus increasing their
intelligibility.  Verified data are data whose quality and accuracy have been as-
sured.  For experimental results, verification signifies that the data have been
shown to be reproducible in a test or experiment that repeats the original.  For
observational data, verification means that the data have been compared withother data whose quality is known or that the instrument with which they were
obtained has been properly calibrated and tested.Digital data may be processed or stored on various types of media, includingmagnetic (RAM, hard drive, diskettes, tapes) and optical (CD-ROM, DVD) media.
Data can be made accessible either through portable media or, increasingly, on-line.A database is a collection of related data and informationÑgenerally numeric,
word oriented, sound, and/or imageÑorganized to permit search and retrieval orprocessing and reorganizing.  A data set is a collection of similar and related datarecords or data points.  Many databases are a resource from which specific data

points, facts, or textual information are extracted for use in building a derivativedatabase or data product.  A 
derivative database, also called a value-added or
transformative database, is built from one or more preexisting database(s) and
frequently includes extractions from multiple databases, as well as original data.A database producer acquires data in raw, reduced, or otherwise processed
formÑeither directly, through experimentation or observation, or indirectly, from
one or more organizations or preexisting databasesÑfor inclusion in a databasethat the database producer is generating.  Such database creatorsÑsometimes
known as database publishers or originators but for the purpose of this report
referred to as database producersÑtraditionally are the rights holders of the intel-lectual property rights in the databases.continuedA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16A QUESTION OF BALANCEIn general, database production covers all aspects of preparation, processing,
and maintenance; development of software for search, retrieval, and manipulation;and documentation of the software and database features and functions prior to
distribution of the database by a vendor.  Among the wide variety of functions
encompassed by database production, in addition to data acquisition, are datareduction (where needed), formatting, enhancing, expanding, merging with other
data or data records, categorizing, classifying, indexing, abstracting, tagging, flag-ging, coding, sorting/rearranging, putting into tabular form, creating visual repre-sentations, updating, and putting into searchable and retrievable form for and use
and manipulation by users.A database vendor (variously known as a distributor, online host (mostly in
Europe and the United Kingdom), disseminator, or provider) sells, leases, or li-
censes digitized versions of a database on optical disks (e.g., CD-ROM, DVD),floppy disks, tapes, or downloadable complete databases.  Many databases, par-
ticularly textual ones, are also based on or provided as hard-copy paper publica-
tions.  A database producer organization may also serve as a database vendor if it
both produces a database and provides online access directly to users or sells,leases, or licenses the database.For the sake of simplicity, the term database dissemination or 
distribution as
used in this report includes the concept of making databases available online.The modifier scientific and technical designates the subject matter of the data-base content in the general areas covered in this report.Box 1.1 Continuedthe rights holder will be put out of business.  Besides being unfair to the rights
holder, this actual or potential loss of revenue may create a disincentive to pro-
duce and then maintain databases, thus reducing the number of databases avail-
able to others.  However, preventing database uses by others, or making access

and subsequent use more expensive or difficult, may discourage socially useful
applications of databases.  The question is how to protect rights in databases

while ensuring that factual data remain accessible for public-interest and other
uses.This report explores issues in the conundrum posed by the need to properlybalance the rights of original database producers or rights holders and the rights
of all the downstream users and competitorsÑwith the principal focus on thebalance of rights between the database rights holders and public-interest users
such as researchers, educators, and librarians.  In particular, the Committee for a
Study on Promoting Access to Scientific and Technical Data for the Public Inter-
est focuses on scientific and technical (S&T) data (with examples drawn prima-
rily from the physical and biological sciences) as an essential consideration in
reasoned attempts to balance competing interests in databases.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES17To broaden the perspective of and enhance cooperation among the variouscompeting interests, and to help ensure an efficient and effective outcome for all,
the committee examines the following basic elements in the larger issue at hand:¥Salient characteristics and the importance of S&T databases producedand used in research;¥Impacts of computer technology on the production, distribution, and useof S&T databases;¥Motivations of the various sectors involved in S&T research and thedissemination and use of research results;¥Economic issues and incentives that influence the production, distribu-tion, and use of S&T databases, and how these activities are interrelated;¥Mechanisms currently in place for protecting these economic incentives; and¥New legislation currently under consideration that would affect the pro-duction, dissemination, and use of S&T databases in a variety of ways.To ensure the most successful outcome in the current debate over rights indatabases, any new action must take account of and balance the legitimate inter-
ests of the various stakeholders, and must reflect awareness of how the broad
public interest can best be served.SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATA AND THECREATION OF NEW KNOWLEDGEFactual data are both an essential resource for and a valuable output fromscientific research.  It is through the formation, communication, and use of facts

and ideas that scientists conduct research.  Throughout the history of science,

new findings and ideas have been recorded and used as the basis for further
scientific advances and for educating students.Now, as a result of the near-complete digitization of data collection, manipu-lation, and dissemination over the past 30 years, almost every aspect of the
natural world, human activity, and indeed every life form can be observed and
captured in an electronic database.2  There is barely a sector of the economy that
is not significantly engaged in the creation and exploitation of digital databases,
and there are manyÑsuch as insurance, banking, or direct marketingÑthat arecompletely database dependent.Certainly scientific and engineering research is no exception in its growingreliance on the creation and exploitation of electronic databases.  The genetic

sequence of each living organism is a natural database, transforming biological2 See Paul F. Uhlir (1995), 
ÒFrom Spacecraft to Statecraft:  The Role of Earth Observation
Satellites in the Development and Verification of International Environmental Protection Agree-ments,Ó GIS Law, Vol. 2, p. 1.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18A QUESTION OF BALANCEresearch and applications over the past decade into a data-dependent enterpriseand giving rise to the rapidly growing field of bioinformatics. Myriad data collec-
tion platforms, recording and storing information about our physical universe at
an ever-increasing rate, are now integral to the study and understanding of the
natural environment, from small ecological subsystems to planet-scale geophysi-
cal processes and beyond.  Similarly, the engineering disciplines continually

create databases about our constructed environment and new technical processes,
which are endlessly updated and refined to fuel our technological progress and
innovation system.Basic scientific research drives most of the worldÕs progress in the naturaland social sciences.  Basic, or fundamental, research may be defined as research

that leads to new understanding of how nature works and how its many facets are
interconnected.3  Society uses the fruits of such research to expand the world
Õsbase of knowledge and applies that knowledge in myriad ways to create wealth
and to enhance the public welfare.New scientific understanding and its applications are yielding benefits suchas the following:¥Improved diagnosis, pharmaceuticals, and treatments in medicine;¥Better and higher-yield food production in agriculture;¥New and improved materials for fabrication of manufactured objects,building materials, packaging, and special applications such as microelectronics;¥Faster, cheaper, and safer transportation and communication;¥Better means for energy production;¥Improved ability to forecast environmental conditions and to managenatural resources; and¥More powerful ways to explore all aspects of our universe, ranging fromthe finest subnuclear scale to the boundaries of the universe, and encompassing
living organisms in all their variety.4SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES AS A RESOURCEÑTHE CURRENT CONTEXTThe committeeÕs January 1999 Workshop on Promoting Access to Scientificand Technical Data for the Public Interest:  An Assessment of Policy Options,
53 See John A. Armstrong (1993), 
ÒIs Basic Research a Luxury Our Society Can No LongerAfford?Ó Karl Taylor Compton Lecture, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, October 13.
4 National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power:  Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 18.5 See online, National Research Council (1999), 
Proceedings of the Workshop on PromotingAccess to Scientific and Technical Data for the Public Interest:  An Assessment of Policy Options
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., <http://www.nap.edu>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES19included presentations on and discussions of data activities in twelve selectedorganizations representing three broad sectors (government, not-for-profit, and
commercial).  The sample activities illustrated some of the depth and range of

uses for S&T databases today (Table 1.1 provides a summary) and indicated also
the complexity of the often overlapping relationships and interests of database
users and producers.The discussion below outlines basic aspects of current data activities, includ-ing collection and production of S&T data and databases, dissemination, and use,
and it describes the roles that the three sectors play in the overall process.  In

contrasting past and current practices, it indicates how ongoing technological
advances have contributed to increased capabilities for obtaining and using S&T
data.  This description, which provides essential background for the remainder of

this report, draws on examples from the four general discipline areasÑgeo-graphic and environmental, genomic, chemical and chemical engineering, and
meteorological research and applicationsÑfocused on in the workshop.Collection of Original Data and Production of New DatabasesSources of Primary Data and UsesThe process of scientific inquiry typically has begun with the formulation ofa working hypothesis, based usually on limited observation and data, followed by
experimentation designed to test the hypothesis.  The experimentation results in

the accumulation of new data used to confirm or refute the original hypothesis.
Understanding of the natural and physical world has been advanced by research-
ers building on a growing base of knowledge that is continually being refined,
tested, and augmented in the long-established approach to scientific inquiry
known as the scientific method.With the advent of digital technologies has come a dramatic increase in thepace and volume of data acquisition.  Ongoing rapid advances in electronic

technologies for computing and communications, experimentation, and observa-
tion ranging from high-frequency direct sampling to multispectral remote sensing
have enabled dramatic increases in the quantities of data generated about the
natural world at scales from the microcosm to the macrocosm.  For instance, the

volume of data on weather and climate stored in the National Climatic Data
Center has increased 750-fold in the past two decades (Box 1.2).  A pharmaceu-

tical company that 5 years ago could characterize 100,000 compounds per year
can now handle a million compounds in a week.Although some of these data represent actual measurements, large quantitiesof data also are being generated through numerical simulations performed on
supercomputers. Collection of new data is becoming increasingly automated as
recording devices and instrumentation become more sophisticated and rapid.
Moreover, many older paper-based data sets, such as historical U.S. WeatherA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20A QUESTION OF BALANCETABLE 1.1Examples of Different Types of S&T Database Activities
Discussed in the January 1999 WorkshopOrganizationInformation and
(Sector)Tools ProvidedData Sources
Geographic and EnvironmentalU.S. GeologicalGeographic data: maps andUSGS, other federal agencies,
Survey (USGS)map productsstate and local governments,

(Government)Data from other programs:not-for-profit researchers,
biologic, geologic, hydrologicpartnerships with private sector
Long-TermSite description database,Ecological researchers at
Ecologicalintegrated climate database,distributed sites belonging to the
Research (LTER)remotely sensed ecological dataLTER network

Network Office(Not-for-Profit)GeoSystemsDigital maps, MapQuest WebFrom the public domain:
Global Corp.site, mapping servicesgovernment-produced maps
(Commercial)(federal, state, local), digital
geographic data, remotelysensed imageryOther sources: commercial and
other countriesÕ maps, digital
data, remotely sensed imagery,other published sourcesGenomicNational Center forGenBank: DNA and proteinDirect contributions from
Biotechnologysequence data; Other genomicscientists; access to other
Informationmapping databases; 3D proteindatabases from government,

(Government)structure database;not-for-profit, other country
bibliographic databases;sources
software toolsCenter forSpecialized biologicalProprietary and public-domain
Bioinformaticsdatabases; softwareexperimental data from

University oftools for integrationacademic researchers; manual
Pennsylvaniaof distributedprocessing and encoding of
(Not-for-Profit)heterogeneous databasesdata from published literature;
online molecular and cellularbiology and genomic databasesMolecularSoftware for storing,>150 online database sites,
Applications Groupmining, and visualizingpublic and proprietary
(Commercial)genomic data; databases
derived from public andprivate data andproprietary softwareA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES21continuedDisseminationUsersModes
USGS, other government agencies,Maps: hard copy (paper, plastic, film) and digital form;
commercial database providers anddistributed by agency directly and through partnerships

value adders, researchers, and thewith private sector, not-for-profit sector
general publicResearchersInternet, some tape and CD-ROM for portability
Commercial clients:Maps: hard copy and digital form
large companies and consumersSoftware products distributed via retail channels
(CD-ROM) and directly to corporate customersMapping services distributed via InternetResearch scientists in academic,Internet access via Web servers and File Transfer
government, commercialProtocol (FTP)
organizationsResearch scientists in academic,Internet access
government, commercialSource code distributed directly

organizations (U.S. and abroad)Research scientists in academic,Some software products downloaded from the Web;
government, commercialothers require on-site expert installation
organizations (U.S. and abroad)A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22A QUESTION OF BALANCEChemical and Chemical EngineeringNational Institute ofSpecialized chemistry andExperimental results from
Standards andchemical engineering databasespublished literature; experiments

Technology (NIST)(extensively evaluated anddone specifically for data
Physical anddocumented)acquisition; published data
Chemical Propertiesevaluations; supplementary data

Divisiondeposits
(Government)Chemical AbstractsChemical Abstracts:Journals, patents, books,
Servicebibliographic databaseproceedings, dissertations
American ChemicalRegistry: registry of chemical

Societysubstances
(Not-for-Profit)Software access tools
Institute forBibliographic databases:Journals, books, proceedings
Scientificcitation indexes, tables of(print and electronic format)
Informationcontents

(Commercial)Information services
Linkages to publishersÕfull-text databasesMeteorological
National ClimaticClimatological summaries fromNational Weather Service, World
Data CenterNational Weather ServiceMeteorological Organization,

(Government)stations; historical long-termNASA, bilateral agreements
climatic databaseswith other countries
Unidata Program,Quasi-real-time atmosphericPublic: National Weather Service,
Universityand related dataNational Environmental Data
Corporation forCase study data setsService

AtmosphericSoftware toolsPrivate: network of lightning
Researchsensors, sensors in commercial
(Not-for-Profit)aircraft
TASCReal-time weather informationPublic: National Weather Service
Ñ(Commercial)downlink directly from U.S. and
international weather satellites,other observational sourcesNOTE:  Although the subject matter of this study included all S&T databases, the committee was
able to choose only representative examples for discussion and analysis in the report.  For instance,
specific examples from the social sciences or the space sciences, among other disciplines, were notincluded.TABLE 1.1Continued
OrganizationInformation and
(Sector)Tools ProvidedData Sources
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES23Researchers in academic,Variety of forms: hard-copy publication, CD-ROM or
government, commercialfloppy disk, Internet access; NIST distributes directly

organizations (some databases usedor via agreements with secondary distributors
primarily by industrial users)Researchers in academic,Electronic access, hard copy, CD-ROM
government, commercialorganizations; patent examiners;
studentsAcademic, government lab, andDiskette, CD-ROM, FTP files, Internet access,
corporate libraries; researchershard copy
in academic, government,
commercial organizationsIndividuals, commercial clients,Hard-copy, microfiche, magnetic tape, disks,
government agencies, engineeringCD-ROM, FTP, Internet

usesAcademic departmentsInternet
News media (broadcast and cablePublic and private data communication networks:
TV), aviation, energy and power,satellite broadcasting services and Internet

agribusinessDisseminationUsersModes
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24A QUESTION OF BALANCEBureau observational records or U.S. census data, are being digitized and orga-nized into electronically accessible databases.  This shift from a data-poor to a

data-rich research and education environment is occurring through the activities
of a host of government agencies, universities, and other research establishments,
both public and private, nationally and internationally, in diverse research disci-
plines.In many cases data are being collected not to answer specific scientificquestions, but rather to describe various physical and biological phenomena in
ever-increasing detail.  This broad-based acquisition of data, coupled with data

mining and knowledge discovery6 and the broad review and analysis of informa-
tion stored in large databases, is anticipated to reveal trends or patterns or to leadBox 1.2Example of Large-Scale Data Collection Activityby the Federal GovernmentStatistics from just one discipline in the natural sciencesÑatmospheric phys-icsÑillustrate the explosive growth in the size of some digital scientific and techni-cal databases.  The National Climatic Data Center (NCDC) is responsible for stor-

ing national, as well as some global, weather and climatic information.  Once, most
of these data came from human observations of the current state of the weather,using simple and straightforward instrumentation, including such commonplace
devices as thermometers, barometers, wind vanes, and rain gauges.  The compar-
atively recent deployment of satellites, sophisticated Doppler radars, lightning de-tection networks, automatic surface-observing platforms, and heavily instrument-
ed buoys in the marine environment, all linked together through broadband,high-speed communication systems, has increased the types and volumes of datacollected.  The NCDC
Õs storage requirements for these data have increased con-comitantly by many orders of magnitude.  In the period between 1980, when some
of the high-resolution data were just beginning to be recorded, and 1994, whenmuch of the Doppler radar and lightning data had yet to be generated, the volume
of data stored at the NCDC increased from approximately 1 terabyte to 230 ter-abytes.  By 1999, the NCDC
Õs data holdings had grown to 750 terabytes and areprojected to expand to more than 20 petabytes by 2014. These data are archived
indefinitely and made available to the public.____________SOURCE:  Information provided by Gerald Barton, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration, Washington, D.C.6 Data mining and 
knowledge discovery are related, frequently confused terms, as are 
data, infor-mation, and knowledge.  In the context of electronic databases, the data stored therein remain as datauntil they are extracted (mined) and recompiled (put in a context), at which point they becomeinformation.  After 
Òinformation is developed into a collection of related inferences, the data, nowA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES25to discoveries that will serve as a source of new hypotheses.  The increasing use
of databases as a research tool, whether in pursuit of new information or clues to
unexpected relationships as starting points for conducting fundamental research,
or for developing new commercial applications,7 relies on the production andavailability of such databases as an initial step in the process.In recent decades, and in most disciplines today, the federal government andfederally funded research have played the major role in generating primary S&T
data.  Substantial amounts and varieties of data are created by thousands of

federal government grantees doing basic research, either individually or in teams,
and most often at universities and other not-for-profit research institutions.  The

National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health, which in FY
1999 funded over $2.6 billion8 and $11.8 billion
9 in extramural grants, respec-
tively, provide the bulk of support for these efforts.  However, other federal

departments and independent agencies also have significant research grant pro-
grams that involve the collection of research data and the production of associ-
ated databases outside the direct control of the government.In FY 1998, the federal government spent approximately $19.5 billion onintramural and extramural basic research and almost $50 billion on applied re-
search.10  A substantial fraction of that funding was devoted to the creation of
primary data used for fundamental research, education, and other public-interest
purposes.  Among the current major observational data research programs are

NASAÕs Earth Observing System and numerous space science missions.11 The
Human Genome Project of the National Institutes of Health is another large-
scale, data-intensive research effort.12  Large experimental facilities dedicated to
information, become knowledge.Ó  The automated process of evaluating data and finding relation-
ships is data mining, and that of extracting information, especially predicted relationships, or discov-
ering previously unknown patterns among data is knowledge discovery.  Numeric databases are
more amenable to data mining than textual databases. See Walter J. Trybula (1997), ÒData Miningand Knowledge Discovery,Ó pp. 197-229, 
Annual Review of Information Science and Technology,Vol. 32, Martha E. Williams, ed., published for the American Society for Information Sciences byInformation Today, Inc., Medford, N.J.7 For a discussion of different types of scientific data and their distinguishing characteristics, see
National Research Council (1997), Bits of Power, note 4, pp. 49-57.8 Office of Management and Budget (1999), 
ÒBudget of the United States Government, FiscalYear 2000ÑAppendix,Ó U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., p. 1062.
9 Office of Management and Budget (1999), note 8, p. 441.
10 Intersociety Working Group (1999), 
ÒTable I-11.  Total U.S. R&D 1996-1998,
Ó in 
Researchand Development FY 2000, American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington,D.C., p. 71.11 See the NASA Web site at <www.nasa.gov> for a description of these major projects under the
Earth Sciences Mission home page at <http://www.earth.nasa.gov/missions/index.html> and the Space
Science Missions home page at <http://spacescience.nasa.gov/missions/index.html>, respectively.12 See the NIH Web site at <www.nih.gov> and the National Human Genome Research Institute
home page at <http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/HGP>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26A QUESTION OF BALANCEenabling advances in fundamental physics are operated by the Department ofEnergy13 or by universities or not-for-profit organizations under contract to one
or more federal government agencies.The government also collects large amounts of data for operational, non-research applications, such as daily weather forecasting, public health and safety,
and other public-interest government functions.  Many of the resulting data-

basesÑsuch as those developed from observations made by meteorological satel-lites and ground-based NEXRAD radars operated by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, or the geological, hydrological, and ecological data
collected by the U.S. Geological Survey in response to Department of the Interior
mandates14Ñhave multiple uses, as well as value for both immediate and long-term research.Additional extensive data are collected continuously at the state and localgovernment levels, principally in support of public government functions, such
as the provision of local health, education, and welfare services, or the regulation
of various economic activities.  These databases also provide a wealth of factual

and statistical information for social science researchers, as well as for historians.While original data collection activities in the United States, especially forresearch and educational purposes, are carried out largely under government
auspices, a significant amount of basic research is also funded outside govern-
ment by both not-for-profit and commercial institutions.  In 1998, nongovern-

mental sources spent approximately $15 billion on basic research,15 some of
which was used to produce and analyze new S&T databases.  In addition, most

large federal government research projects and programs involve one or more
foreign government agencies, often with significant international participation of
researchers.16 Large-scale research in areas such as climate trends, marine biol-
ogy, and space science requires international cooperation in the collection, pro-
duction, and dissemination of observational data.  The effectiveness of such

cooperation is dependent on, among other things, agreement on laws and policies
for sharing and using those data in different countries.Significant Aspects of Database ProductionThe rate of scientific progress depends not only on the collection of newdata, but also on the quality of the data collected, their ease of use, and the
dissemination of information about the database.  Considerable attention must be
13 See the DOE Web site at <www.doe.gov> and the Office of High Energy and Nuclear Physics
home page at <http://www.er.doe.gov/production/henp/henp.html>.14 See Table 1.1 and the committee
Õs online Proceedings, note 5, at Chapter 3, ÒCharacteristics ofScientific and Technical Databases.Ó15 Intersociety Working Group (1999), note 10, p. 71.
16 See National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power, note 4, pp. 58-61.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES27given to all those activities necessary to organize raw or disparate data intodatabases for broader use.  These functions and methods typically include digi-

tally processing the data into successively more highly refined and usable prod-
ucts; organizing the data into a database with appropriate structure, format, pre-
sentation, and documentation; creating the necessary accompanying analytical
support software; providing adequate quality assurance and quality control; an-
nouncing the availability of the database; and arranging for secure near-term
storage and eventual deposit in an archive that preserves the database and enables
continued access.17 As databases become ever larger and more complex, effec-
tive database production methods become increasingly important and constitute a
significant component of the overall cost of the database.The production of S&T databases requires at least some involvement bythose responsible for collecting the original data.  Typically, those closest to the

collection of the data have the greatest expertise and interest in organizing them
into a database whose contents are both available to and readily usable by others.
Furthermore, the highly technical and frequently esoteric nature of S&T data-
bases is likely to require that the original data collectors (or project scientists)
participate in at least the initial stages of organizing, documenting, and reviewing
the quality of data in the database.  Involvement by the original data collectors in

managing that part of the database production process decreases the probability
that unusable or inaccurate databases will result, reduces the need for subsequent
attempts to rescue or complete such data sets, and saves time and expense overall.The level of processing and related database production activities is a signifi-cant factor in defining the ultimate utility (and legal protection) of a digital data
collection.  It is the original unprocessed, or minimally processed, data that are

usually the most difficult to understand or use by anyone other than the originator
of those data, or an expert in that particular area.  With every successive level of
processing, organization, and documentation, the data tend to become more com-
prehensible and easier to use by the nonexpert.  As a database is prepared for

more widespread use with the addition of more creative elements, it also tends to
become more copyrightable as well as more generally marketable.  In the case of

observational sciences, it is the raw, noncopyrightable data that are typically of
greatest long-term value to basic research (see ÒThe Uniqueness of Many S&TDatabases,Ó below).  Increased or new protection for noncopyrightable databases
previously in the public domain could therefore have a disproportionate impact
on the heretofore unrestricted access to and use of raw data sets for basic research
and education.Although the production of many S&T databases is performed by, or with17 See generally, National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data on Our PhysicalUniverse: A New Strategy for Archiving Our NationÕs Scientific Resources, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28A QUESTION OF BALANCEthe active participation of, the originating researchers, it also is common for thirdparties to be involved in an aspect of database production referred to as Òvalueadding.Ó  Because the comprehensive production of very large or complex data-
bases can be quite expensive, organizations that collect data, especially in gov-
ernment, are increasingly ÒoutsourcingÓ database production and subsequent dis-
tribution to third parties in an effort to contain costs.  In such instances, the raw,

or minimally processed, data are provided to a private-sector vendor expressly
contracted with by government to add value to the data and produce a database in
a commercially marketable format to meet broad user requirements.  However,

since most federal government databases are openly available and in the public
domain, adding value to them may be undertaken as an initiative by entrepreneurs
that see a business opportunity in such activities, without any formal contractual
arrangement with the government data source.  (For examples of such third-party

providers, see the summary in Table 1.1 and the committeeÕs online workshopProceedings.)In the context of this report, the most significant aspect of these third-party,value-adding arrangements is that they almost always involve the transfer of
public or publicly funded data and databases to private-sector proprietary data-
base producers and vendors.  To the extent that these transfers are done on an

exclusive basis and the original government databases are not maintained or
otherwise made publicly available, the result is a concomitant decrease in the
public availability of S&T data.Perspective on Number of Databases ProducedÑSome StatisticsAccording to one set of recently compiled statistics,18 over the period from
1975 through 1998 the number of all databases grew by a factor of 38 (from 30118 The statistics provided in this section were all compiled by Martha E. Williams (1998), 
ÒStateof Databases Today:  1999,
Ó in 
Gale Directory of Databases, L. Kumar, ed., Gale Research,Farmington Hills, MI.  Dr. Williams notes the following caveats:
There are undoubtedly large numbers of government and private databases that are notincluded in these numbers.  The government seems not to have a systematic way of

making the existence of numeric databases known so that they could be identified anddescribed in database directories where the public could learn about them.  The compiler
of these statistics estimates that there are tens of thousands of such numeric databases and
that the numbers of records contained therein is in the petabyte range.  Many such data-
bases are in the hands of individual researchers, some of whom would be reluctant to fillout questionnaires or who consider the data to be of interest only to a small number of
known colleagues.  The statistics reported herein relate to publicly available databases
where the producer wants to make the data publicly known versus databases that areavailable to the public in theory only.  Databases that would require a Freedom of Infor-

mation Act request or need-to-know are not included in these statistics.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES29to 11,339), the number of database producers increased by a factor of 18 (from200 to 3,686), and the number of vendors grew by a factor of 23 (from 105 to
2,459).  In 1975 the 301 identified databases contained about 52 million records,
whereas in 1998 the 11,339 tallied databases held nearly 12.05 billion records, a
231-fold increase in the number of records.Although in todayÕs digitized information world databases are produced onall continents, the percentage of all types of databases produced in the United
States continues to represent the lionÕs share of the global output.  In 1998, of the11,339 databases that were identified, 63% were produced in the United States.
In 1975, of the 301 publicly available, computer-readable databases worldwide,
59% were U.S. databases.  From 1985 to 1993, the ratio of U.S. to non-U.S.

databases remained at about 2:1.  From 1994 on, production of non-U.S. data-

bases has accelerated somewhat, so that in 1998 the ratio of the number of U.S. to
non-U.S. databases was about 3:2.  The average size of U.S. databases in terms of

the number of records they contained was larger than that of the non-U.S. data-
bases.  As noted above, however, most U.S. government and academic databases

are not represented in these figures.In the source quoted here, database statistics were compiled in eight majorsubject categoriesÑbusiness, health/life/medical sciences, humanities, law, multi-disciplinary, news/general, science/technology/engineering, and social sciences.
If the health/life/medical sciences category is combined with science/technology/
engineering, that general scientific and technical category had the largest number
of databases (28%) in 1998, followed by business (26%), news/general (15%),
and law (11%), with the remaining three categories accounting for the other
20%.19The Uniqueness of Many S&T DatabasesA key characteristic of original S&T databases is that many of them are theonly one of their particular kind, available only from a single source, which has
significant economic and legal implications, as discussed in subsequent chapters
of this report.  For example, many S&T databases describe physical phenomena

or transitory events that have been rendered unique by the passage of time.
Measurements of a snowstorm obtained with a single radar observation, or a
statistical compilation of some key socioeconomic characteristics such as income
levels collected by a state agency, cannot be recaptured after the original event.
The vast majority of observational data sets of the natural world, as well as all
unique historical records, can never again be recreated independently and are
thus available only as originally obtained, frequently from a single source.  Other

S&T databases are de facto unique because the cost of obtaining the data was19 Williams (1998), ÒState of Databases Today,Ó note 18, p. xxvi.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30A QUESTION OF BALANCEextremely high.  This is the case with very large facilities for physical experi-
ments or space-based observatories.Even when data similar but not identical to original research results or obser-vations are available for use in non-technical applications, scientists and engi-
neers will likely not find an inexact replica of a database a suitable substitute if it
does not meet certain specifications for a particular experiment or analysis.  For

example, two infrared sensors with similar spatial and spectral characteristics on
different satellites collecting observations of Earth may provide relatively inter-
changeable data products for the non-expert consumer, but for a researcher, the
absence of one spectral band can make all the difference in whether a certain type
of research can be performed.  Thus a database generally deemed adequate as a

substitute in the mass consumer market very likely will not be usable for many
research or education purposes.Dissemination of Scientific and Technical Data and the Issue of AccessS&T data traditionally were disseminated in paper form in journal articles,textbooks, reference books, and abstracting and indexing publications.  As data

have become available in electronic form, they have been distributed via mag-
netic tape and, more recently, optical media such as CD-ROM or DVD.  The

growing use of the Internet has revolutionized dissemination by allowing most
databases to be made available globally in electronic form.  Digitization and the

potential for instant, low-cost global communication have opened tremendous
new opportunities for the dissemination and utilization of S&T databases and
other forms of information, but also have led to a blurring of the traditional roles
and relationships of database producers, vendors, and users of those databases in
the government, not-for-profit, and commercial sectors.  In fact, virtually anyone

who obtains access to a digital database can instantly become a worldwide dis-
seminator, whether legally or illegally.20Two of the most important mechanisms for the dissemination of public andpublicly funded databases have been government data centers and public librar-
ies.  Government, or government-funded, data centers have been created in recent

decades for dissemination of data obtained in certain programs or research disci-
plines.  Examples of such data centers include the National Center for Biotech-
20 Of course, this same development is occurring with other forms of online information and
proprietary publications outside the S&T database context, such as with copyrighted digital musicand videos.  For an extensive discussion of the impact of the Internet on various types of information

and related intellectual property rights management, see Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard, National Research Council (2000), The Digital Dilemma:  Intellectual Property in the Infor-
mation Age, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., in press.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES31nology Information and the National Climatic Data Center (Table 1.1), but manyothers have been established for almost every field of research.21Public libraries, whether part of the federal depository library program, uni-versity research libraries, or other public libraries or foundations specializing in
various S&T or other academic subjects, not only preserve and publicly dissemi-
nate government data, but provide general public access for many proprietary
S&T databases as well.  With ever-increasing costs, however, the libraries
Õ abil-
ity to provide this public Òsafety netÓ for all published products is diminishing.
22Historically, most federal government S&T data and government-fundedresearch data in the United States have been fully and openly available to the
public.23  This has meant that such data are available free or at low cost for
academic and commercial researchÑand indeed any other useÑwithout restric-tions and can be incorporated into derivative databases, which can, themselves,
be redistributed and incorporated into additional databases.  In some instances in

which the government contracts for the dissemination of data, however, the rights
assigned to the database vendor may place restrictions on the ability of the re-
search and education communities to fully utilize the data.  Increasingly, both

government and not-for-profit organizations are exploring means to recover data-
base production and distribution costs, or to generate revenue streams in order to
support their expensive data activities, thereby making them function in a manner
similar to commercial organizations.The ability to access existing data and to extract and recombine selectedportions of them for research or for incorporation into new databases for further
distribution and use has become a key part of the scientific process by which new
insights are gained and knowledge is advanced.  When the ability to access or

distribute data on an international basis is required, various intergovernmental
agreements are depended on to facilitate such exchanges in the public sector.  In

contrast, to achieve a suitable return on their investment, private-sector vendors
of proprietary databases typically seek to control unauthorized access to and use
of their databases.  It is at the intersection of public and private interests in data
21 See National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data, note 17, and the accompany-ing Study on the Long-term Retention of Selected Scientific and Technical Records of the FederalGovernment:  Working Papers,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., and National Research
Council (1997) Bits of Power, note 4, for a description of many of these government S&T datacenters.22 As the prices of many serial journal subscriptions substantially outpace the rate of inflation, forexample, research libraries increasingly need to rely on interlibrary loans to obtain access for their
students and professors.  See Association of Research Libraries (1999), 
ARL Statistics:  1997-98
,Martha Kyrillidou et al., eds.,  Association of Research Libraries, Washington, D.C.
23 As defined in National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power, note 4, p. 15,  Òfull and openÓavailability of data means that Òdata and information derived from publicly funded research are madeavailable with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than the costof reproduction and distribution.ÓA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32A QUESTION OF BALANCEwhere the greatest challenges emerge.  As an example, Box 1.3 sketches some of
the issues and approaches currently being tried.Use of Scientific and Technical DatabasesPrior to its public dissemination, the use of a database is limited to thoseinvolved in the collection of data or production, and therefore does not provide
the opportunity to contribute broadly to the advancement of scientific knowledge,
technical progress, economic growth, or other applications beyond those of the
immediate group.  It is only upon the distribution of a database that its far-

reaching research, educational, and other socioeconomic values are realized.  One

or more researchers applying varying hypotheses, manipulating the data in differ-
ent ways, or combining elements from disparate databases may produce a diver-
sity of data and information products.  The contribution of any of these products

to scientific and technical knowledge might well assume a value far greater than
the costs of database production and dissemination.  The results of a thorough
Box 1.3Database Production in Competitive Research and theQuestion of AccessGenomic sequence databases exemplify the tension over rights in data andtheir uses associated with the development of original databases that have both
important fundamental research uses and great potential for applied commercialproducts.  Advances in molecular biology and automated DNA sequencing tech-
nology have made possible the rapid sequencing of genomes from a variety of life
forms, including human beings.  These databases are being produced simulta-
neously by researchers at government, not-for-profit, and commercial laboratories.Although the government and not-for-profit genomic database producers maybe slower than the commercial sector in compiling gene sequence data on thesame organisms, they are striving to create analogous databases in order to pro-vide the results on an open basis as a public good for broad research and other
uses.  Government and not-for-profit sequence data are collected and integrated
into major sequence databases in a cooperative international effort that includes theNational Center for Biotechnology Information in the United States,1 the European
Molecular Biology Laboratory in the United Kingdom on behalf of the EuropeanUnion,2 and the DNA Database of Japan.
3  These centers not only collect and
share the data on a daily basis, but also provide some quality control, documenta-
tion, and organization of the data before making the information freely available tothe scientific and technical community, typically over the Internet.  The Human
continuedA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES33Genome Project aims to provide full sequence data for the human genome and toserve as the future reference standard.Because of the high intrinsic commercial value of human genomic informationfor the identification of disease markers and therapeutic agents, commercial enti-ties simultaneously seek to be first in generating primary genomic data, which theycan license to pharmaceutical or biotechnology companies, or patent, if possible,
to gain market advantage.While the human genome provides the basic blueprint for human life, it is smalldifferences in individual genes that are likely to provide insight into important ques-
tions such as variations in disease susceptibility in different populations (for exam-ple, why certain groups of people are predisposed to high blood pressure, diabe-tes, or AlzheimerÕs disease).  These can be studied by comparing the gene
sequences of different populations, such as those individuals susceptible to a dis-ease compared to those individuals who are not.  Hence, over time, gene se-
quence databases of a wide variety of discrete populations will be developed sup-
ported by a mix of public and private funding.Recently, for instance, the Icelandic government formed a controversial part-nership with a private U.S. firm to develop a database that will contain genetic
information on the entire Icelandic population.  Icelanders belong to a highly homo-
geneous gene pool, which will simplify the detection of disease-related genes. Thegovernment gave the firm, by statute, an exclusive license to create and operate
that database.4Another recently begun effort involves a consortium of ten U.S. and foreignpharmaceutical companies, together with government and not-for-profit organiza-tions, formed to generate a map of human single-nucleotide polymorphisms,5which can be thought of as a low-resolution indicator highlighting areas of variabil-ity in the genetic code associated with genetic differences between individuals.Although the research is funded in large part by the commercial sector, the resultswill be made publicly available.  In addition to the cost-sharing benefits of this

consortium, a major reason for its establishment is the fear that an individual com-pany, or group of companies, could generate scientifically valuable databases andinformation on a proprietary basis, preventing broad access and capturing a high
proportion of the associated intellectual property rights.61See the National Center for Biotechnology Information Web site at<www.ncbi.gov>.2See the European Molecular Biology Laboratory Web site at <www.embl.uk>.3See the DNA Database of Japan Web site at <www.ddbj.nig.ad.ip>.4See J. Gulcher and K. Stefansson (1999), ÒAn Icelandic Saga on a Central-ized Healthcare Database and Democratic Decision Making,Ó National Biotech-nology, Vol. 17, July, p. 620, and Martin Enserink (1998), ÒPhysicians Wary ofScheme to Pool IcelandersÕ Genetic Data,
Ó Science, Vol. 281, August 14, pp.890-891.5See Eliot Marshall (1999), ÒDrug Firms to Create Public Database of GeneticMutations,Ó Science, Vol. 284, April 16, pp. 406-407.6See Marshall (1999), note 5.Box 1.3  Continued
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34A QUESTION OF BALANCEdatabase analysis may reveal a value of the data not apparent in even a detailedexamination of the individual elements of the database itself.  With the wide-

spread availability of information on the Internet have come abundant opportuni-
ties to search for scientific and technical gold in this ore of factual elements.  The

possibilities for discovery of new insights about the natural worldÑwith bothcommercial and public-interest valueÑare extraordinary.In considering how databases are used, it is important to distinguish betweenend use and derivative use.  End use
Ñaccessing a database to verify some fact orperform some job-related or personal task, such as obtaining an example for a
work memoÑis most typical of public consumer uses.  End use does not involve
the physical integration of one or more portions of the database into another
database in order to create a new information product.  A derivative (value-

adding or transformative) use (see Box 1.1) builds on a preexisting database and
includes at least one, and frequently many more, extractions from one or more
databases to create a new database, which can be used for the same, a similar, or
an entirely different purpose than the original component database(s).Integration of Distributed Data to Broaden Accessand Potential for DiscoveryIn seeking new knowledge, researchers may gather data from widely dispar-ate sources.  A significant advantage arising from the abundance of digitized data

now accessible through both private and public networks is the potential for
linking data in multiple (even thousands of) databases.  The ability to link sites on

the World Wide Web is one type of integration that could result in more data
being available overall to users.  Another is the merging of databases of the same

or complementary content.  It is now possible to maintain a site with continuously

verified links to related information sites for use by subscribers or members of a
specific group; an example is the Engineering Village of Engineering Informa-
tion, Inc.24  Yet another type of integration occurs in the connection of distrib-
uted databases such that different parts of a single large database may reside on
different computers in geographically dispersed locations throughout the country
or the world.  With a common structure, data can be located in a physically

distributed network and accessed as if they were in one database in one computer
in one location.  The cost can thus be distributed and the value of each contribu-

tory database increased. Still other databases are automatically created from other
databases.  For example, data are routinely mined and collected by 
ÒknowbotsÓand Òweb crawlersÓ (software employing artificial intelligence and rule-based
selection techniques) on the Internet throughout the world and retrieved for pro-24 See, for example, the Engineering Village of Engineering Information Web site at <www.ei.org/
aivillage/village.serve-page?p=4011>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES35cessing and further use.  One such data-mining activity in the area of biotechnol-
ogy was described and discussed at the committeeÕs January 1999 workshop (seethe Molecular Applications GroupÕs activities summarized in Table 1.1).With a capability to integrate information in multiple databases comes thepotential for exploiting relationships identified in the information and developing
new knowledge.  In many scientific fields, the initial investment by the database

rights holder may not produce the greatest value until it is integrated with the
investments of others.  For example, while protein sequence data are valuable in

their own right, their value is greatly enhanced if associated x-ray crystallo-
graphic data are also concurrently available.  It is possible to use the combined

data to understand the way in which protein chains are folded and, in the case of
an enzyme, the way in which various nonsequential residues, or even residues on
separate protein chains, combine to form an active site.Derivative Databases and New Data-drivenResearch and CapabilitiesThe ethos in research is that science builds on science.  The creation of
derivative databases not only enables incremental advances in the knowledge
base, but also can contribute to major new findings, particularly when existing
data are combined with new or entirely different data.  The importance for re-

search and related educational activities of producing new derivative databases
cannot be overemphasized.25  The vast increase in the creation of digital data-
bases in recent decades, together with the ability to make them broadly and
instantaneously available, has resulted in entire new fields of data-driven research.For example, the study of biological systems has been transformed radicallyin the past 20 years from an experimental research endeavor conducted in labora-
tories to one that relies heavily on computing and on access to and further refine-25 As noted by Vinton Cerf, senior vice president at MCI WorldCom, Inc. (
ÒACM AwardsKeynote,Ó Association for Computing Machinery, New York City, May 15, 1999):
Scientific databases are proving to be non-linear accelerators of research in specific fieldssuch as biology, astronomy, meteorology, space physics, chemistry, economics, epidemi-ology, environmental studies and a wealth of other fields.  The non-linearity comes about
because as each research adds more material to the database, the information is placed injuxtaposition with all other items in the system, exhibiting the same kind of non-linearimpact that placing computers in a common network has had, in accordance with Metcal-
feÕs Law (which says that the value of the network grows as the square number of devicesin the net).  Cerf
Õs Law says that shared databases grow in value in accordance with thenumber of combinations of data items in the database.  When the hundreds of thousands

of databases on the Internet and other networks are accessible remotely and can be reachedin parallel, and when the partial results can be combined and searched anew, the value ofthese data can grow dramatically.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36A QUESTION OF BALANCEment of globally linked databases.26 Indeed, one of the fastest growing disci-
plines is bioinformatics, a computer-based approach to biological research.  New

technologies, such as DNA microarrays and high-throughput sequencing ma-
chines, are producing a deluge of data.  A challenge to biology in the coming

decades will be to convert these data into knowledge.27The availability of global remote-sensing satellite observations, coupled with
other airborne and in situ observational capabilities, has given rise to a new field
of environmental research, Earth system science, which integrates the study of
the physical and biological processes of our planet at various scales.  The large

meteorological databases obtained from government satellites, ground-based ra-
dar, and other data-collection systems pose a challenge similar to that mentioned
above for biology, but also already have yielded a remarkable range of commer-
cial and non-commercial value.  Dissemination of the atmospheric observations

in real time or near-real time for ÒnowcastsÓ and daily weather forecasts has very
high commercial value, which is captured by third-party distributors.  Use of

these atmospheric observations to develop numerical models that predict the
weather accurately, hours or days in advance, adds value in terms of safety and
economic benefits to society that are not readily quantifiable.  While the eco-

nomic value of these data can be gauged by the profits of private-sector distribu-
tors, how does one measure the value of the lives and property saved by timely
and accurate hurricane forecasts and tornado warnings?  Once the immediate and

most lucrative commercial value is exploited, the resulting data continue to have
significant commercial and public-interest uses indefinitely.  For instance, these

data enable basic research on severe weather and long-term climate trends and
provide various retrospective applications for industry.  The original databases

are archived and made available by the National Climatic Data Center (see Box
1.2).  Derivative databases and data products are distributed under various ar-

rangements by both commercial and not-for-profit entities like the Unidata Pro-
gram of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (see Table 1.1 and
the online workshop Proceedings).Geographic information systems that integrate myriad sources of data pro-vide an opportunity for new insights about the natural and constructed environ-
ment, greatly enhancing our knowledge of where we live and how we affect our
physical environment.  Important applications include environmental manage-

ment, urban planning, route planning and navigation, emergency preparedness26 See generally, Working Group on Biomedical Computing (1999), 
ÒThe Biomedical Informa-tion Science Initiative,Ó National Institutes of Health, June 3, available online at <www.nih.gov/
welcome/director/060399.htm>.27 See Sylvia Spengler and Manfred D. Zorn (1999), 
ÒHandling Data Sets in Biology,Ó Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory Colloquium, Washington, D.C.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES37and response, land-use regulation, and enhancement of agricultural productivity,among many others.28Finally, databases used by researchers and educators also frequently areproduced and disseminated primarily for other purposes.  For example, a physical

scientist studying the complex relationships among geology, hydrology, and biol-
ogy as they relate to the preservation of species diversity likely would draw on
numerous digital and hard-copy databases originally gathered for other purposes.
A social scientist studying the characteristics and patterns of urban crime or the
spread of communicable diseases likely would do the same.  For many scientists,

the ability to supplement existing databases with further data collection in a
seamless web of old and new data is basic to meeting the needs of their specific
investigations.Text Databases and Online PublicationAnother type of S&T database not yet discussed, but that is used extensivelyby the research community, consists primarily of text with data summarized or
added as examples.  These databases may consist of primary literature (as in the

case of full-text databases of journal articles) or secondary literature (as in the
case of bibliographic reference databases).  Traditionally, this text has been avail-

able in print form, with publishers providing peer review, professional editing,
indexing and formatting, and other services, including marketing and distribu-
tion.  Increasingly this information is being provided as text databases with the

publishers also providing the systems that allow access to these databases.  These

value-adding or information repackaging functions are performed by both not-
for-profit and for-profit organizations.  For example, the not-for-profit American

Association for the Advancement of Science, a scientific society, produces a
database containing the full text of articles from Science magazine, including
enhancements to the content that do not appear in the print version.29  Similarly,
the for-profit publisher Elsevier Science produces ScienceDirect, a database con-
taining the full text of its journal articles.  Bibliographic reference databases are

also produced by government, not-for-profit, and for-profit organizations, such
as the National Library of Medicine, Chemical Abstracts Service, and the Insti-
tute for Scientific Information, respectively (see Table 1.1 and the online work-
shop Proceedings30).  Where full-text databases include associated data collec-
28 National Academy of Public Administration (1998), 
Geographic Information for the 21st Cen-tury: Building a Strategy for the Nation, National Academy of Public Administration, Washington,D.C.29 See 
Science online at <http://www.sciencemag.org/>.
30 See the committee
Õs online Proceedings, note 5, at Chapter 3, ÒCharacteristics of Scientific andTechnical Databases.ÓA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38A QUESTION OF BALANCEtions, physical and legal possession of the data collections may be retained by theoriginator or may pass to the publisher.As S&T data and results are increasingly digitized and made available online,publishers are seeking access to and inclusion of the underlying data collections
on which published articles are based.  The intent is not only to provide greater

validity and support for published research articles, but also to make their online
publications more interesting and useful to the S&T customer base.  The ability to

link to the underlying databases instantaneously and at different levels of detail
adds an entirely new and exciting dimension to scientific publishing and to the
potential for new research, but also raises the question of who will have the rights
to exploiting those data.THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVELY BALANCING PRIVATERIGHTS AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST IN SCIENTIFIC ANDTECHNICAL DATABASESThe general advancement of knowledge independent of its eventual societalbenefits is a goal of basic research.  Nevertheless, an endless array of examples

demonstrates how the creation of new knowledge, building on the existing base
of understanding and information developed by researchers, has enabled broad
and important socioeconomic benefits for the nation as a whole.  Our society

appreciates that knowledge itself is intrinsically valuable and important, and our
success in the world market for advanced technology products and services at-
tests to the direct economic benefits of the resulting applications.  It is for these

reasons that government funds basic research and related data activities as a
public good.31,32  Yet it is precisely these activities that are at risk of being
hindered, if not in some instances stopped, by proposed major changes to the
legal protections of factual databases.31 As Lester Thurow points out: 
ÒA successful knowledge-based economy requires large publicinvestments in education, infrastructure, and research and development.Ó He goes on to say that
private returns are apt to be more certain if one is looking for an extension of existingknowledge rather than for a major breakthrough; thus private firms tend to concentrate
their money on the development end of the R&D process.  Time lags are shorter, and in
the business world speed is everything.  Because of this proclivity in the private sector,
government should focus its spending on the long-tailed projects for advancing basic
knowledge.  This is where the private firms won
Õt invest, but it is precisely where thebreakthroughs that generate business opportunities are made.(Lester C. Thurow (1999), ÒBuilding Wealth: The New Rules for Individuals, Companies, andNations,Ó Atlantic Monthly, June, p. 64.)32 For a discussion of public goods in the context of basic scientific research and related data
activities, see National Research Council (1997), Bits of Power, note 4, pp. 111-114.  This issue is
discussed in greater detail in Chapters 3 and 4.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASES39Legislative efforts are currently under way in the United States, the Euro-pean Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization to greatly enhance
the legal protection of proprietary databases.  These new legal approaches threaten

to compromise traditional and customary access to and use of S&T data for
public-interest endeavors, including not-for-profit research, education, and gen-
eral library uses.  At the same time, there are legitimate concerns by the rights

holders in databases regarding unauthorized and uncompensated uses of their
data products, including at times the wholesale commercial misappropriation of
proprietary databases.Because of the complex web of interdependent relationships among public-sector and private-sector database producers, disseminators, and users, any action
to increase the rights of persons in one category likely will compromise the rights
of the persons in the other categories, with far-reaching and potentially negative
consequences.  Of course, it is in the common interest of both database rights

holders and usersÑand of society in generalÑto achieve a workable balanceamong the respective interests so that all legitimate rights remain reasonably
protected.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.402Incentives and Disincentives Affecting
the Availability and Use of
Scientific and Technical Databases
40As noted in Chapter 1, scientific and technical (S&T) databases are not justa by-product of research, but also an essential foundation on which progress in
science builds.  Increasingly, too, databases are a research tool that can be sold or

licensed and used as the input for new products, the creation of customized
derivative databases, and innovations to broaden the scope and increase the pace
of discovery.  The incentives and disincentives to provide databases reflect all

these uses, as well as financial motives.  This chapter points out the divergent

objectives of organizations that produce and distribute S&T databases, and it
outlines some of the economic factors affecting access to such data.  In addition,
it elaborates on the committeeÕs conclusion that any new legislation that would
change the status quo must take into account how it would alter the incentives to
produce both original and derivative databases, how it would affect the dissemi-
nation and use of databases (especially regarding whether access would be exclu-
sive or unrestricted, particularly for the scientific community), and what the
unintended consequences might be for scientific inquiry and other public-interest
uses.DIVERGENT OBJECTIVES OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT PRODUCEAND DISTRIBUTE SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASESOriginal and derivative S&T databases are produced by government, not-for-profit/academic, and for-profit organizations (see Table 1.1 in Chapter 1 for
selected examples).  Whereas individual researchers typically are motivated by

curiosity, a desire to contribute to the knowledge base, and an opportunity toA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES AFFECTING AVAILABILITY AND USE41influence the thinking of others, their employers also have in mind a combinationof organizational mission and funding considerations.  Table 2.1 summarizes

typical objectives of government, not-for-profit/academic, and for-profit organi-
zations in producing and disseminating S&T databases and the different weight
each places on mission versus financial considerations.In government and not-for-profit research organizations, including universi-ties, basic research institutes, and national laboratories, the advancement of
knowledge as an intrinsic good and in the service of national goals motivates the
production and distribution of S&T databases; exploiting data for financial gain
is subordinate to fulfilling public-interest objectives.  The data products of not-

for-profit and government organizations are judged primarily by criteria that are
not directly profit related, such as their value to end users, their potential value in
advancing a field, their ability to enhance the status of an institution and its
research or educational capabilities, and similar objectives typically associated
with public-interest or public-good activities related, for example, to improving
knowledge of disease factors or interdependencies within ecosystems.Of course, not all not-for-profit institutions behave in this generalized way.At one end of the spectrum are organizations that, especially if they are fully
subsidized, distribute their data freely on the Internet without any effort at cost
recovery.  Many individual researchers or academics certainly operate this way.

At the other end are not-for-profit institutions that seek to maximize the revenues
from their S&T databases, subject to the constraints of their tax-exempt status, to
finance future R&D and database development in order to remain at the forefront
of their respective fields.  Most not-for-profits, however, fall somewhere in the

middle in trying to reconcile their public-interest mission, on the one hand, with
the need to generate sufficient operating revenues, on the other.  Universities

present a good example of this dichotomy, with the trend in recent years toward
greater cost recovery1 and greater attention to the protection and exploitation of
their intellectual property.2In contrast, the for-profit sector seeks mainly to generate profit for manage-ment and shareholders.  Of course, market success also depends on creating value

for usersÑotherwise, the data products would not be successful. High value cantranslate to high prices, and such pricing inevitably restricts access.  Neverthe-

less, there are exceptions to the rule here as well, since not all for-profit entities
attempt to charge as much as they could for their proprietary databases, perhaps1 For a discussion of the trend in academic institutions to protect their research results as intellec-
tual property, see Kenneth W. Dam (1998), ÒIntellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise,ÓJohn M. Olin Law & Economics Working Paper No. 68 (2d Series), University of Chicago LawSchool.2 Intellectual Property Task Force (1999), ÒIntellectual Property and New Media Technologies: AFramework for Policy Development and AAU Institutions,Ó Association of American Universities,
May 13, Washington, D.C., 31 pp., available online at <www.tulane.edu/~aau/AAUPolicy.html>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42A QUESTION OF BALANCETABLE 2.1  Typical Objectives of Organizations That Produce and
Disseminate S&T DatabasesFederal GovernmentPrimary motivationsServe national goals, including promoting societal
well-being and supporting basic research and other
public-good interestsGoals of S&T data collectionSupport agency mission;  undertake basic research
and database developmentas a basis for economic growth and productivity
and for public well-beingGoals of S&T database distributionMaximize the downstream benefits of basic research;
promote availability and use of research results inboth public and private sectorsAccess to dataOpen exchange of information encouraged by
federal policyInterest in protecting the databasesVery low; any restrictions generally seen as a
producedproblem, with few benefits
NOTE:  This table provides broad generalizations regarding the organizations of the three sectors.

The committee recognizes that many exceptions and nuances exist, as discussed in this chapter.instead using such databases as a marketing tool for other products or services, orchoosing revenue-generating methods such as advertising as an alternative to
charging users for access to data.  Such exceptions, however, usually are seen in

non-scientific database markets that have large user clienteles.33 See generally Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council
(2000), The Digital Dilemma:  Intellectual Property in the Information Age
, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C., in press.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES AFFECTING AVAILABILITY AND USE43Not-for-Profit/AcademicFor-Profit
Fulfill mission, including furthering research,Achieve corporate objectives, including
education, creation of knowledge, andprofit making and growth, and ensure

discovery; remain economically viableshareholder and customer satisfaction
Advance knowledge by conducting newSupport development of new or improved
research and by validating and building onproducts or services; develop databases for
the research of others; educate futuredirect sale or lease as products or as services
researchers; contribute to basis for producingin support of other products or services

social benefits; build reputation and statusof researchers and their institutionsEncourage open sharing of ideas; enableDisseminate data to protect competitive
existing data to be reused for discovery ofadvantage when databases are used for
new knowledge; invite review and validationdevelopment of other products or are

of research results; facilitate use of researchthemselves products or services; disseminate
results for product development by S&Tvia sale or license to generate revenue,
community and commercial concerns;enhance customer base and market position,

recover costs or generate revenue in supportgain competitive advantage, achieve profits,
of missionor recover costs
Open, with data and ideas shared afterInternal and confidential, or available/
results have been publishedmarketed externally at a cost set by the
organizationModerate; ranges from very low (for fullyVery high; databases regarded as
subsidized databases) to moderate (wheninvestments to be protected whether they are
cost recovery is necessary) to high (whenused in product development or are
data are a source of revenue required tothemselves products or services to be sold

support mission)SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATABASE COSTS,PRICING, AND ACCESSDespite their differences in mission and motivation, organizations in all threesectors are constrained by financial responsibilities:  federal government agen-

cies must justify their expenditures to Congress; not-for-profit entities must make
their organizations at least viable (with any excess of income over expenses
reinvested in the organization); and commercial firms must answer to sharehold-
ers.  All organizations therefore give careful consideration both to the costs
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44A QUESTION OF BALANCEassociated with database production and distribution and to the potential forgenerating revenue.Production and Distribution CostsThe costs of databases can be categorized as production costs and distribu-tion costs.  Database production includes both data collection and database prepa-

ration.  The cost of data collection can be very high and varies with the size,

complexity, and difficulty of obtaining the data.  It includes the costs of the

observational or experimental instrumentation, deployment and maintenance of
that instrumentation for the lifetime of the data collection project, and related
infrastructure costs such as initial data storage.  Data acquisition costs typically

represent the bulk of the costs of a database.  In major data collection projects

such as those involving remote sensing satellites (e.g., National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration geostationary or polar-orbiting spacecraft), or in
large physics experiments requiring specialized facilities (e.g., high-energy par-
ticle accelerators), the costs can easily be in the hundreds of millions, or even
billions, of dollars.  Database preparation costs are those associated with prepar-

ing a database for dissemination, including ensuring data quality and accuracy,
and enhancing the utility of the data for users.  The cost of these efforts can vary
from modest to large, depending on the nature of the database and its intended
use.  For example, the cost of the labor for abstracting or indexing databases can
make their production expensive.Distribution costs include the cost of making, sending, and billing for physi-cal copies; any additional transaction costs such as those for licensing and related
administrative activities; and user-specific costs such as those for database main-
tenance and specialized handling.  Distribution costs tend to be much lower than
database production costs, particularly if the Internet is the medium of dissemina-
tion and little effort is devoted to marketing or user assistance.  In some cases, the

distribution costs are simply the costs of copying.Producing databases for online distribution is more a matter of potentialmarket opportunity and incentives, rather than of potential cost savings.  Custom-

ers have come to expect online distribution, particularly in the S&T data market
in which nearly all users are now connected to networks and are technically
sophisticated.  For such users, online access can improve a database
Õs accessibil-ity, functionality, and utility.  From the producer
Õs perspective, it opens newmarket opportunities or broadens existing ones, but it is more likely to shift costs
than to reduce them.  The concern over adequate protection of a rights holder
Õsdatabase products is exacerbated in the online milieu by factors such as the
possibility of unauthorized access, duplication of content, and mass redistribu-
tion. As discussed in Chapter 3, however, making the information available online
also can reduce the opportunities for misappropriation of a database by prevent-
ing the user from accessing all the underlying data.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES AFFECTING AVAILABILITY AND USE45Pricing and AccessBecause for most S&T databases the production costs are high relative to thesubsequent distribution costs, there is a trade-off between efficient access and
cost recovery.  An economist would define an efficient-access
 price for a data-base as one that is equal to the cost of making the database accessible to one
additional (the marginal) user.  A higher price inefficiently excludes potential

users, whether the data activity is in the public or the private sector.  The users
Õwelfare could be enhanced without increasing the burden on taxpayers if users
were allowed to buy access to the data at the marginal cost of dissemination.4An efficient-access price will almost never generate revenue that matchesthe database production costs.5 Instead, the database must be subsidized in some
way.  Cost recovery has an equity justification, namely that the database is paid

for by the users instead of being subsidized out of general revenue.  It also

subjects the database to a (weak) market test of whether the value to users ex-
ceeds the cost.  If not, then revenue cannot exceed costs.
Efficient-access pricing is only feasible in conjunction with some othersource of revenue or subsidy, such as taxpayer support (in the case of federal
agencies) or endowments or industry or government contract support (in the case
of not-for-profits).  Federal agencies are required by law to provide efficient

access, limiting charges to no more than the incremental cost of data dissemina-
tion, and not including the average cost of producing the database.6 Frequently,
the federal agency simply charges for the cost of reproduction and distribution,
which can be zero if the database is distributed online.74 Such a price is efficient whether the database is sold or licensed to end users or those using the
data in derivative products.  Competition among vendors in the derivative market will keep the pricelow, thus transferring much of the benefit of the underlying data to the consumer.  In both cases,

efficient access could be preserved with higher revenue if the provider could distinguish users with ahigh willingness to pay for access and use from those with a low willingness to pay.5 For example, in remote sensing systems the development and maintenance costs of the system
are very high per user, but the cost of dissemination is trivial in comparison, especially when doneonline.  Information goods such as databases share the essential feature of public goods, namely that
use of the good is nonrivalrous.  This means that after the first user is served, the marginal cost of

allowing access by each additional user is minimal, and the average cost per user is declining (thereare economies of scale).  Competitive theory does not extend to pure public goods, and the market-
place will not deliver them efficiently, if at all.  In order to cover costs, the price must exceed the cost

of supplying the marginal user.6 See Office of Management and Budget (1993), Circular A-130, 
ÒManagement of Federal Infor-mation Resources,Ó U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., regarding federal govern-
ment information dissemination practices and policies, which were codified in the Paperwork Reduc-tion Act of 1995, P.L. 104-13, which amended 44 United States Code Chapter 35, effective October1, 1995.7 For a discussion of pricing publicly funded S&T data, see National Research Council (1997),
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., pp. 124-126.  On the other hand, providing access can be more costly than it seems, and users
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46A QUESTION OF BALANCEIn contrast to government agencies and some not-for-profit entities, profit-motivated firms must, at a minimum, recover their costs.  Of course, for-profit

entities seek to generate additional income, sometimes using sophisticated pric-
ing strategies, such as segmenting the market with differentiated products and
varying the price according to volume, convenience of delivery, customer sup-
port services, documentation, scope of subject matter, geographic coverage, and
so on.8  (See Box 2.1 for examples of marketing models for private-sector S&T
data products and services.)  Unless commercial providers are much more effi-

cient than government providers, the profit motive leads to higher prices for
access than a government agency would ideally charge under its mandate to
provide wide access.Whether a commercial database will be made available to public users (suchas university laboratories) on better terms than to commercial firms depends on
whether there is competition between those two sectors.  If the database contains

information whose value to commercial buyers is reduced by academic use, then
the vendor will not sell it at preferential rates to academics.Stronger Statutory Protection and the Incentives for InvestmentThere is a natural link between cost recovery and protection of databases.9 If
databases can be copied without any legal constraints or otherwise freely ac-
quired by users or competitors, then the rights holders will not recover their costs
and hence will have no incentive to produce databases.10 Stronger statutory
protection might help prevent unauthorized copying, particularly in unprotected
digital formats, and thus promote cost recovery and improve profit margins.  In

this way it could provide incentives for the creation of new databases in the
private sector, especially by commercial entities.  However, although this moti-

vation sounds compelling, it should be tempered by the realization, elaborated inmust sometimes invoke the Freedom of Information Act to obtain data from the federal government.One interpretation is that the cost of providing the information includes techniciansÕ time, which
cannot be disentangled from other activities and is hard to pass on to the user as a cost of dissemina-
tion.8 See National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power, note 7, p. 125.9 The trade-off between access and cost recovery is expressed by Richard Gilbert in Chapter 4 of
the committeeÕs online workshop Proceedings as a trade-off between access by users and protection
of rights holders or vendors, where protection refers to market exclusivity that comes from intellectualproperty rights.  See National Research Council (1999), 
Proceedings of the Workshop on PromotingAccess to Scientific and Technical Data for the Public Interest:   An Assessment of Policy Options
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., <http://www.nap.edu>.10 Some databases, such as consumer-oriented catalogs, are a way to sell products.  These data-
bases are not the committeeÕs concern, however, because firms already have every incentive toprovide them and they do not require statutory protection.  The committee
Õs concern here is withdatabases for which the pricing for access is the only source of revenue, e.g., most S&T databases.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES AFFECTING AVAILABILITY AND USE47Chapter 3, that databases already benefit from many forms of protection thatpermit rights holders to recover their costs.  And even when balanced, new

legislation could have unintended, negative consequences that need to be avoided,
as discussed in Chapter 4.Moreover, the participants in the committeeÕs January 1999 workshop didnot report any instances in which the current lack of statutory protection had
dissuaded them from investing in promising new projects.  While most of the not-

for-profit and commercial-sector participants noted that their organizationsÕ datahad been copied on occasion, such copying was written off as an unavoidable loss
and part of doing business (similar to shoplifting in retail stores).  Commercial-

sector participants noted that in repeated instances of suspected infringement, the
practice of issuing Òcease and desistÓ letters normally was effective, but when
not, they felt appropriately obliged to terminate the infringerÕs further access (i.e.,to their password-protected online databases).11  In no case, however, had copy-ing of their data prevented the companies represented at the workshop from
earning a reasonable profit, over and above full cost recovery.12Mounting Pressures on Government Producers and Distributors ofScientific and Technical Databases for Cost RecoveryHistorically, the generation of primary S&T data, in such diverse fields asmeteorology, astronomy, and high-energy physics and in the public census, has
been funded by governments either directly through specific contracts or indi-
rectly through the sponsorship of academic research.  In the United States, the

resulting databases of the federal government have been placed in the public
domain and have provided the basis for subsequent research.In many cases in which the government produces databases, it distributes theraw or partially processed data as a public good and lets not-for-profit organiza-
tions and commercial firms customize the data for special market segments or
individual users.  This achieves a better balance between requirements for cost

recovery and the advantages to the public of efficient-access pricing.  Under this
approach, taxpayers subsidize the collection and preservation of the raw or par-
tially processed data, but users pay the entire additional cost of customizing the11 Several participants reported that pirated editions of their databases were being sold in develop-
ing countries.  This kind of wholesale copying is illegal under domestic and international copyright
and unfair competition laws.  The ongoing failure of other nations to respect and enforce existing

intellectual property law is largely a concern of new World Trade Organization rules known as theTRIPS agreement (see note 5 in Chapter 3).  Increased worldwide protection of databases would
require a new treaty, and its effectiveness could depend on its integration into the TRIPS agreement.12 An extensive background report prepared in advance of the workshop also failed to uncover
any negative consequences for companies.  See Stephen M. Maurer, Appendix C, in the committeeÕsonline Proceedings, note 9.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48A QUESTION OF BALANCEBox 2.1Marketing Models for Private-Sector S&T DataProducts and ServicesTraditional Marketing MethodsMany of the business plans for creating and distributing databases are similarto those used in the software industry.  Referred to here as ÒtraditionalÓ methods,

they are usually tailored to the perceived marketÕs size and wealth:¥Mass-market products.  The typical commercial database directory liststhousands of low-cost, mass-market databases with prices ranging from a fewhundred to tens of thousands of dollars each.  This approach extends to scientific
and engineering products.  Examples include POISINDEX (a medical database

that links many thousands of poisons to treatment protocols and is aimed at emer-gency room personnel), Science and Technology Network (STN) International (on-line databases of the physical and mechanical properties of thousands of materi-
als), and the Institute for Scientific Information, Inc. (see Table 1.1 in Chapter 1)¥ Specialty-market products.  
Many database producers concentrate ondeveloping products aimed at relatively small, high-value markets.  Examples from

Table 1.1 include Molecular Applications Group (software for storing, mining, andvisualizing genomic data) and TASC (custom weather data for aviation, agribusi-ness, and power companies).  Not surprisingly, such products tend to be costlyÑ
indeed, large pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms may pay millions and eventens of millions of dollars per year in licensing fees for access.  Sales contracts

normally include detailed confidentiality provisions.¥Custom products.  Large pharmaceutical houses sometimes ask bioinfor-matic companies to provide exclusive access to a particular database.  For exam-

ple, in 1994 SmithKline Beecham agreed to pay $125 million to Human GenomeSciences, Inc. for exclusive rights to one such proprietary database containingEST (gene fragment) information.11 Jon Cohen (1997), ÒThe Genomics Gamble,Ó Science, Vol. 275, February 7,pp. 767-772.databases, which are prepared and sold mostly by commercial firms.  There are
problems with both systems of finance, however.  As mentioned above, subsidies

avoid the market test of whether the willingness to pay for the data exceeds their
cost.  Commercial provision at higher prices must face this market test, but the

higher prices inefficiently restrict access.  In the evidence collected by the com-

mittee, there was no suggestion that federal agencies were collecting too much
raw data, so it is reasonable to price the raw data for efficient access, relying onA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES AFFECTING AVAILABILITY AND USE49New Marketing MethodsIn addition to taking a traditional approach to marketing databases, vendorshave also devised effective alternatives for selling their products.  The following

sampling of new methods is provided by way of illustration:¥Bundling.  Product-linked databases are frequently sold as part of a pack-age that includes other products.  For example, medical and scientific instrument
makers may bundle their products with relevant nuclear physics data.  Databasesare also included in the price of some proprietary search tools.¥Use of market makers.  Many companies create elaborate databases tohelp users find and use their products.  For example, semiconductor chip manu-
facturers commonly prepare elaborate Òcookbooks,Ó Òlibraries,Ó and design tools to
help engineers use their products.  Similarly, some online bibliographic services
are made available to consumers at little or no cost.  When a user
Õs research issuccessful, such services offer to sell reprints at costs ranging from $10 to $20 per
article.¥Migration of old products to new media.  Some publishers have beenable to create new digitized versions of databases as an outgrowth of existing printproducts.  Electronic versions of journals and other print-based resources are prob-
ably the classic example.  Current vendors include Elsevier Science (ScienceDi-

rect), John Wiley & Sons, Springer-Verlag, and Academic Press.  Extensions of
the concept, which would link traditional articles to online data sets, are alreadybeing developed and implemented.
____________SOURCE:  Commissioned paper by Stephen M. Maurer, 
ÒRaw Knowledge:  Pro-
tecting Technical Databases for Science and Industry,Ó Appendix C in National
Research Council (1999), Proceedings of the Workshop on Promoting Access toScientific and Technical Data for the Public Interest:  An Assessment of Policy
Options, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., <http://www.nap.edu>.taxpayer subsidies to the extent possible.  Of course, taxing for general revenue
also involves some inefficiency.1313 Charging an access price higher than the efficient-access price can be thought of as funding thedatabase through an excise tax.  However, basic principles of optimal taxation suggest that income
taxes are less distorting than isolated excise taxes.  See, for example, Richard Tresch (1981), 
PublicFinance: A Normative Theory, Irwin-Dorsey Limited (Georgetown, Ontario), p. 320, who says:A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50A QUESTION OF BALANCEHowever, because of mounting budgetary pressures generally, and increas-ing costs of public information management specifically, government database
providers worldwide have recently been coming under pressure to recover all
costs, rather than only the cost of distribution.  This pressure toward full cost

recovery results both from the rising costs associated with the rapidly expanding
rate of data collection and from foreign pressures.  European governments, for

example, are turning increasingly to a full-cost-recovery approach for their S&T
database production and dissemination activities.  The E.U. Database Directive

puts considerable pressure on non-E.U. countries, including the United States, to
do the same.14  Although existing law in the United States precludes adoption ofsuch restrictions for government data, the enactment of a strong new database
protection statute for private-sector databases could stimulate further interest in
privatizing U.S. government database dissemination activities.  By making data-

bases more profitable, new protectionist legislation could shift responsibility for
their creation from the public sector to the private sector.  The social harm of such

a shift would be an increase in the price for access, especially for highly special-
ized databasesÑsuch as some S&T databasesÑwith a comparatively small mar-ket.  A possible social benefit would be that the private sector would be subjected

to a weak market test of whether the value of the databases exceeded their cost.
As noted above, however, most data collected by public agencies are raw data
whose full potential value has not yet been realized, and in many cases, user-
oriented transformations of the data are already in the hands of the private and
nonprofit organizations that might have a better sense of the user market.Pressures for cost recovery also arise because the benefits that accrue toconsumers and the broader society under the efficient-access pricing model are
harder for legislators and administration policy makers to see (and measure) than
those that accrue as reduced tax burdens under the cost-recovery model, or those
that accrue as increased profits under the commercial model.  Thus, science

agencies in the United States are increasingly turning to the private sector, to both
not-for-profit and commercial entities, in outsourcing government S&T database
dissemination activities, or even to purchase data from commercial suppliers.
For example, in order to promote private-sector investment and development of
space technologies and applications, the Commercial Space Act of 1998 encour-
ages NASAÑan agency engaged to a substantial degree in basic research activi-tiesÑto purchase space and Earth science data products and services from theprivate sector, and to treat data as a commercial commodity under federal pro-
curement regulations.  The potential negative effects of this trend are discussed in

some detail in Chapter 4.ÒIncome taxes are held in high regard by many public sector economists.  .  .  .  (They are) seen as
being reasonably efficient, based on large empirical literature which indicates that the supply of labor
and capital are both extremely price inelastic.Ó14 See Stephen M. Maurer (1999), 
ÒRaw Knowledge:  Protecting Technical Databases for Science
and Industry,Ó Appendix C in the online workshop 
Proceedings, note 9.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.513Access to and Protections for Databases:Existing Policies and Approaches
51The escalating drive to enhance legal protection for databases arises prima-rily from three developments.  The first is the evolution of a digital world in

which information is an increasingly important commercial commodity whose
unauthorized appropriation can be accomplished cheaply and accurately, and the
information broadly disseminated.  The second is the 1991 U.S. Supreme Court

decision in Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co.,1 limiting
copyright protection to creative works and denying protection to a Òsweat-of-the-
browÓ database whose composition, even though it may require the investment of
effort and resources, is not sufficiently creative in selection and arrangement to
qualify for copyright protection.  The third is the European ParliamentÕs adoption

in 1996 of the Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases (hereinafter, the
E.U. Database Directive; the E.U. Directive)2 that requires countries of the Euro-
pean Union to adopt strong property protection for databases (see Appendix D for
the full text of the E.U. Directive).  The E.U. Directive also stipulates that 
suigeneris protection for databases in Europe will be extended to foreign database
rights holders only if their home countries have adopted substantially similar1 499 U.S. 340 (1991).  It is important to note, however, that 
Feist did not ÒoverturnÓ the Òsweat-
of-the-browÓ doctrine under copyright, which Congress had actually done already under the Copy-right Act of 1976.  Moreover, the sweat-of-the-brow doctrine under state law was never a prevailing
legal approach.2 Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the Legal
Protection of Databases, 1996 O.J. (L77) 20.  The E.U. Database Directive is reprinted as Appendix
D of this report.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52A QUESTION OF BALANCEprotection.3 These three developments have resulted in a perceived increased
vulnerability of databases to misappropriation and to a new European legal re-
gime that has been alleged to place U.S. database rights holders at a competitive
disadvantage in Europe.4  It is the last factor that appears to concern private-
sector scientific and technical (S&T) database producers and vendors the most,
based on input received at the committeeÕs January 1999 workshop.  Neverthe-
less, it is important to note that all other laws protecting foreign rights holders in
the European Union remain independently applicable to them under the national
treatment clause of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights (TRIPS Agreement)5 and related conventions.
This chapter briefly describes the law and policy governing U.S. governmentdatabases; the existing legal, technical, and market-based measures that are avail-
able to protect private-sector databases in the United States; and the new E.U.
Database Directive.ACCESS TO U.S. GOVERNMENT-FUNDEDSCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DATAThe U.S. government is the worldÕs largest creator, user, and disseminator ofdata and information, including the federal records and S&T databases that are
considered highly valuable national assets.  A basic principle underlying most

U.S. information law is that democracy thrives and the economic and social
benefits of information are maximized in society by fostering wide diversity in
the creation, dissemination, and use of information.6  By extension, to gain the
greatest economic and social benefits from government information assets, such
information should be made available to all in the most efficient, timely, and
equitable ways possible.  U.S. laws and policies generally implement this propo-

sition.  In direct contrast to those laws that encourage protection of the propri-

etary rights of private-sector entities, U.S. domestic information policy at the
federal level may be summarized as one comprising Òa strong freedom of infor-3 E.U. Database Directive (1996), note 2, Recital 56.
4 See testimony of Henry Horbaczewski, Reed Elsevier, Inc., on behalf of the Coalition Against
Database Piracy in June 15, 1999, hearing on H.R. 1858, the Consumer and Investor Access to
Information Act of 1999, before the House Commerce Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade,and Consumer Protection, U.S. House of Representatives, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C.5 See Final Act Embodying the Results for the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions, done at Marrakesh, Morocco, April 15, 1994, reprinted in The Results of the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations:  The Legal Texts 2-3
 (GATT Secretariat ed., 1994); Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1C:  Agreement on Trade-Related

Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, Apr. 15, 1994.  The TRIPS Agreement holds all member
states of the World Trade Organization to a common set of intellectual property norms.6 44 U.S.C., section 3506(d)(1)(A) (Supp. 1995).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES53mation law, no government copyright, fees limited to recouping the cost of dis-semination, and no restrictions on reuse.Ó7U.S. law expressly forbids federal departments and agencies from claimingcopyright in their written works, thereby placing these information resources in
the public domain.  The 1976 Copyright Act states that 
Ò[c]opyright protectionunder this title is not available for any work of the United States Government.Ó8The reasons are several.  One is the fundamental belief that government copyright
of public records is the antithesis of open access whereby an informed citizenry
can check official actions and possible abuses.  However, other values also are at

work.  Taxpayers should not have to pay twice for the same information
Ñoncefor the cost of generating the work, and a second time to obtain it.  Also important

to avoid is the danger that government could exercise copyright in a manner that
would burden free speech (e.g., so as to prevent critics from obtaining particular
information at any price).  Finally, individuals ought to be able to derive benefit

from public goods (such as public S&T data and information) and enjoy im-
proved educational opportunities through increased access to data and informa-
tion, opportunities that are inherently beneficial in their own right.9  Thus, the
position of Congress has been to support the development of secondary markets
for government information by individuals and private businesses, and to other-
wise encourage the distribution of government information in the public interest.The U.S. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)10 and the open records laws
of the individual states11 together balance the right of citizens to be informed
about government activities and the need to maintain the confidentiality of some
government records.  Both the national FOIA and state open records laws gener-
ally support a policy of broad disclosure by government.  For instance, if a

database held by a federal agency is determined to be an agency record, the
record must be disclosed to any person requesting it unless the record falls within
one of nine exceptions contained in the FOIA.12 Exceptions are construed nar-
7 Peter N. Weiss and Peter Backlund (1997), 
ÒInternational Information Policy in Conflict:  Open
and Unrestricted Access versus Government Commercialization,Ó in 
Borders in Cyberspace: Infor-mation Policy and the Global Information Infrastructure, Brian Kahin and Charles Nesson, eds.,MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.8 17 U.S.C., section 105.
9 U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1986), 
Intellectual Property Rights in an Ageof Electronics and Information, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.10 5 U.S.C., section 552.
11 R. Daugherty, G. Leslie, and L. Reis, eds. (1997), 
ÒTapping OfficialÕs Secrets:  A State Open
Government Compendium,Ó Reporters
Õ Committee for Freedom of the Press, Arlington, VA, avail-
able online at <www.rcfp.org/tapping/index.cgi>.12 The nine exceptions as set forth in 5 U.S.C., section 552 (b) are as follows:
(b) This section does not apply to matters that areÑ(1) (A) specifically authorizedunder criteria established by an Executive order to be kept secret in the interest of nationaldefense or foreign policy and (B) are in fact properly classified pursuant to such Execu-A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54A QUESTION OF BALANCErowly by the courts so that disclosure is typically favored over non-disclosure.  In
responding to citizen requests for records, government agencies at most levels are
authorized to recover the costs of responding to those requests.Federal departments and agencies also have affirmative obligations to ac-tively disseminate their information as defined by the provisions of OMB Circu-
lar A-130.13  They are particularly encouraged to disseminate raw content on
which value-added products can be based and to do so at cost of distribution and
through diverse channels, with no imposition of restrictions on the use of the
data.  The core provisions of OMB Circular A-130 were incorporated into the

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995,14 which additionally encourages agencies to
use information technology to provide public access, rather than relying on cum-
bersome FOIA processes.  Given federal agencies
Õ expanding use of World Wide
Web servers to meet their internal objectives, as well as to better implement the
governmentÕs data-sharing policies, the additional cost of disseminating informa-tion to the public has become so negligible that many government databases are
now made freely available to anyone with the ability to access them over the
Internet.15tive order; (2) related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency;(3)specifically exempted from disclosure by statute (other than section 552b of this title),
provided that such statute (A) requires that the matters be withheld from the public insuch a manner as to leave no discretion on the issue, or (B) establishes particular criteriafor withholding or refers to particular types of matters to be withheld; (4) trade secrets
and commercial or financial information obtained from a person and privileged or confi-dential; (5) inter-agency or intra-agency memorandums or letters which would not beavailable by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with the agency; (6) person-
nel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearlyunwarranted invasion of personal privacy; (7) records or information compiled for lawenforcement purposes . . . ; (8) contained in or related to examination, operating, or
condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of an agency responsible for theregulation or supervision of financial institutions; or (9) geological and geophysical infor-mation and data, including maps, concerning wells.  Any reasonably segregable portion

of a record shall be provided to any person requesting such record after deletion of theportions which are exempt under this subsection.  The amount of information deleted
shall be indicated on the released portion of the record, unless including that indication
would harm an interest protected by the exemption in this subsection under which thedeletion is made.  If technically feasible, the amount of the information deleted shall be
indicated at the place in the record where such deletion is made.13 Office of Management and Budget (1993), Circular A-130, 
ÒManagement of Federal Informa-tion Resources,Ó U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
14 Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, P.L. No. 104-13, 109 Stat. 163 (May 22, 1995), 44 U.S.C.
Chapter 35.15 For example, federal legislation and court decisions generally may be accessed online at <http:/
/thomas.loc.gov/>, while many federal geographic data sets may be accessed online at <http://
fgdclearhs.er.usgs.gov/>.  The databases being made available by federal agencies typically may be
traced through their official Web sites indexed online at <http://lcweb.loc.gov/global/executive/fed.html>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES55Open access policies specifically targeted at public and publicly funded S&Tdata availability and exchange, on agency and interagency program levels as well
as internationally, have been adopted in recent years especially in the area of
environmental and earth science research.16  These policies all restate in similar
terms the federal policy of full and open availability of data pointed to in Chapter1.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) applies generally to all federalagency contractual relationships with the private sector.17  In subpart 27.4,
ÒRights in Data and Copyrights,Ó the FAR delineates the respective rights and
obligations of the government and the contractor regarding the use, duplication,
and disclosure of data produced under contracts with the government.18  As a
general proposition, the government acquires unlimited rights in most data first
produced in the performance of a contract, while the contractor may receive
limited rights in some data.Article 36(a) of OMB Circular A-110, ÒUniform Administrative Require-ments for Grants and Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospi-
tals, and Other Not-for-profit Organizations,Ó19 states that the recipient of a grant
or agreement subject to this circular Òmay copyright any work that is subject tocopyright and was developed, or for which rights holdership was purchased,
under an award.  The Federal awarding agency(ies) reserve a royalty-free, nonex-

clusive and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish or otherwise use the work for
Federal purposes, and to authorize others to do so.Ó  Article 24(h) states, 
ÒUnlessFederal awarding agency regulations or the terms and conditions of the award
provide otherwise, recipients shall have no obligation to the Federal Government
with respect to program income earned from license fees and royalties for copy-
righted material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions pro-
duced under an award.ÓSimilarly, the Grant Policy Manual of the National Science Foundation(NSF) specifies in Section 732.1 that the following principles govern the treat-
ment of copyrightable material produced under NSF grants:2016 For a comprehensive collection of such policies in the environmental data area, see Interagency
Data Management Working Group of the U.S. Global Change Research Program (1999), Data Ac-cess Policy Actions of Importance to Global Environmental Change Data Users, U.S. Global ChangeResearch Program, Washington, D.C.  See also, the Data Policies portion of the U.S. Global Change

Research ProgramÕs Global Change Data and Information System Web site online at<www.gcdis.usgcrp.gov/policies>.17 48 CFR, Chapter 1.
18 48 CFR, at subpart 27.4 on 
ÒRights in Data and Copyrights.Ó19 Office of Management and Budget (1997), Circular A-110, 
ÒUniform Administrative Require-ments for Grants and Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Not-
for-profit Organizations,Ó revised November 19, 1993; as further amended August 29, 1997.
20 National Science Foundation (1995), 
Grant Policy Manual, NSF 95-26, Arlington, VA, avail-able online at <www.nsf.gov:80/bfa/cpo/gpm95/start.htm>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56A QUESTION OF BALANCEa.NSF normally will acquire only such rights in copyrightable material as
are needed to achieve its purposes or to comply with the requirements of anyapplicable government-wide policy or international agreement.
b.To preserve incentives for private dissemination and development, NSF
normally will not restrict or take any part of income earned from copyrightablematerial except as necessary to comply with the requirements of any applicable
government-wide policy or international agreement.c.In exceptional circumstances, NSF may restrict or eliminate an awardee
Õscontrol of NSF-supported copyrightable material and of income earned from it,
if NSF determines that this would best serve the purposes of a particular pro-gram or grant.Cooperative research and development agreements (CRADAs) provide yetanother legal mechanism by which databases or services can be created to meet
particular governmental needs.21  The CRADA legislation, however, creates an
exception to the Freedom of Information Act.  Databases created under a CRADA

potentially may be withheld from citizen requests under FOIA.22State and local governmental entities in the United States also create andmaintain records and databases that have substantial value for various segments
of the research and educational community.  State governments historically have

been a primary source of detailed information in the areas of health, welfare,21 15 U.S.C., section 3710a:
As used in this sectionÑ(1) the term Òcooperative research and development agree-mentÓ means any agreement between one or more Federal laboratories and one or more
non-Federal parties under which the Government, through its laboratories, provides per-
sonnel, services, facilities, equipment, intellectual property, or other resources with orwithout reimbursement (but not funds to non-Federal parties) and the non-Federal partiesprovide funds, personnel, services, facilities, equipment, intellectual property, or other
resources toward the conduct of specified research or development efforts which areconsistent with the missions of the laboratory, . . . .  See 15 U.S.C. 3710a(d)(1).
22 See DeLorme Publishing Company, Inc. v. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,917 F.Supp. 867 (DC Maine 1996) upholding 15 U.S.C. 3710a as a legislative exception to FOIA:15 USC 3710a provides two types of protection from disclosure of privileged or confi-dential information resulting from cooperative research and development activities.  First,
(n)o trade secrets or commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential. . .  which is obtained in the conduct of research or as a result of activities under this

chapter from a non-Federal party participating in a cooperative research and developmentagreement shall be disclosed.  See 15 USC 3710a(c)(7)(A).  Second, (t)he director, or in
the case of a contractor-operated laboratory, the agency, for a period of up to 5 years after
development of information that results from research and development activities con-ducted under this chapter and that would be a trade secret or commercial or financialinformation that is privileged or confidential if the information had been obtained from a
non-Federal party participating in a cooperative research and development agreement,may provide appropriate protections against the dissemination of such information, in-cluding exemption from subchapter II of chapter 5 of Title 5.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES57education, labor markets, transportation, the environment, and criminal justice.23Because communities have a great interest in knowing about themselves and theiractivities, local governments often produce detailed databases on the characteris-
tics and attributes of physical, social, and human resources in the community that
are unavailable from other sources.The U.S. Copyright Act does not explicitly ban copyright claims in theworks of state and local governments, as it does for the works of the U.S. govern-
ment.24  As such, most state and local governments believe they have the option
of asserting copyright in their public records if they choose to do so.  Some legal
scholars argue that although allowed by law, generally it is unwise economic and
social policy for state and local governments to allow government commercial-
ization of public information.25  Other legal scholars argue that claims of copy-
right by state and local governments in many of their works and databases are
illegal.26  Under the patents and copyright clause of the U.S. Constitution, the
argument is made that Congress lacks the ability to extend copyright beyond that
which is necessary to provide ÒincentivesÓ to authors to make their works avail-
able.27  When state or local government agencies collect information in response
to a legislated obligation, it is the public need as defined by the legislative obliga-
tion that provides the incentive to gather information or to create a public record.
If copyright failed to exist, the information would still be collected.  This being

the case, copyright provides no incentive for data collection and database produc-
tion, and the works therefore may not be protected by copyright.28  Yet other
legal scholars claim that government commercialization of public information
raises significant First Amendment free speech issues.29  One argument is that
contractual provisions that ban the reuse or further dissemination of public infor-23 Weiss and Backlund (1997), note 7, p. 304.
24 17 U.S.C., section 105.
25 In support of the general proposition for all levels of government, see L. Ray Patterson and
Craig Joyce (1989), ÒMonopolizing the Law:  The Scope of Copyright Protection for Law Reports
and Statutory Compilations,Ó UCLA Law Review, Vol. 36, p. 719; J.H. Reichman and PamelaSamuelson (1997), ÒIntellectual Property Rights in Data?Ó Vanderbilt Law Review, Vol. 50, p. 51;and J. Littman (1992), ÒAfter Feist,Ó U. Dayton Law Review, Vol. 17, p. 607.  For a state-level
statement of policy in general accord see Minnesota Government Information Access Council, DigitalDemocracy:  CitizensÕ Guide for Government Policy in the Information Age
, available online at<http://www.admin.state.mn.us/ipo/giac/report/index.html>.26 H. Perritt (1996), 
Law and the Information Superhighway, John Wiley & Sons, New York,
p.484.
27 United States Constitution, Article I, Section 8, clause 8.
28 See generally the discussion in Perritt (1996), note 26, pp. 482-487.
29 See Henry Perritt, Jr. (1996), 
Section 11.10 First Amendment Role, Law and the InformationSuperhighway, Wiley Law Publications, New York, pp. 489-491; Philip H. Miller (1991), ÒLifeAfter Feist: Facts, the First Amendment, and Copyright Status of Automated Databases,Ó FordhamL. Rev., Vol. 60, pp. 507, 509; and Michael J. Haungs (1990), ÒCopyright of Factual Compilations:Public Policy and the First Amendment,Ó Colum. J. Law & Soc. Probs., Vol. 23, pp. 347, 364.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58A QUESTION OF BALANCEmation or that establish varying fee structures depending on purpose of use mightreadily be used by government officials for ulterior motives of censorship or
manipulation of public information for political purposes.Regardless of the legal and economic arguments, many local and state agen-cies have pursued the imposition of copyright in at least some public records and
databases, both hard copy and digital.30  These local government authorities
perceive the possibility of paying for the creation and maintenance of local gov-
ernment information systems other than through general tax revenues.  Restrict-

ing access to public records is contrary to the plain letter language of most state
open records laws in the United States, and therefore explicit legislation is typi-
cally required to allow the restrictions.  Those who seek to impose new access

restrictions on citizens bear the burden of overcoming the underlying policy
arguments on which the existing laws are based, foremost of which are that open
access keeps government accountable and that open access to government infor-
mation, subject to appropriate limitations based on privacy, confidentiality,
national security, and other considerations, has far greater long-term economic
benefits for a community than does pursuing revenue-generation approaches.It is noteworthy that the United States has become a world leader in researchand technology at a time when its domestic public information laws have been so
divergent from those of most other nations.  In general, the U.S. legal system

allows greater access to and use of government information at the local, state, and
national government levels than is allowed in other nations.  U.S. law also grants

individuals greater leeway to use the work products of others without permission
than is often granted by the laws of other nations.  The role of the U.S. legal system
in supporting full and open access to scientific data for the academic and commercial
sectors and the role of U.S. federal funding in defraying the costs of collecting
and providing access to scientific data are factors that should not be overlooked
when exploring the competitive success of U.S. scientists and businesses.EXISTING PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASESIN THE UNITED STATESCurrently available legal protections of databases in the United States in-clude copyright, private contracts and licensing, trade secret law, and state unfair30 Iver Petersen (1997), 
ÒPublic Information, Business Rates: State Agencies Turn Data BaseRecords Into Cash Cows,Ó New York Times, July 14, p. D1; For What ItÕs Worth: A Guide to Valuingand Pricing Local Government Information (1996), Public Technology, Inc. Press, Washington,
D.C.  (Note: Public Technology, Inc. is a not-for-profit technology organization of the National
League of Cities, the National Association of Counties, and the International City/County Manage-ment Association.)  For a survey of local government policies relating to the distribution of digital

geographic information, see H.J. Onsrud, J.P. Johnson, and J. Winnecki (1996), ÒGIS DisseminationPolicy: Two Surveys and a Suggested Approach,Ó Journal of Urban and Regional InformationSystems, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 8-23.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES59competition law.  Significant augmentation of the existing legal regime is pro-
vided for online databases by various technical means as well as by additional
market-based measures.Legal ProtectionsCopyright LawA database can be protected under the Copyright Act as a Òcompilation,Ódefined as a work that results from the collection and assembly of data that are
Òselected, coordinated, and arrangedÓ in an original way.
31  As the Supreme
Court stated in the Feist decision, if the selection or arrangement of the data
displays a Òmodicum of creativityÓ it is protectable by copyright.
32  The term of
copyright protection is longÑthe life of the author plus 70 years, or in the case ofa work for hire, the shorter of 95 years from first publication or 120 years from
the year of creation.33  An unauthorized reproduction, which is not otherwise
privileged by the law, is illegal, and substantial civil and criminal remedies exist
to punish infringers.34Since the fall of 1998, copyright law has prohibited the manufacture and saleof devices designed primarily to circumvent technologies such as signal scram-
bling and encryption that are used to protect copyrighted works.  Beginning in the

fall of 2000, the law will also prohibit the attempt to circumvent such technologi-
cal protections.  The 1998 law, known as the Digital Millennium Copyright

Act,35 contains some exemptions for libraries, educational institutions, law en-
forcement, and research activities, and opens the possibility of additional future
exemptions to be made after further study of the statuteÕs operation by the Librar-ian of Congress.  The new statute also prohibits the removal or alteration of

Òcopyright management informationÓ from copyrighted works.  
ÒCopyright man-agement informationÓ essentially means any identifying mark, such as the name
and address of an author or copyright rights holder that is associated with a
work.36The copyright law, however, permits some unauthorized uses that are deemedto be ÒfairÓ or that are specifically exempted from infringement in the statute.
37Section 107 of the 1976 Copyright Act states that:31 17 U.S.C., section 101.
32 Feist, note 1.33 17 U.S.C., section 302.
34 17 U.S.C., sections 501-512.
35 Digital Millennium Copyright Act, P.L. 105-304 (October 28, 1998), U.S. Congress, Washing-ton, D.C.36 17 U.S.C., sections 1201 and 1202.
37 17 U.S.C., section 107.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60A QUESTION OF BALANCE.  .  .  the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduc-
tion in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section,for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including
multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringe-ment of copyright.  In determining whether the use made of a work in any
particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered shall includeÑ(1)the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of
a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;(2)the nature of the copyrighted work;

(3)the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
copyrighted work as a whole; and(4)the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the
copyrighted work.38A more significant limitation on copyright protection, particularly for data-bases, is that copyright protects only the manner of expression and does not
Òextend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept,principle, or discoveryÓ incorporated into a copyrighted work.39  For some data-bases, the line between protected expression and unprotected facts can be diffi-
cult to identify.  Generally speaking, however, copyright would most likely pro-

tect the selection or arrangement of a database, but not the data as such.  Consider,

for example, a scientific journal article reporting the results of an experiment,
with the data from the experiment reproduced as an appendix in a database
qualifying as a compilation.  Copyright would protect the narrative description of

the experiment, but subsequent researchers could use the findings of the experi-
ment without permission.  Moreover, other researchers could extract the data

from the appendix.Unlike in Europe and in many other countries, U.S. copyright law does notprotect works of authorship created by the federal government.40  This asymme-try is significant, since a similar asymmetry with the European Union would exist
upon enactment of any new database protection legislation in the United States.Because of the speculative nature of the outcome of basic scientific research,much science is conducted with the use of public funds by researchers in govern-
ment and in academia who do not directly depend financially on the economic
exploitation of their results.  The realities of the scientific process and the limited

legal protection for data under copyright law have contributed to the tradition and
culture within the scientific community of open sharing of ideas and data dis-
cussed in Chapters 1 and 2.38 17 U.S.C., section 107.
39 17 U.S.C., section 102(b).
40 17 U.S.C., section 105.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES61Private Contracts and LicensingRights holders of trade secrets may protect the confidentiality of their infor-mation by disclosing the information only to those who agree, in a binding
contract, to keep it confidential and to refrain from reproducing the information.
Where two individuals bargain face to face and one agrees to disclose in return
for a promise of confidentiality, a court ordinarily will enforce the terms as it
would any other contractual provision.  If the information is sold outright to

another partyÑsuch as when a book is sold to a consumerÑcontractual restraintson the buyerÕs right to use or resell the copy usually are not enforced.41  Increas-
ingly, however, information products are not Òsold,Ó but rather are licensed with
restrictive terms as to use.42  For example, all the commercial database vendors
who participated in the committeeÕs January 1999 workshop, as well as those not-for-profits that disseminated their data for a fee, indicated that they relied prima-
rily on site licensing arrangements for disseminating their databases to custom-
ers.  Because customers typically have the opportunity to read the license terms

and conditions in advance, and even to make agreed-upon changes, such terms
are ordinarily enforceable.Database rights holders can easily protect their interests with a confidential-ity agreement when distribution of a database is limited to those who directly
contract with them.  The fact that contract terms are only effective between the

contracting parties and not binding on third parties who may get access to the
database has been cited as a weakness,43 since many databases must be publicly
distributed in order to be commercially viable.  In recent years, however, rights

holders of some digital databases have marketed their databases to the public
using Òshrink-wrapÓ license agreements.  These are agreements that are enclosed
within the package containing the database (usually a database on a CD-ROM or
on other electronic media) and provide notice on the outside of the package that41 The 
Òfirst saleÓ doctrine of copyright law, 17 U.S.C., section 109, specifically authorizes the
rights holder of a copy to Òsell or otherwise dispose of
Ó the copy.  See also 
Bobbs-Merrill v. Straus,210 U.S. 339 (1908).42 For a discussion of the emerging legal issues pertaining to online database and information
licensing, see the special issue on licensing of information and proposed changes to Article 2B of theUniform Commercial Code (UCC) in Berkeley Technology Law Journal (1998), Vol. 13, No. 3, andin California Law Review (1999), Vol. 87, No. 1.  Both present the results of a symposium, 
ÒIntellec-tual Property and Contract Law for the Information Age,Ó held at the University of California,
Berkeley, in April 1998.  The symposium Web site is at <www.sims.berkeley.edu/BCLT/events/
ucc2b/ucc2b.html>.  In April 1999, however, the efforts to amend UCC Article 2B were terminated

and the proposed revisions to state law in this area were proposed instead as the ÒUniform ComputerInformation and Technology Act.Ó  For comprehensive background information on the evolution of
this issue, see generally ÒA Guide to the Proposed Uniform Computer Information Transactions ActÓonline at <www.2Bguide.com>.43 See U.S. Copyright Office (1997), 
Report on Legal Protection for Databases, U.S. Congress,Washington, D.C., available online at <lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/reports>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62A QUESTION OF BALANCEbreaking the Òshrink-wrap,Ó or entering the electronic gateway if online, consti-
tutes acceptance of the terms within.  These terms often include restrictions on

distribution of the database to others.  The enforceability of these provisions

remains uncertain, however.  Some legal scholars argue that the shrink-wrap

license constitutes a valid contract, while others believe that a contract cannot
exist unless the parties have access to the terms prior to paying for the product.44Similarly, some leading cases have upheld the shrink-wrap license and the terms
that restrict use;45 other cases have refused to enforce the terms of a shrink-wrap
license.46  Most shrink-wrap licenses permit the licensee to return the product,
unused, if the terms are unacceptable.  The reality is that most consumers do not

read these license terms.Private transactions are an important method of distributing valuable infor-mation and are increasingly the method of choice for providing access to data and
information on the Internet.  On the one hand, particularly with vulnerable digital

information, the right to distribute information with restrictions on use allows
original rights holders of databases to capture the economic returns from their
initial investment.  Moreover, private transactions are flexible in permitting the

two parties to tailor their agreement to the mix of their particular interests, as long
as they have the opportunity to negotiate the terms.  On the other hand, enforcing

ÒcontractualÓ terms imposed through shrink-wrap licenses (and now 
Òclick-onÓlicenses in the online medium), which effectively are imposed on the public at
large, may interfere with the balance between private property rights and public-
interest access to information.47  A term in a shrink-wrap or click-on license that
prohibits what would otherwise be a privileged use of the data might effectively
limit scientistsÕ access to or use of the raw materials necessary for their research,
contrary to public-interest policies.Trade Secret LawState trade secret law protects valuable commercial information that is keptsecret by its rights holder from unauthorized access or reproduction by improper
means.48  Trade secret doctrines do not require that the information be kept
absolutely secret, but the trade secret rights holder must take reasonable steps to
maintain the confidentiality of the information.  Trade secret law also might be
44 See generally, Mark Lemley (1995), 
ÒIntellectual Property & Shrinkwrap Licenses,Ó USC L.Rev., Vol. 68, p. 1269.45 Pro CD v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d. 1447 (7th Cir. 1996).46 Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software Ltd., 655 F. Supp. 750 (1987).47 See J.H. Reichman and Jonathan Franklin (1999), 
ÒPrivately Legislated Intellectual PropertyRights:  Reconciling Freedom of Contract with Public Good Uses of Information,
Ó U. Penn. LawReview, Vol. 147, p. 875.48 See generally, 
Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition, sections 39-45 (1995).A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES63applicable in the absence of any contractual provisions for confidentiality if theparties understood that the disclosure was in fact in confidence.  Once informa-

tion is made public it loses its secrecy and enters the public domain.  It then can

be free for others to use, absent some form of protection, such as copyright.Unfair Competition Law in State Common LawWhen Congress acts in areas in which it has authority (e.g., copyright, inter-state commerce), federal law preempts state law when Congress explicitly so
states in the legislation, or when state law would interfere with implementation of
the federal law.  The copyright system preempts state laws that duplicate or

disrupt the protection accorded works of authorship by copyright.49  Thus, states
may not grant a general right to database owners to prevent unauthorized repro-
duction or use of databases that qualify as an original work of authorship, and it
is unlikely that they could grant a naked right against reproduction or use to
unoriginal databases.  However, in some states, a common law cause of action for

misappropriation is understood to survive preemption and under limited circum-
stances may provide protection to some database owners from certain forms of
unfair competition.The doctrine of misappropriation derives from the early U.S. Supreme Courtdecision in International News Service v. Associated Press.50  In that case, a
news wire service appropriated the dispatches of a competing service from pub-
lished newspapers on the East Coast and published them simultaneously and in
direct competition with the originating service on the West Coast.  The Supreme
Court, while denying that a statutory property right could exist in the news, found
that the unauthorized appropriation in this case was prohibited because compiling
the data gave rise to a Òquasi-property rightÓ and also because the unauthorized
appropriation directly undermined the investment in news gathering of the origi-
nating service.  Courts have usually been reluctant to apply the decision beyond

the facts of the case, and the Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition, sec-
tion38 (1995) described the misappropriation doctrine as lacking a coherent

application.51The most recent discussion of the misappropriation doctrine occurred inNational Basketball AssÕn v.  Motorola, Inc
.52  Although the court recognized a
limited scope for the doctrineÑone confined to situations in which time-sensitive49 Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition, section 301 (1995). Cf. 
Sears, Roebuck & Co. v.Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225 (1964); Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U.S. 234 (1964); andBonito Boats Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc. 489 U.S. 141 (1989).
50 248 U.S. 215 (1918).
51 But see 
Goldstein et al. v. California, 412 U.S. 546 (1973) allowing state misappropriationprotection of noncopyrightable sound recordings.52 105 F.3d 841 (2d Cir. 1997).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64A QUESTION OF BALANCEdata were appropriated and used in direct competition with the originatorÑitrefused the request of a professional basketball league to prohibit the unautho-
rized taking and distribution of the scores of its currently played games to paid
subscribers of a paging service.While database rights holders can and do assert protection under the misap-propriation doctrine, the reluctance of the courts to apply this doctrine and the
likelihood that its broad application would be preempted by the Copyright Act
makes the misappropriation doctrine of questionable value in protecting data-
bases beyond those with extremely time-sensitive value, such as real-time stock-
price quotations.  However, nothing prevents Congress from developing a

minimalist form of statutory protection that builds on this foundation.Technological ProtectionsThe danger of database misappropriation can be mitigated with increasingefficiency by technologies that help enforce the terms of licensing contracts, or
that enable the rights holder to keep the database as a trade secret while also
providing access to subsets of data at armÕs length.53  A number of technological
innovations have been developed to provide various forms of security, privacy
protection, and intellectual property management.  Table 3.1 provides a summary

of some of these approaches.  No form of computer protection is perfect, and no

method will likely prevent copying of small amounts of data.  Moreover, it is

almost certain that every technological security method will eventually be able to
be countered through the use of other technological advances.  The technological
53 The committee did not focus extensively on the increasingly important area of technological
protections for digital information, because a concurrent NRC report is examining this issue in depth.
See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council (2000), TheDigital Dilemma:  Intellectual Property in the Information Age
, National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C., in press.  For additional information on these technologies, see Mark Stefik and Teresa

Lunt, ÒOverview of Technologies for Protecting and Misappropriating Digital Intellectual PropertyRights:  The Current Situation and Future Prospects,
Ó Chapter 5 in the committee
Õs online Proceed-ings.  See National Research Council (1999), 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Promoting Access toScientific and Technical Data for the Public Interest:   An Assessment of Policy Options
, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., <http://www.nap.edu>.  Also see 
Berkeley Technology LawJournal, Vol. 13, No. 3, Fall 1998 (issue dedicated to intellectual property and contract law); I.Trotter
Hardy (1998), Project Looking Forward:  Sketching the Future of Copyright in a Networked World
,report prepared for the U.S. Copyright Office; Mark Stefik and Alexander Silverman (1997), ÒTheBit and the Pendulum: Balancing the Interests of Stakeholders in Digital Publishing,Ó AmericanProgrammer, September, pp. 18-35 (also published in The Computer Lawyer, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 1-15, January 1999); Brian Kahin and Kate Arms, eds. (1996), Proceedings: Electronic Commerce forContent, Forum on Technology-Based Intellectual Property Management, Interactive MultimediaAssociation, Annapolis, MD; Bruce Schneier (1996), Applied Cryptography, second edition, JohnWiley & Sons, New York; and Lars Lyberg, ed. (1993), Journal of Official Statistics, Special Issueon Confidentiality and Data Access, Vol. 9, No. 2, Statistics Sweden.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES65TABLE 3.1  Summary of Technological Approaches to Protection of Databases
ApproachWhat It DoesDomain of UseLimitations
EncryptionCodes information soAny digital data;Protection vanishes
that a secret key isprotects data duringwhen data decrypted for

needed in order tostorage anduse; strong security
read ittransmissionrequired for
safeguarding keysWatermarkingEmbeds covertDigital photos, music,Can be easy to remove
tracing or identifyingtext, and databasesor tamper with; may

informationconfound data merging
DownloadLimits amount ofCurrently deployed;Presents only a weak
limitationsdata that can bediscourages wholesale,barrier to a determined
downloaded at oneautomatic downloadingadversary
time or from one siteof databases from
the WebDatabaseClassifies data in aIntelligence andMore relevant to online
access controldatabase into differentbusiness organizationsdatabases than to offline
levels or groups forin which individuals orscientific  databases, or
access, and limits usedifferent groups havedatabases of more

based on agreed-toaccess to differentgeneral interest
set of rulesportions of a database
according to job
function or need toknowHardware-basedEnforces a digitalHigh-security systemsNot widely deployed;
trusted systemcontract that governsused mainly in militaryinexpensive hardware
fees for and uses ofand intelligenceaugmentation provides

digital worksapplicationsonly minimal support;
outstanding legal issuesabout liability and
enforceability of digitalcontractsSoftware-basedSupports sameIn trial use forVulnerable to being
trusted systemfunctions asdistribution of video,disabled by simple
hardware-basedmusic, and documentsmeans; subject to

trusted systems,wide-scale system
except that supportfailure triggered by
is provided onlycomputer viruses

by softwareA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66A QUESTION OF BALANCEapproaches that currently are available, however, can hinder or prevent, to vary-ing degrees of efficiency, the wholesale copying and redistribution of databases
without compensation to their rightful rights holders.  These approaches are

reviewed briefly in the discussion below.EncryptionA powerful and frequently cited technology for computer security is encryp-tion, the encoding of data to make them unreadable to those who do not have the
key for deciphering them.  Separating those who should have access from those

who should not, encryption enables differences in level of security with increases
in key length.  Encryption is applicable to practically any kind of digital informa-

tion.  It is the technology of choice for protecting data in storage and during

transmission over an insecure channel.But encrypted data are only as secure as the key, and there are differentapproaches to the problem of protecting the key.  Given the data and the key, a

knowledgeable user can decrypt the data and then distribute them, or distribute
the encrypted data together with the key.  If the protections in the system are

insufficient, there are various ways in which an attacker could obtain the key or
gain access to an unencrypted form of data (e.g., digital music or video while it is
being played back, or text or data while they are being displayed).  Thus, al-

though encryption is an important element of any modern computer security
system, it often must be combined with other elements in a security architecture
to achieve the degree of protection desired for the digital data or information
product.WatermarksThe term ÒwatermarkÓ initially signified a special mark made in paper during
its manufacture.  The mark, which becomes visible when the paper bearing it is

held up to a light, is taken as indicating an original.  The term now covers a wide

range of technologies for embedding information in digital files and rendered
works, including text, pictures, and audio.  As a technique for intellectual prop-

erty protection, watermarks carry information that identifies a work or provides a
means of tracing its purchaser or user.  Watermarks can be visible or hidden.

Hidden watermarks are designed to avoid interfering with the use of the data.  For

example, in digital music, watermarks can be encoded in such a way that they are
not detectable to the human ear when the music is played.  A watermark could be

hidden in a database as extra (but unused) elements of data that would not inter-
fere with information processing systems.Watermarks do not prevent copying but could potentially provide a meansfor tracing the source of an unauthorized copy.  This trace-back capability pro-

vided by watermarks is not necessarily foolproof; those who would misappropri-A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES67ate data or otherwise infringe on rights in a database might be able to writeprograms for tampering with or removing the watermarks.  Such tampering may

well be illegal under the recent Digital Millennium Copyright Act, however.Online Database Access ControlsSeveral kinds of technology have been developed to control or limit access todatabases, particularly those available online.  One of the simplest is an online

regulator, which limits the quantity of information that can be downloaded by a
given individual or site.54  The technology provides an impediment to automaticdata-mining programs that would acquire a databaseÕs contents by merging theresults of a large set of individual queries.  A second approach to online database

access control marks the data according to different levels and categories and
regulates the availability of the information to authorized parties.  This technol-

ogy is relevant in business and intelligence applications, where access to infor-
mation is regulated according to Òneed to knowÓ tiers or categories of access.
Trusted SystemsÒTrustedÓ systems are those that can be relied on to obey certain rules for
distributing information.  In the context of intellectual property protection, the

rules take the form of a digital contract between the information provider and
user.  The contract spells out fees and other terms and conditions of use, such as

the period of time over which the information can be used and whether the user is
allowed to print out or make copies of the information for distribution or sale.Trusted systems with secure hardware support have been used in militaryand intelligence organizations for several years and currently are in limited use in
digital and networked publishing.  For example, they support pay-per-view and

subscription viewing of satellite television services.  Software and hardware for

distributing music via trusted systems are in early prototyping and testing stages,
and systems supporting digital network document and software publishing are in
limited use on personal computers and in Òelectronic books.Ó  Although trusted
systems for database access could be developed, such currently available tech-
nologies possess minimal security and control measures.  The systems seldom

have digital contract provisions specifying more than the duration of the sub-
scription and perhaps the number of simultaneous users.54 For example, several of the commercial and not-for-profit database vendors at the committee
ÕsJanuary 1999 workshop noted that this online protection strategy, in conjunction with other availabletechnical measures and well-structured licensing terms, provided satisfactory protection for their
businesses, despite the possibility that a determined individual could access and download from adatabase under multiple identities, or collude with others to do so, in order to reconstruct illegally theentire database.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68A QUESTION OF BALANCESeveral obstacles prevent effective, widespread deployment of trusted sys-tems for databases.  First, the legal standing of digital contracts enforced by

machines has many practical limits with respect to enforceability and liability.
Second, appropriate public-key infrastructure to support authentication and au-
thorization is not yet widely used or available.  Third, the only commercially

viable approach to trusted systems for databases depends exclusively on software
for implementing security, but software-only approaches are vulnerable to tam-
pering and to widespread, catastrophic failure caused, for example, by computer
viruses.  Fourth, it can be both very costly and time consuming to attain the levels

of confidence necessary to achieve a Òtrusted system,Ó which conflicts with the
rapid pace of the industry and time-to-market considerations.Summary of Technological ProtectionsSeveral technological measures have been developed that can be deployedfor management of intellectual property rights in databases.  The main goal of

protection is to prevent widescale unauthorized redistribution of databases with-
out compensation to database rights holders.  Although no totally effective tech-

nological solution has yet been developed to protect intellectual property com-
prehensively, several measures are already in use with increasingly satisfactory
results.  A potentially effective technological approach appears to be the use of

trusted systems, with digital contracts that specify appropriate terms and condi-
tions.  These systems would use encryption technology for protecting databases

during storage or communication, watermark technologies to enable tracing the
source of pirated copies when such theft occurs, and database access controls and
query governors to flexibly control database access.Current limitations affecting technology available for protection of owner-ship rights in databases include absence of a widespread public-key infrastructure
for encryption, legal uncertainties about the enforceability of digital contracts,
and the relatively low level of security that is possible with software-only secu-
rity systems.  In addition, despite advances in technological measures for protect-

ing digital databases, human fallibilityÑor overt malicious actionÑwill continueto result in system security breaches for the foreseeable future.Market-based Database Protection Through Updating and CustomizingThere are various business practices that database vendors can use to protecttheir investments.55  One type of protection for databases arises from their com-
mercial perishability.  Many data become rapidly obsolete; consequently, data-
55 See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (2000), 
The Digital Dilemma, note 53,in press.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES69bases are updated frequently.  For example, meteorological data and stock market
prices are provided in real time on a continuous basis.  Some biotechnology

databases are updated every night.  Most commercially viable databases are

updated at least annually.  Since copying intrinsically introduces a lag, updating

provides some level of protection against piracy, because the copier, like the
database originator, must provide updates, thereby reducing the cost advantage of
copying.56Frequent updates can constrain the market price for a database because themost recent update competes with its previous version in the market, although the
former versions may nonetheless be almost as useful.  Database pricing will

almost certainly permit recovering the cost of updating, but the cost of the origi-
nal database might not be recoverable.  Collaborations among the government,

not-for-profit, and commercial sectors, however, can overcome some of these
problems.  For example, as discussed at the January 1999 workshop, commercial

meteorological, geographic, and biotechnology database producers utilizing the
original data made available freely under the federal governmentÕs full and openaccess mandate have successfully marketed and disseminated their value-added
databases.  The joint effort of the original public-data collector and commercial

database value-adder and vendor accomplished the twin goals of enhanced data
quality and wide dissemination at a reasonable price.  Most important, in the

context of this report, this broad distribution of data was achieved without statu-
tory database protection.Another market-based approach used by database producers and vendors tolimit the potential for misappropriation, while meeting the needs of their custom-
ers, is production of customized or targeted versions of their databases.  Different

versions of the same database tailored to different market segments can appeal to
a broader swath of the market while making it more difficult for an unfair com-
petitor to steal all versions and undermine the customer base.57Finally, database producers or vendors who have a well-established reputa-tion in the market will have an advantage over most competitors who would copy
their products.  Customers are frequently willing to pay more to vendors who are

reputed to sell quality databases and data products.TIPPING THE BALANCE:THE EUROPEAN UNIONS DATABASE DIRECTIVEOther nations have legal and other protective measures for databases similarto those already in place in the United States, but a discussion of foreign law is56 See Stephen M. Maurer in Appendix C of the committee
Õs online Proceedings, note 53.57 See generally, Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian (1998), 
ÒVersioning: The Smart Way to SellInformation,Ó Harvard Business Review, Nov.-Dec., pp. 106-114.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70A QUESTION OF BALANCEbeyond the scope of this study.  There is, however, one important new legal
developmentÑthe aforementioned E.U. Database DirectiveÑthat is particularlyrelevant to the present discussion, since it has been cited by commentators58 as
well as by congressional legislators59 as a major driver for the adoption of a
similar legal regime in the United States (see Appendix D for the full text of the
directive).The E.U. Database Directive requires that each member country of the Euro-pean Union (and affiliated states) adopt legislation protecting databases.60  The
E.U. Directive imposes a uniform copyright provision that protects only the
Òselection or arrangementÓ of the contents of a database that is the 
ÒauthorÕs ownintellectual creation.Ó61  Countries are permitted to provide for privileged unau-
thorized uses in accordance with the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works.62  The specific privilege recommended for not-for-
profit educational or scientific uses is very narrowly limited, however, Òfor thesole purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research as long as the
source is indicated and to the extent justified by the non-commercial purpose to
be achieved.Ó63The E.U. Directive also provides for an independent right to protect data-bases that are not protectable by copyright.  The right attaches to any database

that is a product of substantial investment and prohibits any extraction or
reutilization of a substantial part of a protected databaseÑjudged qualitatively orquantitativelyÑwithout permission of the rights holder.64 The E.U. Directive
provides that a noncopyrightable database is protected for 15 years from its date
of completion.65  ÒLawful usersÓ of databases that have been made available to
the public may extract or use insubstantial parts of the database for any purpose
and may make other such use that does not conflict with the Ònormal exploitationof the database or unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the maker of
the database.Ó66  Member states may, but are not required to, incorporate some
very narrow and specific exceptions, including one for the purposes of illustra-58 See Reichman and Samuelson (1997), note 25.
59 See statement by Senator Orrin Hatch on Database Antipiracy Legislation, 
Cong. Rec., Vol.
106, S. 316 (Jan. 19, 1999).60 E.U. Database Directive, note 2, Article 16.  The directive required all member states to comply
with its requirements by January 1, 1998.  Only a few had done so by that date, and not all countries

had complied as of September 1999.61 Id., Article 3(1).
62 Id., Article 6.
63 Id., Article 6(2)(b).
64 Id., Article 7.
65 Id., Article 10.  Although the nominal term of protection is limited to 15 years, Article 10(3)
has the effect of extending protection in perpetuity to databases that continue to be updated orrevised pursuant to a Òsubstantial new investment, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively.Ó66 Id., Article 8(2).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO AND PROTECTIONS FOR DATABASES71tion for teaching or scientific research that is more limited than the one providedfor under copyright.67Most significant, from the U.S. perspective, the E.U. Directive provides thatmember states should make the protection applicable only to databases owned by
nationals or habitual residents of a member state or to databases owned by nation-
als of a third country only if the third country offers comparable protection to
databases produced by nationals of a member state.68Although preliminary drafts of the E.U. Database Directive were founded onan unfair competition law model of database protection, the final version was
based on a strong property rights model.  The initial right to exclude extraction or

use applies even when the unauthorized use is not a competitive threat to the
protected database.  Only express privileged uses can escape potential liability.

The privilege for scientific research appears to apply only for non-commercial
purposes, and this is further qualified by an ambiguous limitation for the purposes
of illustration.  Since most scientific research has at least the potential for com-

mercial application, including commercial publication, and is not simply for
Òillustration,Ó the privilege may turn out to be a very narrow one, indeed, even ifit is adopted by a member state.  Similarly, the 
Òinsubstantial partÓ exception is
undermined by the qualitative impact test.  Moreover, the term of the right is 15

years, and potentially much longer, a very long period given the commercial half-
life of many kinds of scientific data.69When combined with unrestricted online licensing rights, strong databaseprotection legislation such as the E.U. Directive subjects a research user of, say,
a chemical handbook, to a starkly different situation than that experienced under
traditional copyright law under the print paradigm.  Table 3.2 provides a sum-

mary comparison of research user rights under these two legal regimes.70  The
net result of unrestricted licensing coupled with strong statutory database protec-
tion is that the most borderline of all the objects of protection under intellectual
property lawÑraw or factual data, whether S&T or any otherÑparadoxicallyreceives the strongest scope of protection available from any intellectual property
regime except, perhaps, patent law.71 The committee believes that the adoption
of a law such as the E.U. Directive, either in the United States or internationally,
would retard the advancement of science, the growth of knowledge, and opportu-
nities for innovation.67 Id., Article 9(b).
68 Id., Recital 56 and Article 11.
69 See the discussion of the term of protection in Chapter 4.
70 See J.H. Reichman and Paul F. Uhlir (1999), 
ÒDatabase Protection at the Crossroads:  Recent
Developments and Their Impact on Science and Technology,Ó Berkeley Technology Law Journal,Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 799-821.71 Reichman and Samuelson (1997), note 25, p. 94.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72A QUESTION OF BALANCETABLE 3.2Summary Comparison of Not-for-Profit Research User Rights
Under Traditional Copyright and Under Online Licensing When Combinedwith Sui Generis Database Protection Legislation
TraditionalLicensing Plus 
Sui Generis Protection Such as
Copyright LawProvided by the E.U. Database Directive
1.  User can immediately use all disparate1.  Even after paying for access to factual data
factual data and information disclosed inand information, which are not copyrightable by
a database; copyright law does not protectdefinition, user faces limitations on use in any
ideas or facts.  Fair-use exception availableways prohibited by the license and as reinforced

for certain additional research orby the legislation; user cannot distribute another
educational uses, even of protecteddatabase, using the same factual data or
expression.information, without either seeking permission
and perhaps paying anotherfee or regenerating
those protected data independently.2.  User can independently create another2.  User can independently create another
version of a database and sell it; copyrightversion of the database. If this is not possible,
law allows independent creation, and alluser needs a license or permission to combine

factual data are in the public domain.legitimately accessed factual data or information
into a derivative data product; the licensor canclaim that the user is violating redistribution
and other rights, and the user must guess whatcourts will consider to be aquantitatively or
qualitatively insubstantial part of the database;
the licensor is under no duty to grant such alicense; and if a sole source, the licensor may not
want any competition from follow-on products.3.  User can combine noncopyrightable3.  User cannot lend, give, or sell data to others
factual data with other data andeven after paying for access (unless permitted

information into a multiple-source orby the license) because there is no first sale,
interdisciplinary database for research oronly a license; user would have to obtain
educational purposes without permissionexpress permission and perhaps pay additional

or additional payment to the originators.afees to avoid the risk of harming the market(e.g., possibly causing one lost sale).4.  User can make limited or 
Òfair useÓ4.  Because there are no limits on licensing,
of even protected expression for not-for-user is subject to database vendor overriding
profit research or classroom purposes;even those exceptions contained in the

such uses often deemed fair or privilegedlegislation, including exceptions for research,
uses under statutory law or precedents.education, or other public-interest uses.
5.  Following the first purchase of a5.  During the period of protection, user rights
copyrightable database in hard copy, userdepend on the terms of the license supported by
can lend, give, or resell it to anyone elsethe new property right; database would not

under the first-sale doctrine, borrow itenter the public domain for at least 15 years
from a library, use it at any time for(and in Europe possibly never if the rights
virtually any [lawful] purpose, and makeholder continues to invest in maintenance or

a copy of it for personal or scholarlyupdates of a dynamic database).
purposes.NOTE:  This summary table was compiled from a more detailed comparative discussion presented in
an article by J.H. Reichman and Paul F. Uhlir (1999), ÒDatabase Protection at the Crossroads:Recent Developments and Their Impact on Science and Technology,Ó Berkeley Technology LawJournal, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 799-821.a Acknowledgment of sources is an appropriate academic norm, but their express permission is not
required.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.734Assessment and Recommendations73Our nation has a vibrant and demonstrably productive community of scien-tific and technical (S&T) database creators, disseminators, and users that has led
the world.  Advances in computing and communication technologies make S&T

databases and the facts they contain increasingly valuable for producing new
discoveries and for accelerating the growth of knowledge and the pace of innova-
tion.  The same technologies that facilitate the effective production, dissemina-

tion, and use of data, however, can also expedite their unauthorized dissemina-
tion and use, with the potential effect of undermining incentives to create new
databases, facilitating unfair competition and wholesale piracy, and in the most
extreme cases, exposing the original database rights holder to market failure.As Chapter 3 points out, the current efforts to enact statutory federal data-base protection in the United States appear to be stimulated by three principal
factors:  (1) the possibility for rapid and complete database copying with the

potential for instantaneous broad dissemination; (2) the gap in U.S. law created
by the Feist1 decision, which invalidated copyright protection on the basis of
investment and effort (i.e., Òsweat-of-the-browÓ) investments alone; and (3) the
E.U. Database Directive, which requires other nations to pass a similar law in
order for their citizens to enjoy the E.U. DirectiveÕs protections in Europe, thereby
providing a potentially unfair advantage to European competitors of the U.S.
private sector.21 Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).2 Although certain database vendors might be at some competitive disadvantage in the European
Union, the committee believes that a less protectionist law in the United States that encourages theA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74A QUESTION OF BALANCEThe committee believes, however, that the need for additional statutory pro-tection has not been sufficiently substantiated.  The high level of activity in the

production and use of digital S&T (and other) databases in the United States
serves as prima facie evidence that threats of misappropriation do not constitute a
crisis.  Nor do the existing legal, technical, and market-based measures provide a

chronic state of underprotection for proprietary databases.  The almost universal

use of licensing, rather than sale, of online databases and other digital informa-
tion, coupled with technological enforcement measures, on balance potentially
provides much stronger protections to the licensors vis-‹-vis their customers thanthey enjoyed prior to Feist and under the print media copyright regime (see Table
3.2 in Chapter 3).  While some of the current law providing protection to database

rights holders remains uncertain in terms of scope of applicability, the trend in
recent years has been to broaden, rather than narrow, applicable intellectual prop-
erty protections.Moreover, strong statutory protection of databases would have significantnegative impacts on access to and use of S&T databases for not-for-profit re-
search and other public-interest uses.  Nevertheless, although the committee op-

poses the creation of any strong new rights in compilations of factual informa-
tion, it recognizes that limited new federal legal protection against wholesale
misappropriation of databases may be appropriate.  In particular, a balanced

alternative to the highly protectionistic E.U. Database Directive could be achieved

in a properly scoped and focused new U.S. law, one that might serve as a model
for an international treaty in this area.In this chapter, the committee examines several legislative options and re-lated government activities, and recommends a number of legislative principles
and policy actions to help inform the current debate.  The chapter concludes with

a recommendation directed specifically to the not-for-profit S&T community.ASSESSMENT OF LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS, WITHRECOMMENDATIONS ON GUIDING PRINCIPLESThe committee assessed and compared three separate proposals for increaseddatabase protection of private-sector databases in the United States that were
placed in the Congressional Record at the beginning of the 106th Congress.
3During the 105th Congress, the House of Representatives twice approved a mea-sure establishing a specific statutory scheme for the protection of databasesÑH.R. 26524 and Title V of H.R. 2281,
5 which was substantially the same as H.R.
use of factual data for both public interest and commercial purposes will benefit the U.S. economyand society to a greater extent.3 Cong. Rec., Vol. 106, S. 316 (Jan. 19, 1999).
4 H.R. 2652, the 
ÒCollections of Information Antipiracy Act,Ó 105th Congress (1997).
5 H.R. 2281, Title V, the 
ÒCollections of Information Antipiracy Act,Ó 105th Congress (1998).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS752652.6  Both H.R. 2652 and 2281 were adopted on suspension calendar by the
House despite significant opposition from an array of scientific, educational,
library, and consumer public-interest organizations and institutions, as well as
from a number of commercial publishers and information technology services
companies.7  These House bills applied both to databases that qualified for
copyright protection and to noncopyrightable Òsweat-of-the-browÓ databases that
did not.The proposed legislation drew the concerned attention of the not-for-profitcommunities because expanding private property rights in factual databases could
interfere with scientific progress and other public-interest uses of data.8  At the
same time, some private-sector firms believe that their databases are vulnerable
to misappropriation due to a gap in the law.9 Other reactions from the private
sector included the perception that the proposal adopted by the House placed too
many impediments to transformative uses of existing databases for commercial6 The only significant change in Title V of H.R. 2281 was to remove Òpotential marketsÓ from theambit of liability for not-for-profit uses in Section 1403, Permitted Acts (a) Educational, Scientific,
Research, and Additional Reasonable Uses, which was amended as follows:(1) Certain Not-for-profit Educational, Scientific, or Research Uses.Ñ . . . no person
shall be restricted from extracting and using information for not-for-profit educational,scientific, or research purposes in a manner that does not harm directly the actual [orpotential] market for the product or service referred to in section 1402.Ó [words in brackets
deleted].7 See the testimony of the not-for-profit sector cited in note 8 below, and of the commercial
opponents to the legislation in note 10 below.  In addition, over 130 organizations and companies
signed a position statement critical of H.R. 354 that was placed in the public record by Dr. JamesNeal, director of the Milton S. Eisenhower Library at  Johns Hopkins University and president of the
Association of Research Libraries, during the March 18, 1999, Hearing on H.R 354, the ÒCollectionsof Information Antipiracy Act,Ó held by the Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property of the
Committee on the Judiciary of the U.S. House of Representatives [hereinafter March 18, 1999,
Hearing].  A copy of the position statement and the full list of signatories may be found online at
<www.databasedata.org>.8 See testimony by Wm. A. Wulf, president of the National Academy of Engineering on behalf ofthe National Academies, J.H. Reichman, professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Law, andJames G. Neal, director of the Milton S. Eisenhower Library at Johns Hopkins University andpresident of the Association of Research Libraries, at the October 23, 1997, Hearing on H.R. 2652,
the ÒCollections of Information Antipiracy Act,Ó held by the Subcommittee on Courts and Intellec-
tual Property of the Committee on the Judiciary of the U.S. House of Representatives [hereinafterOctober 23, 1997, Hearing].9 Id.  See testimony by Paul Warren of Warren Publishing, Inc., on behalf of the Coalition Against
Database Piracy.  See also testimony by Robert E. Aber, senior vice president and general counsel,
the NASDAQ Stock Market, Inc., on behalf of the Information Industry Association, at the February
12, 1998, Hearing on H.R. 2652, the ÒCollections of Information Antipiracy Act,Ó held by the
Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property of the Committee on the Judiciary of the U.S.House of Representatives [hereinafter February 12, 1998, Hearing].A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76A QUESTION OF BALANCEpurposes.10  Perhaps most significant, the Administration presented its own con-
sensus critique of the House bills on August 4, 1998,11 and the Department of
Justice12 and the Federal Trade Commission
13 issued legal memoranda outlining
their concerns about the legislationÕs constitutionality and anticompetitive ef-fects, respectively.Soon after the approval of Title V of H.R. 2281 by the House in July 1998,Senator Orrin Hatch (R-UT), chairman of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary,
initiated negotiations among the various interests, which continued from early
August until early October.14  While substantial progress was made in this pro-
cess and the needs of the science, education, and library communities were di-
rectly acknowledged, a consensus was not achieved before the 105th Congress
adjourned in October 1998.15Shortly after the 106th Congress convened in January 1999, CongressmanHoward Coble (R-NC), chairman of the Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual
Property of the House Committee on the Judiciary, reintroduced as H.R. 35416the proposal that had twice passed the House in the previous session.  H.R. 354

included two changes to respond to concerns of the scientific community and
other critics of the original legislative proposal.17  Thereafter, Senator Hatch
10 Id.  See testimony by Jonathan Band, partner, Morrison & Foerster LLP, on behalf of the On-
Line Banking Association, and by Tim Casey of MCI, Inc. on behalf of the Information TechnologyAssociation of America at the February 12, 1998, Hearing.11 See letter from Andrew J. Pincus, general counsel of the Department of Commerce, to The
Honorable Orrin G. Hatch, chairman, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, August 4, 1998, summa-rizing Òa number of concernsÓ of the Administration with H.R. 2652.
12 See memorandum for William P. Marshall, associate White House counsel, from William
Michael Treanor, deputy assistant attorney general, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice,July 28, 1998, regarding ÒConstitutional Concerns Raised by the Collections of InformationAntipiracy act, H.R. 2652.Ó13 See letter from Robert Pitofsky, chairman, Federal Trade Commission, to The Honorable Tom
Bliley, chairman, Committee on Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives, September 28, 1998,
regarding potential anti-competitive effects of Title V of H.R. 2281.14 These negotiations were conducted in closed sessions with representatives of the principal
organizations that had previously taken a public position on the House bills.  The Intellectual Prop-

erty Counsel to Senator Hatch, Edward Damich, moderated the negotiation process.15 For a detailed discussion of the Senate negotiations and the legislative process associated with
the database protection legislation in the U.S. Congress through early April 1999, see generally J.H.
Reichman and Paul F. Uhlir (1999), ÒDatabase Protection at the Crossroads:  Recent Developments
and Their Impact on Science and Technology,Ó Berkeley Technology Law Journal, Vol. 14,  pp. 793-
834.16 H.R. 354, the 
ÒCollections of Information Antipiracy Act,Ó 106th Congress (1999).
17 The two changes made in H.R. 354 by the House Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual
Property included an attempt to eliminate the potential for indefinitely prolonging the 15-year dura-
tion of protection in section 1408 (c), and expanding the scope of the exemption for certain not-for-profit educational, scientific, and research uses in section 1403 (a), both of which are discussed inmore detail later in this chapter.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS77inserted in the Congressional Record two other proposalsÑthe first drafted by acoalition of commercial and not-for-profit interests (hereinafter, the Coalition
Proposal)18 seeking much more limited protection than H.R. 354, and the second
a draft bill that had emerged at the end of the 1998 negotiations sponsored by
Senator Hatch (hereinafter, the Senate Discussion Draft).19In the rest of this section the committee discusses several of the most impor-tant provisions of these three proposals and evaluates them in terms of their
potential effects on access to and use of S&T data by public-interest users.  In

doing so, the committee recognizes that these proposals have changed and will
continue to change before any one of them is considered for final adoption.
Nonetheless, they serve as models for the types of issues that arise from the
perspective of the research and education communities confronted with the pros-
pect of legislative changes that would affect access to data.20As noted in Chapter 1, because of the complex web of interdependent rela-tionships among public-sector and private-sector database producers, dissemina-
tors, and users (see Table 1.1 in Chapter 1 for an indication), any action to
increase the rights of persons in one category is likely to compromise the rights of
the persons in the other categories, with potentially far-reaching negative conse-
quences.  A principal concern of the committee, therefore, is that the develop-

ment of any new database protection measures aimed at protecting private-sector
investments take into account the need to promote access to and subsequent use
of S&T data and databases not only by the not-for-profit sector, but by commer-
cial producers of derivative databases as well.  Of course, it is in the common

interest of both database rights holders and usersÑand of society generallyÑtoachieve a workable balance among the respective interests so that all legitimate
rights remain reasonably protected.  Therefore, 
as a general guiding principle,the committee recommends that any new federal protection of databases
should balance the costs and benefits of the proposed changes for both data-
base rights holders and users.18 See the 
ÒDatabase Fair Competition and Research Promotion Act of 1999,Ó Cong. Rec., Vol.106, S. 316 (Jan. 19, 1999).19 Id., 
ÒChapter 14ÑProtection of Databases,Ó S. 322-326.
20 At the time of this writing, the House Committee on Commerce has introduced and marked up
a slightly modified version of the Coalition Proposal.  See H.R. 1858, The Consumer and Investor
Access to Information Act of 1999, 106th Congress, May 20, 1999.  The House Committee on the

Judiciary also has marked up H.R. 354, which includes a number of significant revisions.  Because
the study committee had already written its report, it was not able to consider these additionalchanges to the proposed legislation.  Nevertheless, the committee believes that its analysis and

recommendations remain relevant to the ongoing debate concerning this legislation, as well as to anyeventual implementation of a statutory database protection regime.  Any bill that is finally adopted, if
any, most likely will be substantially further modified.  For this reason, the committee presents its

legislative recommendations as guiding principles, rather than as specific legislative language.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78A QUESTION OF BALANCEThe Standard of HarmThe key provision of the three legislative proposals defines the nature ofprotection accorded a database rights holder and establishes the standard of harm
against which a defendantÕs liability is to be judged.  As introduced in January
1999, H.R. 354 prohibited the Òextraction or useÓ of a substantial part of a
database if it results in Òharm to the actual or potential marketÓ for any product or
service incorporating the database.21  A 
Òpotential marketÓ includes any market
the database rights holder Òhas current and demonstrable plans to exploitÓ or a
market that is Òcommonly exploited by persons offering similar products or ser-vices.Ó  The Senate Discussion Draft narrowed the protection of actual markets to
those markets commonly exploited by persons offering similar products.22The Coalition Proposal took a different approach, prohibiting only the Òdu-plication of anotherÕs database [and inclusion of those records in] . . . a databasethat competes with the original.Ó23  To compete with the original database, the
duplicate must be substantially identical to the original, must be shown to dis-
place substantial sales or licenses of the original, and must be offered for sale or
digitally distributed in such a manner as to Òsignificantly diminish the incentiveto investÓ in developing the original database.  The latter requirement may be
interpreted as threatening the opportunity to recover a reasonable return on the
investment in collecting or organizing the original database.None of the three legislative proposals purported to create broad propertyrights in the original database, as the E.U. Directive does.  However, by expand-
ing protection to Òpotential markets,Ó H.R. 354 would allow the rights holder to
foreclose markets or uses beyond the rights holderÕs actual use.  This has the
effect of granting exclusive rights to the original database rights holder in uses
unknown at the time of the databaseÕs creation.  The limitation of the H.R. 354
language stating Òcurrent demonstrable plans to exploitÓ is unclear because the
time at which Òcurrent plansÓ is to be measured is not stated.  Does 
ÒcurrentÓmean at the time the extraction and use occur, at the time the user develops the
new market, or at the time the database rights holder brings suit?  A scientific

researcher might discover an entirely new application for a database, only to be
foreclosed from such use if the original database rights holder were subsequently
to develop Òcurrent and demonstrable plansÓ to exploit that application as an
additional market.  For example, scientist A has a database consisting of human

gene sequences potentially useful for locating genes controlling certain diseases,
but does not know of any particular sequences that are valuable for this purpose.
By extraction and use of AÕs database, scientist B discovers a set of sequences21 H.R. 354, section 1402.
22 Section 1301(3).
23 Section 1401.  The House Committee on Commerce bill, H.R. 1858, has extended that prohibi-tion to include a Òdiscrete sectionÓ of a database.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS79that seem particularly valuable for further experimentation and makes this subsetof sequences available to the scientific community.  In doing so, scientist B could

violate the protection provided by H.R. 354.  Although protection of original,

noncopyrightable databases with a strong, copyright-like property right may en-
courage additional investment in producing databases, it simultaneously discour-
ages others from investing in discovery of new uses for existing databases and
elevates the cost of using them.  In principle, the public benefits most from the

weakest legal incentives for encouraging such investments, and intellectual prop-
erty theory has always promoted the open availability of facts.  For the creation of

legal incentives greater than this, the former chairman of the House Committee
on the Judiciary, Robert Kastenmeier, required proponents of new intellectual
property rights to meet a very heavy burden.24The Senate Discussion Draft provided considerably narrower protection byrequiring a showing of ÒsubstantialÓ harm to the actual or neighboring market,25which was defined in the Proposed Conference Report Language as Òharm [that]is such as to significantly diminish the incentive to invest in gathering, organizing
or maintaining the database.Ó26  The harm test in the Coalition Proposal was
similarly circumscribed, requiring both a displacement of substantial sales and a
showing that the unauthorized use Òsignificantly diminished the incentive toinvest in the collecting or organizing of the protected database.27  These latter
two formulations expressly acknowledged that not all duplications are action-
able, even if used for commercial purposes (e.g., in distant markets) or for pro-
competitive purposes by honest means.  The intent was to recognize that competi-

tors who add value and generate socioeconomic benefits should not incur liability
if they do not directly harm the market of the original database rights holder, i.e.,
if they do not compete unfairly.The committee believes that strong protection based on a broadly framedstandard of harm test, such as the one proposed by H.R. 354, poses a number of
potential problems for research, education, and other public-interest users, as
well as for legitimate private-sector, value-adding database producers.  As a

general rule, the stronger the statutory protection, the greater the encumbrances
will be on the reuse and transformation of data received by second-generation
database producers and users.  One person
Õs derivative use can be characterizedas an infringement on the original database rights holderÕs product; where the baris set will determine to what extent database producers and disseminators will be24 See Robert W. Kastenmeier and Michael J. Remington (1985), 
ÒThe Semiconductor ChipProtection Act of 1984:  A Swamp or Firm Ground?,
Ó Minn. L. Rev., Vol. 70, p. 417, establishing astringent four-part test for assessing the merits of any proposed intellectual property protection fornew technologies.25 Section 1302.
26 Proposed Conference Report Language, Section 1302, at 33.
27 Section 1405 (4).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80A QUESTION OF BALANCEenriched at the expense of all socially and economically valuable downstreamuses.As noted in Chapter 1 (and indicated in Table 1.1), many organizations areusers as well as producers and vendors of S&T databases, as, for example, when
they draw on one or more databases to search for cross-disciplinary associations
or to create a derivative or value-added database targeted to a competing or
entirely new market.  Private-sector creators of derivative databases have con-

flicting views of protection:  protection of source databases might deprive them

of access, but insufficient protection for their own creations might make them
vulnerable to copying.  Protection entails contradictory consequences for creators

of derivative databases.  A concern of the committee, therefore, is that anynew protection judged to be necessary must take into account the need to
promote access to and subsequent use of S&T data and databases not only
by the not-for-profit sector, but by commercial producers of derivative data-
bases as well.28A major negative effect of a strong standard of harm test would be to raisethe resale prices for value-added or derivative databases, as well as to inhibit their
production.  Value-adding database producers that use multiple data sources to

create new products, as is common in both the private and the public sector, are
particularly penalized by a strong standard of harm test.29  Although the conse-
quences would be difficult to measure, strong new rights for database rights
holders would probably result in a broad loss of research opportunities.30  If, forexample, potential users opted to engage in other professional activities rather
than deal with more expensive and onerous restrictions on database use, the
probability of subsequent discoveries, innovations, and advances in knowledge
would decrease, not only because of the reduced number of users, but also be-
cause the remaining database users would be constrained in their activities.

Downstream commercial providers who must pay license fees to the rights hold-
ers of sole-source databases can recover such fees only if they themselves charge
more for access, costs that are passed down the chain of derivative products to all
users, including investigators in not-for-profit institutions.By making entry into a market more expensive, greater statutory protectionalso could increase the likelihood that small or niche markets, which are com-28 Indeed, many commercial entities have expressed concerns about such effects of strong data-
base protection.  See, for example, the testimony and position statement cited in note 10.
29 As noted by Nobel laureate Joshua Lederberg in his testimony on behalf of the National
Academies and the American Association for the Advancement of Science at the March 18, 1999,
Hearing, note 7, the Òrecent advent of digital technologies for collecting, processing, storing, andtransmitting data has led to an exponential increase in the number of databases created and used.  A
hallmark trait of modern research is to obtain and use dozens, or even hundreds of databases,
extracting and merging portions of each to create new databases and new sources of knowledge andinnovation.Ó30 See Reichman and Uhlir (1999), note 15, p. 820.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS81monplace for many S&T databases, would be served by sole-source providers.  A
higher cost of entry typically deters entrants and allows the first entrant to act as
a monopolist.31  A sole source may then use its market power to inhibit the
development of derivative databases if these are interpreted as undermining the
investments in the original database, even if such derivative uses are in com-
pletely different markets or are protected as Òpermitted actsÓ under a statute.
Monopoly power could be exercised over the data in many areas of research,
because most observational databases cannot be independently recreated after the
fact, and it is economically inefficient and undesirable to require independent,
redundant collection of original data in activities that use very high cost systems.
As the Federal Trade Commission cautioned in its analysis of the predecessor bill
to H.R. 354, Ò. . . policies that further entrench the market power of single-sourcedata providers could have an unintended, undesirable impact on competition and
innovation because of the significant potential for anticompetitive conduct in
single-source database markets.Ó32  The law should encourage competition be-
cause competition leads to lower prices, resulting in broader use and, hence,
further discovery and innovation.Increased license fees or unreasonable restrictions on subsequent uses orredissemination of data would negatively affect both government and not-for-
profit database value adders or disseminators in other ways as well.  For example,

European government meteorological data providers, who are already benefiting
from the stronger protections offered by the E.U. Database Directive, are placing
various use and redistribution restrictions on the National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration (NOAA), asking NOAA to enforce these restrictions in
the United States, contrary to existing U.S. law and policy.  Such encumbrances

from private-sector sources would be exacerbated by any database legislation
that, similar to the E.U. Database Directive, extended protection to elements not
now protected.  Government S&T managers, in particular, are concerned that

they do not receive enough funding to pay license fees and enforce restrictive
provisions, in addition to meeting the costs of data collection and database prepa-
ration, and anticipate that they might have to decline data contributed by private-
sector sources (as well as public-sector European sources) that carry high royalties
or restrictions on subsequent distribution that require enforcement by the user.31 See Laura D
ÕAndrea Tyson and Edward F. Sherry (1997), Statutory Protection for Databases:Economic & Public Policy Issues, research paper prepared under contract to Reed-Elsevier, Inc. andThe Thomson Corporation, and presented as testimony on behalf of the Information Industry Asso-
ciation at the October 23, 1997, Hearing, note 8.  Tyson and Sherry, however, generally argue that
there are not many instances in the commercial database industry in which sole sources dominate themarket and can prevent or inhibit entry.  Although the committee did not analyze the entire database

market in this study, it did find that in many S&T areas, including practically all observationaldatabases, the data sources are unique.32 Federal Trade Commission letter, note 13, p. 2.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82A QUESTION OF BALANCEWith increased statutory protection for databases and the accompanyinghigher transaction costs, scientists and educators in the not-for-profit sector might
no longer be able to afford access to newly proprietary data sources or to enforce
subsequent access and use restrictions on the data obtained from those sources,
contrary to existing norms and practice.33  Not-for-profit research institutions
tend to be conservative, risk-averse organizations that err on the side of caution,
and they would likely institute guidelines prohibiting any database research ac-
tivity that might potentially expose them to liability under a new legislative
regime and to costly litigation.  Such a possibility is particularly problematic

given the uncertainty about what portions of databases would be deemed Òquali-tatively substantialÓ by the rights holders in each case and about what they would
view as a Òreasonable useÓ by not-for-profit entities.  Such defensive measures
would serve to further restrict, perhaps even beyond what might be allowed under
the law, what scientists and educators can do with databases that they lawfully
obtain.Providing stronger property rights for databases that contain information ofhigh commercial value, such as in the area of genomic research, can have the
opposite of the intended effect, because the price of access to these databases is
inversely related to the number of users who will access them.  Hence, from an

S&T perspective, the goal is to encourage the generation of publicly funded, and
therefore readily available, collections of data in key scientific areas, where the
use of this information is of potentially great commercial value, and to discourage
the tendency for private companies to capture this information and restrict access
to a limited audience.  Promoting broad access to publicly generated databases

has the additional benefit of fostering active competition and value-adding activ-
ity since all commercial and academic organizations would have access to this
information.Moreover, enhancing database protection would also serve as an incentive toboth government agencies and not-for-profit organizations to privatize or com-
mercialize their research databases.  Such action would have the undesirable

outcome of reducing the number of databases in the public domain and thus
would have a chilling effect on the full and open data exchange and sharing ethos
that benefits so many areas of scientific and engineering research.Since a strong case for significantly greater protection of databases has notbeen made, primarily because existing protections already go a long way toward
protecting database providers, the committee believes that the concerns regarding33 Examples of this problem are already abundant in the restrictions on experimental research uses
of patentable or otherwise protected innovations in the biotechnology sector.  See M.A. Heller and
R.S. Eisenberg (1998), ÒCan Patents Deter Innovation?  The Anticommons in Biomedical Research,
ÓScience, Vol. 280, p. 698.  Such a problem would be more insidious in the case of noncopyrightable
factual databases, which are subpatentable innovations that do not merit strong property rights andthat have been used much more widely and openly in research to date.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS83increased encumbrances on access and use, as well as the potential for higherprices and related transaction costs, cannot be ignored.  In light of these con-cerns, the committee recommends that any new federal statutory protection
of databases should limit any additional protection to prohibition of acts of
unauthorized taking that cause substantial competitive injury to the data-
base rights holder in the rights holderÕs actual market.  The standard of

harm should be sufficiently clear to permit good-faith users to know when
they are infringing on a database rights holderÕs rights and should not un-
dermine the nationÕs capabilities for innovation or competition in the mar-
ketplace.  Such a formulation would help prevent undue and inappropriate inter-ference with scientific inquiry and with other traditional and customary
public-interest uses of data, as well as promote legitimate and socially beneficial
commercial competitive activities.Scope of ProtectionThe first section of all three of the legislative proposals considered by thecommittee defined a database as a Òcollection of information collected and orga-nized for the purpose of facilitating access to discrete items of the information.ÓAll three proposals also provided protection to databases developed through the
investment of substantial monetary or other resources.  ÒInformationÓ was de-
fined to include data, facts, or other intangible material capable of being collected
and organized in a systematic way.  The Coalition Proposal, however, excluded

Òworks of authorshipÓÑa term applicable to subject matter protected by thecopyright system.  Such an exclusion would deny protection to copyrightable

works such as anthologies of an authorÕs works or a scientific journal that mightotherwise be regarded as a database of articles.  The H.R. 354 and Senate Discus-

sion Draft proposals included these works, consistent with the subject-matter
scope of the E.U. Directive.  The committee believes that the inclusion of collec-

tions of works of authorship, which are already unambiguously protected by
copyright, is both unnecessary and unsupportable.  If the purpose of this legisla-

tion is to fill a purported gap in the legal protection currently available to
noncopyrightable databases, then that scope of protection should not extend so
broadly as to cover fully copyrightable anthologies, journals, and textbooks.  Thecommittee therefore recommends that the subject-matter scope of any new
federal statutory protection of databases be constrained to databases com-
prising a collection of discrete facts and items of information, and expressly
exclude collections of copyrightable material, which is already protected.
Further, protection under any new statute should extend only to a database
that is the product of a substantial investment, and not to any idea, fact,
procedure, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery
disclosed by the database.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84A QUESTION OF BALANCETerm of ProtectionH.R. 35434 and its predecessor bills, as well as the Senate Discussion Draft,
35provided protection for a nominal term of 15 years, reflecting an effort to meetthe E.U. Database DirectiveÕs term of protection36 in response to the E.U.
DirectiveÕs attempt to assert a reciprocity requirement.  However, no analysis or
empirical study supports the choice of 15 years of protection by the European
Union, in comparison with other potential terms of protection.  The committee

believes that unquestioningly adopting an arbitrary term of protection developed
by a foreign power without any experience as to its potential effects would be
unsupportable.  Further, the European Union
Õs reciprocity requirement contra-venes a well-established U.S. government policy requiring national treatment
under all international intellectual property law agreements.37  Nonetheless, one
key difference between the two congressional proposals above and the E.U.
Directive is that the E.U. Directive allows the period of protection for the entire
database to be extended for another 15 years with each substantial new invest-
mentÑthereby providing the rights holder with the possibility of perpetual pro-tection of the entire databaseÑwhile the two congressional proposals tried tolimit the extension of protection to the new data that might be added.38Despite these efforts to limit protection to 15 years, the committee is con-cerned about such a long term of initial protection for factual data, whether for
research and education purposes or any other uses, especially if the standard of
harm remains as strong as proposed in H.R. 354.  Indeed, there has been a

complete failure on the part of the proponents for a 15-year term of protection
either to justify that term, independent of the arbitrary decision made by the
framers of the E.U. Directive, or to compare it with other, shorter terms of34 Section 1408(c).
35 Section 1310(c).
36 Article 10.
37 See Andrew Pincus testimony on behalf of the Administration from March 18, 1999, Hearing,
note 7, which states in part: ÒThe Administration opposes such ÔreciprocityÕ requirements, both
domestically and internationally.  We believe that commercial laws (including intellectual property

and unfair business laws) should be administered on national treatment terms, that is, a countryÕsdomestic laws should treat a foreign national like one of the countryÕs citizens.  This principle is
embodied in Article 3 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS Agreement) as well as more generally in the Paris Convention for the Protection of IndustrialProperty and the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.  The Adminis-
tration believes that Congress should craft U.S. database protection to meet the needs of the Ameri-
can economy....Ó, p. 32.38 Failure to limit the term of protection, coupled with a strong proprietary right such as the one
proposed in H.R. 354, has led some legal commentators to question the constitutionality of such a
provision under U.S. law.  See generally William Michael Treanor (1998), note 12, and Marci
Hamilton, Cardozo Law School, letter to Howard Coble, chairman of the Subcommittee on Courtsand Intellectual Property, House Committee on the Judiciary, February 10, 1998, 5 p.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS85protection used in other intellectual property law models.39 Although, in com-
parison, the term of copyright is much longer, historically the term has been
justified and set according to an authorÕs likely lifetime, plus some additionaltime in which the authorÕs heirs can benefit.40  Moreover, there are other consti-tutionally imposed limits on both the scope and length of such protection.  If a

database meets the constitutional and statutory requirements for copyright, then
the rights holder can obtain the longer term of protection that copyright law affords.
However, the committee has been unable to find any rationale for the 15-year
term and, based on market factors relevant to databases, questions that length of
protection for noncopyrightable databases or Òsubstantial portions thereof.ÓThe committee notes that the average high-activity life span of original datain an online commercial database is approximately 3 years.41  Consequently,
most of the incentive for creating and distributing databases comes from the
return on investment achieved in the first 3 years, when demand for and use of
databases are highest.  It is important to note, however, that there is a significant
difference between how long databases have value and how long statutory pro-
tection for noncopyrightable databases should be accorded.  Although there are

S&T databases in rapidly progressing areas of research, such as some in the life
sciences, whose research and commercial values plummet very quickly as new
data supersede old, many research endeavors, such as the study of environmental
trends, longitudinal socioeconomic studies, and various types of historical analy-
ses, not only depend on consistently collected long-term data sets, but also re-
quire access to both current and historical data for comprehensive and compara-
tive study and verification.  The committee believes that any term of protection

that is set should have a duration deemed sufficient to create incentives for
producing original new databases.  It should not be set to assure that rights

holders capture all the value, since that would require an exceedingly long period
to cover all cases and would constitute establishing protected markets that are
inappropriate.  As a general rule, the broader and stronger the scope of protection,

the shorter the period of protection needs to be to provide an appropriate incen-
tive for creating a database.  In any event, the case for the term of protection to be

used should be made by those who are seeking the new protection, and this has
not been done.Neither H.R. 35442 nor the Senate Discussion Draft43 completely addressed39 See, for example, J.H. Reichman and Pamela Samuelson (1997), 
ÒIntellectual Property Rightsin Data?Ó Vanderbilt Law Review, Vol. 50, pp. 137-152.40 See 17 U.S.C., section 302.
41 See generally, Martha E. Williams (1984-1999), 
Information Market Indicators: InformationCenter/Library MarketÑReports 1-60, Information Market Indicators, Inc., Monticello, IL.42 Section 1408(c).
43 Section 1310.  However, the Hatch Discussion Draft did include a provision for voluntary
deposit of databases to the Copyright Office in Section 1311.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86A QUESTION OF BALANCEthe potential problem of extending protection to substantial portions of old datathat may become inseparably intermingled with new data, which raises the issues
of how to effectively track such activity and how to provide adequate notice of
which substantial portions remain subject to statutory protection.44  Important
factors to consider in this regard are scientific and legal authentication methods
and the necessary documentation (metadata) requirements.  Adequate database

authentication and documentation are essential not only as prerequisites for accu-
rately tracking the term of protection for any given database, but also for improv-
ing the reliability and value of databases for research and other uses.  In addition,

although the committee did not explicitly consider it, some observers have noted
that a registration system similar to the one administered by the Copyright Office
for copyrighted works could be helpful in notifying users about the expiration of
the term of protection for any given database.45Both proposals also allowed for 15 years of retroactive application of protec-tion by not limiting causes of action to databases created on or after the date of
enactment of the legislation.  The committee finds little justification for legisla-

tion that is supposed to be necessary to stimulate and protect new investment to
apply to databases already created without the benefit of such protection.The Coalition Proposal traded off a much weaker standard of harm and scopeof protection for an unlimited term of durationÑbasically for as long as thedatabase has some commercial value to the rights holder.  The cause of action

was limited to a duplication of a database that is placed in direct commercial
competition,46 and this was coupled with additional exemptions for scientific,
educational, or research uses.47  The committee believes that the unlimited term
of duration proposed in the Coalition Proposal is not unreasonable in the overall
context of that proposed bill, since it would also provide some added protection
to those databases that have significant commercial value beyond 15 years and
that have long existed.  It is important to emphasize, however, that any further

strengthening of the standard of harm under this proposal would likely make the
unlimited term of duration not only unacceptable, but unconstitutional.48  Fi-
nally, neither the problem of identifying substantial portions of old versus new
data nor the problem of retroactive application of the statute arose in the Coali-
tion Proposal.As a general principle, the committee recommends that the term ofprotection in any new federal statutory protection of databases be limited to
a period of time sufficient to provide incentives found necessary for the44 For a discussion of how such legislation might address this problem, see testimony of Andrew
J. Pincus, March 18, 1999, note 7.45 Id.
46 Section 1405(4).
47 Section 1402(e).
48 See documents referenced in note 38.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS87creation of new databases.  If legislation with a fixed term of protection is
adopted, an appropriate term of protection most likely should be substan-
tially shorter than the proposed 15-year term.  It should also be based on an

analysis of the economics of the database industry, rather than set arbi-
trarily.The committee also recommends that any new legislation with a fixedterm of protection also should require database rights holders to provide
notice of expiration of the term of protection.  Specifically, any such legisla-tion should:¥Require database rights holders to identify the date on which the databasewas created so that the user will know when it no longer enjoys statutory protec-
tion (of course, those databases that remain commercially valuable longer than
the statutory period of protection can continue to be protected by other means,
such as copyright, trade secret, contract, and technical and other measures); and¥For databases that are updated continuously, or at periodic intervals, re-quire database rights holders to identify with reasonable precision those substan-
tial portions of the database that are and are not subject to protection.  Failure to

identify the date of creation for each new substantial portion of a database should
serve as a basis for a defense against infringement after the expiration of the term
of protection for the original portion of the database.Finally, the committee recommends that protection be applied only todatabases created after the effective date of any new legislation, in recogni-
tion that a major purpose of enacting enhanced protection is to provide
additional incentives for the development of new databases.Exemptions for Not-for-Profit Research and EducationIt might be asked why not-for-profit research and education should haveaccess to data on better terms than commercial enterprises, and why those com-
munities should get special ÒsubsidiesÓ from database producers.  After all, they
do not receive parallel subsidies from suppliers of laboratory mice or telescopes.In Chapter 2, the committee argues that the price of access to commercialdatabases will typically be higher than the efficient-access price, leading to inef-
ficient use.  (This is not true of (nonproprietary) laboratory mice or telescopes.

Mice and telescopes do not have the increasing-returns cost structure of a data-
base, and their price in a competitive market will be the Òefficient-accessÓ price.)
The consequent reduction in data use could negatively affect both commercial
users and public users of databases, but commercial users have an advantage.
They can recover some of the high access fees by pricing their own products
appropriately.  In contrast, the revenues of public users, such as public research

laboratories and universities, come mostly from public agencies (taxpayers).  The
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88A QUESTION OF BALANCEscientific community legitimately predicts that any increase in the price of accessto data will not be compensated by increased public subsidies.49  Hence publicly
funded users are likely to be more negatively affected than commercial users by
new database protection legislation.The consequent reduction in resources available for education and sciencewould be particularly damaging because education and science have a public-
good aspect.  They generate 
Ònonexcludable benefits,Ó sometimes called exter-
nalities, that go beyond any benefits that could be realized on their own ledgers or
to their own constituents.  All of society benefits when children are educated,

when a cure is discovered for a disease, or when significant trends in climate are
detected, and society will receive these benefits even without paying directly for
them.  To ensure an appropriate level of investment in these activities
Ña levelproportionate to the benefits likely to be achievedÑsome public subsidy is re-quired.  This explains, in part, the long-standing U.S. tradition of public educa-

tion and public funding of researchÑa tradition that can claim a significant shareof the acclaim for our economic and social standing.The privileged status of public-interest data users was in fact recognized tovarying degrees by all three of the legislative proposals under consideration.
They all attempted to grant education, science, and research more leeway in
utilizing protected databases, but they varied with respect to their degree of
anticipated effectiveness.H.R. 354 and the Senate Discussion Draft initially permitted extraction oruse of information for not-for-profit educational, scientific, or research purposes,
as long as the use does not interfere with the database rights holderÕs Òactualmarket.Ó50  Under this provision, research that produces a product that poten-
tially, or in fact, opens a new market not exploited by the database rights holder
would not violate the law.  Both proposals went further, to protect some educa-

tional or research activities, even if they do interfere with the rights holderÕsactual market.  H.R. 354 provided a fact-dependent exemption similar to the fair-

use privilege in copyright law.51  An individual act of use or extraction of
anotherÕs database for teaching or research would be privileged if reasonableunder the circumstances.52  The reasonableness of the use or extraction was to be
determined by consideration of four factors:  the commercial or not-for-profit

nature of the use or extraction, the good faith of the user, whether the portion used
or extracted is incorporated into an independent work, and whether the use or
extraction is in the same field as the original database.  However, notwithstanding
49 See National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to ScientificData, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 114.50 Section 1403(a)(1) in H.R. 354, and section 1303(c) in the Hatch Discussion Draft.
51 See 17 U.S.C., section 107, and the discussion of fair use in Chapter 3.
52 Section 1403(a)(2).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS89these factors, a use or extraction would not be privileged if it was likely tobecome a market substitute for all or part of the original database.53The Senate Discussion Draft proposed that anyone can use a protected data-base for purposes of Òillustration, explanation or example, comment or criticism,internal verification, or scientific or statistical analysis of the portion usedÓ and
further authorized not-for-profit scientific, educational, or research activities Òforsimilar customary or transformative purposes.Ó54  This exemption was limited ifsubstantial harm accrues to the original database rights holder because the use
was more than reasonable and customary, consists of a substitute for the original
database, is intended to avoid payment of reasonable fees for use of a database
specifically marketed for education, scientific, or research purposes, or is a part
of a pattern of systematic use.55Because the Coalition Proposal prohibited the duplication of a database onlyif the duplication displaces substantial sales or licenses of the original database,
there was less need for a strong research privilege.  Nonetheless, that proposal

provided that uses for science, research, or education are privileged unless the
uses are part of a Òconsistent patternÓ designed to compete directly with the
original database, or to avoid reasonable fees for access to a database specifically
designed for a scientific, research, or educational program.56  Under the Coali-
tion Proposal, the use of anotherÕs database for scientific or technical researchwould be permitted unless the use directly undermines the incentive to invest in
the original database.57  This model, based on unfair competition law, strongly
acknowledged the value of promoting unfettered scientific research but still of-
fered protection to prevent database rights holders from being the victims of
commercial misappropriation.  Finally, the Coalition Proposal recognized the

fairness of reasonable access charges for databases whose only purpose is for
scientific research.58However, H.R. 354 and, to a lesser extent, the Senate Discussion Draftwould represent a considerable risk for the conduct of research and education.
The nature and value of the products of research frequently are unknown until
well after the research is conducted.  Scientists will not know whether a particular

use of a database under H.R. 354 will affect the Òactual marketÓ for the original or
whether a court will subsequently weigh the factors in such a way as to make the
use privileged.  The Senate Discussion Draft, which allowed not-for-profit scien-

tific research for Òsimilar customary or transformative purposes,Ó still withdrew
the privilege if the ultimate result would be Òlikely to serve as a substituteÓ for the
53 Section 1403(a)(2)(A).
54 Section 1304(a).
55 Section 1304(b).
56 Section 1402(e).
57 Section 1405(4).
58 Section 1402(e).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90A QUESTION OF BALANCEoriginal database.59  Thus, under both of these proposals, a researcher could not
be certain of the authority to utilize anotherÕs database until the results of theresearch were known.  Also, neither a researcher nor any other user would know
with any certainty what the database rights holder might consider to be a quanti-
tatively or qualitatively substantial part of the rights holderÕs database, and therights holder would have every incentive to define its protected domain as broadly

as possible.  This uncertainty could discourage uses that would otherwise occur

under a more privileged access and use provision.
60  Moreover, the 
ÒactualmarketÓ of the originator might be undermined in many ways other than by direct
competition, such as by research demonstrating the original database was inaccu-
rate, was built on false premises, or did not do what it was marketed to do.The uncertain results of research make license transactions for the use ofdatabases intrinsically difficult.  Although a licensor will want to establish a fee

that protects against any reduction in value of the licensorÕs database and thatprovides for sharing in the economic value of the resulting product, not knowing
the value of the research results in advance confounds defining Òthe harm to theoriginal databaseÓ or the database value.
Both H.R. 354 and the Senate Discussion Draft also prevented patterns ofsystematic extraction or uses of individual items of information or other insub-
stantial parts of a database,61 and the H.R. 354 exemption for science was limited
to an Òindividual act of use.Ó62  Both of these limitations failed to reflect the
nature of some scientific research.  For example, the potential for new treatments

for disease represented by the development of databases arising out of the Human
Genome Project is likely to be achieved by the systematic and continuous analy-
sis of the resulting databases rather than by an individual use.  The Coalition

Proposal permitted research using existing databases unless the purpose of the
researcher was direct competition with the database rights holder, an approach
that fosters continuous discovery using databases.63The provisions proposed in H.R. 354 and the Senate Discussion Draft alsoshould be contrasted with the operation of fair use under the Copyright Act.
Copyright fair use, like the H.R. 354 provision, depends on an after-the-fact
balancing of factors to assess whether a subsequent otherwise infringing use is
privileged.  However, copyright law protects only the expression of a protected

work and not the ideas or facts contained therein.  Scientists may freely mine the

world of existing copyright-protected works for the data upon which their re-
search depends, without fear of liability.  One of the significant aspects of a
59 Section 1304(b)(2).
60 See Reichman and Uhlir (1999), note 15, p. 815.
61 Section 1403(b) and section 1303(a), respectively.
62 Section 1403(a)(2).
63 Section 1402(e).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS91databaseÑa collection of factsÑis that it can be difficult to draw the line be-tween facts and expression.  Neither H.R. 354 nor the Senate Discussion Draft

purported to do so, but each prohibited the Òextraction and useÓ of a substantial
part (measured qualitatively or quantitatively) of a database.64  The traditional
methods of scientific researchÑas well as the mining of existing storehouses ofideas or facts (i.e., databases) upon which to build knowledgeÑwould be placedat risk by these proposals.  The Coalition Proposal, in addition to its narrow scope

of initial prohibition, also expressly exempted from protection any Òidea, fact,procedure, system, method of operation, concept, principle or discovery,Ó65 con-
sistent with the Copyright Act.66  This breadth of exemption is also recom-
mended by the committee.Even the limited privileges offered to teachers and researchers in H.R. 354and in the Senate Discussion Draft could be further undermined by the enforce-
ability of contractual limitations on use of databases, or by technical measures
that can prevent uses even if privileged.  Neither H.R. 354 nor the Senate Discus-

sion Draft imposed limits on the ability of a rights holder of a database to impose
additional restrictions on use by contract or technical measures.67  The Senate
Discussion Draft did, however, attempt to temper unreasonable contractual over-
rides, particularly in cases of sole-source databases, by raising the issue of the
potential application of the legal doctrine of misuse in the draft legislative his-
tory68 and by including such issues as part of a required review of the effects of
the legislation69 (see the next section).  The Coalition Proposal, on the other
hand, adopted a ÒmisuseÓ provision, which would authorize courts to deny reliefto a database rights holder if Òpermitted actsÓ of database use are 
Òfrustrated bycontractual arrangements or technological measuresÓ or if 
Òaccess to informationnecessary to researchÓ is prevented.
70As noted above, research and education produce externalities that conferbenefits on society at large.  It is not clear that private parties through contracts

will take these externalities into account when negotiating a license to use an
existing database.  Where this is true, licensors are likely to authorize fewer uses
of their databases than would be socially optimal.  Reliance on private decisions

to ensure widespread availability of scientific and technical data runs the risk of
interfering with research and education.  Therefore, the creation of unprecedented

new federal statutory rights for rights holders of databases must be balanced by64 H.R. 354, section 1402; Hatch Discussion Draft, section 1302.
65 Section 1402(d).
66 See 17 U.S.C., section 102(b).
67 Section 1405(e) in H.R. 354, and section 1306(e) in the Hatch Discussion Draft.
68 Section 1306 of the Proposed Conference Report language, pp. 36-37.
69 See section 4(a), Study Regarding the Effect of the Act.
70 Section 1407(b).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92A QUESTION OF BALANCEsome affirmative duties not to unilaterally override by contract the public-interestexemptions and other permitted uses allowed under any new law.71One approach would be to affirmatively state by legislative provision thattraditional or customary scientific, educational, and research uses could not con-
stitute infringements under unfair competition database legislation.  This would

hold true even if such traditional or customary public-interest uses caused poten-
tial or actual economic harm to the rights holder in a database.  This approach

closely parallels the existing Òfirst saleÓ doctrine in that although current purchas-
ing and subsequent lending of traditional books and journals (such as is done by
libraries) may reduce the sales of these works and allegedly harm the economic
interests of publishers, the sharing of legally acquired works is so important to
societyÕs scientific, educational, and social advancement that the potential oractual harms to authors and publishers are considered inconsequential when bal-
anced against the benefits to society of allowing sharing.  The customary and

traditional practices of the research and educational communities were formed
under the copyright law milieu, which achieved a careful balance of the rights of
rights holders and users over time.  The balance of interests struck by the law in

paper publishing environments has worked well, and an analogous balance has to
be developed in electronic sharing environments, particularly for scientific and
technical databases.It is important that any carved-out rights for traditional and customary scien-tific uses in any legislation that may be adopted not be able to be overridden or
denied to scientists, educators, and other public-interest users through use of
contracts.72  In addition, integrative and derivative uses extending from other
integrative and derivative uses have become one of the major methods of scien-
tific inquiry today.  As discussed in Chapter 1, scientific inquiry involves not

only controlled observation and confirmation based on the published data, infor-
mation, and knowledge from books, journals, and other intellectual works, but
also the mining of electronic data sets that may have been gathered for scientific
or other purposes.  The sifting and winnowing of data and knowledge from all

available sources contribute indispensably to the advancement of knowledge and
the development of yet further derivative databases upon which others may build.
Thus there is a need to minimize the barriers to access and use of facts and
compilations of factual information, not increase them.  It is extremely important
71 For a discussion of proposed 
Òpublic-interest unconscionabilityÓ clauses in licensing agree-
ments for copyrighted works and noncopyrightable databases, see J.H. Reichman and Jonathan A.
Franklin (1999), ÒPrivately Legislated Intellectual Property Rights: Reconciling Freedom of Con-tract with Public Good Uses of Information,Ó U. Penn. L. Rev., Vol. 147, No. 4, pp. 929-951.72 For a discussion of legal and policy issues at the interface of contract law and copyright law see
David Nimmer, Elliot Brown, and Gary N. Frischling (1999), ÒThe Metamorphosis of Contract intoExpand,Ó Cal. L. Rev., Vol. 87, p. 19, and Charles R. McManis (1999), 
ÒThe Privatization (orÒShrink-WrappingÓ) of American Copyright Law,Ó Cal. L. Rev., Vol. 87, p. 1763.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS93that traditional and transformative uses of scientific and technical data be allowedby right without requiring permission of rights holders, similar to the legal situa-
tion for hard-copy documents under the Òfirst saleÓ doctrine.
The Òfair useÓ doctrine under copyright law and the 
Òfirst saleÓ doctrine
apply to all intellectual works and not just to Òtraditional or customary scientific,educational, and research usesÓ as proposed in the paragraphs above.  Thus the
balance between the exclusivity interests of the commercial community and the
openness and sharing interests of the scientific and education communities is not
fully preserved by the proposed legislationÕs exemptions for scientific inquiry.The committee therefore recommends that any new legislation that maybe adopted expressly continue to provide legal rights of access to and uses of
proprietary databases equivalent to those that not-for-profit researchers,
educators, and other public-interest users enjoyed under traditional or cus-
tomary practice prior to enactment.  Courts should be allowed to invalidate

any non-bargained73 licensing terms that are shown to interfere unduly with
otherwise legislatively permitted customary uses by not-for-profit entities.
Additional steps need to be taken by the government and by the research, educa-
tion, and other public-interest communities, however, in the implementation of a
new database protection regime to help ensure that the traditional and customary
rights of public-interest data users are not unduly compromised.  These steps are
discussed in some detail in the section below titled ÒAssessment of Policy Op-tions, with Recommendations for Government Action.ÓPeriodic Assessments of Effects Under Any New StatuteAs pointed out above in this chapter, the Commission of the European Com-munities (CEC) conducted no economic studies of the database industry, or of the
potential effects of different models and provisions, to specifically support the
drafting of the E.U. Database Directive.  The only significant economic analysis

done in the United States with regard to the pending legislation was an article
commissioned by two of the principal supporters of H.R. 354, Reed-Elsevier,
Inc., and the Thompson Corporation.74  While neither the CEC nor the U.S.
Congress has undertaken such studies in advance of their legislative initiatives,
both legislative bodies have implicitly recognized that some negative effects are
likely to be generated by this new legal regime.  The E.U. Directive requires the

CEC to submit to the European Parliament, the Council, and the Economic and
Social Committee of the CEC a report73 By 
Ònon-bargained termÓ the committee means any term, usually contained in a standard form
contract, over which, as a practical matter, no actual bargaining by the parties to the contract takesplace.74 See Tyson and Sherry (1997), note 31.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94A QUESTION OF BALANCE. . . on the application of this Directive, in which, inter alia on the basis ofspecific information supplied by the Member States, it shall examine in particu-lar the application of the sui generis right, including Articles 8 and 9, and shall
verify especially whether the application of this right has led to abuse of domi-nant position or other interference with free competition which would justifyappropriate measures being taken, including the establishment of non-voluntary
licensing arrangements.75Neither H.R. 354 nor its predecessor bills in the House, H.R. 2652 or Title Vof H.R. 2281, had any provision for review of the economic effects of the bill on
competition, consumers, or public-interest users.  In contrast, the Senate Discus-
sion Draft did provide for the conduct of a ÒStudy Regarding the Effect of theActÓ by the General Accounting Office, in consultation with the Register of
Copyrights and the Department of Justice, within 5 years of enactment and every
10 years thereafter.76  The issues for study that the Senate Discussion Draft
would require are fully reproduced below, not only because they represent con-
cerns regarding effects that might arise as a direct consequence of the enactment
of this type of legislation, but also because they form the basis for a core set of
questions that can be addressed independently by those studying the effects of the
bill.(b) ELEMENTS FOR CONSIDERATIONÑThe study conducted undersubsection (a) shall considerÑ(1)The extent to which the ability of persons to engage in the permitted acts
under this Act has been frustrated by contractual arrangements or techno-
logical measures;(2)the extent to which information contained in databases that are the sole
source of the information contained therein is made available through li-
censing or sale on reasonable terms and conditions;(3)the extent to which the license or sale of information contained in data-
bases protected under this Act has been conditioned on the acquisition or
license of any other product or service, or on the performance of anyaction, not directly related to the license or sale;(4)the extent to which the judicially-developed doctrines of misuse in other
areas of the law have been extended to cases involving protection of data-bases under this Act;75 Article 16(3).  Articles 8 and 9, which are referred to in Article 16(3), concern 
ÒRights andobligations of lawful usersÓ and 
ÒExceptions to the sui generis right,Ó respectively.  It should be
noted that until a very last-minute decision by the E.C. Council of Ministers, the proposed Database
Directive contained a mandatory compulsory license for sole-source providers.  See Reichman and
Samuelson (1997), note 39, p. 87.76 Section 4(a).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS95(5)the extent, if any, to which the provisions of this Act constitute a barrier to
entry, or have encouraged entry into, a relevant database market;(6)the extent to which claims have been made that this Act prevented access
to valuable information for research, competition, or innovation purposesand an evaluation of these claims;(7)the extent to which enactment of this Act resulted in the creation of data-
bases that otherwise would not exist; and(8)such other matters necessary to accomplish the purpose of the report.
77This type of monitoring and review of the effects of database protectionlegislation should focus not only on national database activities, but on interna-
tional ones as well, since the market for all online databases is inherently interna-
tional, as are many S&T research activities.  Although the committee believes

that such periodic reviews would be important, particularly if they are not carried
out prior to enactment of any new legislation, there are a number of other aspects
to consider.  There are several government entities that Congress might consider
in addition to, or instead of, the three suggested above, including the Congres-
sional Budget Office, the Department of Commerce, and the Federal Trade Com-
mission, all of which would bring relevant expertise and interests to such a
review.  Also, because of the complexity of the issues to be examined, the rapidly

changing nature of digital information technologies, and the lack of empirical
data to fully support the analysis of these issues, the federal entities charged with
doing the review should consider, in conjunction with the various stakeholder
groups, what kind of data would be desirable to track and should initiate some
means of doing so.  Finally, the committee suggests that instead of an assessment

of effects under the statute, Congress consider enacting a sunset provision that
would take effect after a 5-year period and place the burden of proof and action
on those who would want the legislation to continue.  In light of the concerns

about the possible unintended effects of such legislation, the rapid pace of change
in digital information and network technologies, and the need to exercise due
caution in the enactment of any such legislation, a sunset provision with the
possibility of renewal may be the better option.The committee therefore recommends that any new legislation provideeither for a sunset provision with the possibility to renew, or for periodic
assessments of the effects of new statutory database protection on competi-
tion in the database market and on consumers of databases, as well as on
access to and use of dataÑincluding S&T dataÑby not-for-profit, public-interest users, in order to enable timely and appropriate revisions of legisla-
tion as needed.77 Id., (b).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96A QUESTION OF BALANCEExemptions for Government DatabasesAs discussed throughout this report, S&T databases created either by thegovernment or with government funding provide the largest and, in many scien-
tific areas, the most important source of data for research and education.  More-

over, existing U.S. law and policy prohibit proprietary protection of data or
information created at the federal level, and generally limit such protection at the
state and local levels as well.  Maintaining these exemptions is of crucial impor-

tance, not only to public-interest users of databases in the research and educa-
tional communities but to all citizens.  It therefore is not surprising that all three

legislative proposals attempted to provide broad exemptions for government or
government-funded databases.Nevertheless, there are some notable differences among these proposals.Under H.R. 354, protection provided by the proposed legislation would not ex-
tend to collections of information gathered by or for a governmental entity,
whether federal, state, or local.78  For example, databases compiled by state or
municipal governments in conjunction with their geographic information systems
(GISs) would not be protected, although state and local governments would
retain any copyright, contractual/licensing, trade secret, and technological pro-
tections that currently apply.  H.R. 354 made it clear that the proposed legislation,

and presumably federal copyright law, would preempt conflicting state laws.79This means that state misappropriation laws could not be applied by a state or
local agency in a claim against a commercial business or vice versa.H.R. 354 provided protection for collections of information created by stateand federal educational institutions engaged in the course of education or schol-
arship.80  Relative to civil law suits, the court would be required to reduce or
remit entirely monetary relief Òin any case in which a defendant believed and hadreasonable grounds for believing that his or her conduct was permissible under
this chapter, if the defendant was an employee or agent of a not-for-profit educa-
tional, scientific, or research institution, library, or archives acting within the
scope of his or her employment.Ó81  A similar non-applicability provision would
apply for criminal offenses under that proposed legislation.82  This allowance,
however, is merely an Òinnocent infringerÓ provision; once the not-for-profit
researcher or educator is notified the first time, this immunity would be removed.These liability relief provisions would not apply to state or local governmentagencies under H.R 354.  Thus, if a state or municipal government GIS operation

would use data from a commercial collection of information without permission,78 Section 1404(a)(1).
79 Section 1405(b).
80 Section 1404(a)(1).
81 Section 1406(e).
82 Section 1407(a)(2).
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS97the government operation and employees acting even within the course of theiremployment would be subject to the liability provisions set forth in H.R. 354.
Criminal violations would apply in situations where losses to the commercial com-
pany aggregated to more than $10,000 in a year or if the state or local governmentran its operation for Òdirect or indirect commercial advantage or financial gain.Ó83On the other hand, and again by example, commercial firms extracting govern-ment data from state or municipal GIS operations would not be subject to either
civil or criminal liability provisions under that proposed legislation.Under the Coalition Proposal, prohibitions against duplication would notapply to Ògovernment databases.Ó84  Here, however, 
Ògovernment databaseÓ was
defined as being Òa database (A) that has been collected or maintained by theUnited States of America; or (B) that is required by federal statute or regulation to
be collected or maintained, to the extent so required.Ó85  Under the Coalition
Proposal, state and local governments would gain most of the protections of the
new database legislation, in a manner similar to that of commercial firms, and
could choose to not avail themselves of the proposed legislative provisions at
their option.  This option is similar to the current situation in which many local

governments choose not to seek copyright protection for their public records and
databases.  Under the liability provisions it is also clear that state and local govern-

ments would be in a position similar to that of commercial firms in being able toseek damages from private and government competitors who duplicate their data
and compete with their income streams.  Like H.R. 354, the Coalition Proposal

stated that the new federal legislation would preempt conflicting state laws.The research and education communities generally believe that the greatestbenefits would accrue if state and local governments followed the federal govern-
ment principles of Òa strong freedom of information law, no government copy-right, fees limited to recouping the cost of dissemination, and no restrictions on
reuse.Ó86  This view appears to be gaining currency even in Europe.  A green
paper issued by the Commission of the European Communities in January 1999
comes to the conclusion that public-sector information is a key resource for
Europe and suggests that E.U. nations should more closely follow the model of
U.S. federal government policies with regard to promoting broader access to
government databases.87  Regardless of the merits of providing open access to
83 Section 1407(a)(1).
84 Section 1403(a).
85 Section 1405(5).
86 Peter N. Weiss and Peter Backlund (1997), 
ÒInternational Information Policy in Conflict: Openand Unrestricted Access versus Government Commercialization,Ó in 
Borders in Cyberspace: Infor-mation Policy and the Global Information Infrastructure, Brian Kahin and Charles Nesson, eds.,MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.87 DGXIII (1998), 
Public Sector Information: A Key Resource for Europe, ÒGreen Paper onPublic Sector Information in the Information Society,Ó European Commission, Luxembourg.  Avail-able online at <www.echo.lu/legal/en/access.html>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98A QUESTION OF BALANCEgovernment information, the individual states in the United States traditionallyhave determined which policies they will follow in providing access to their state
and local government information.  The Coalition Proposal appeared to support

continuation of this state and local government self-determination concept.The Senate Discussion Draft more closely paralleled H.R. 354 than it did theCoalition Proposal in its effect on government data collections.  For instance, the

term Ògovernment databasesÓ was again defined to include databases of govern-
ment entities at all levelsÑfederal, state, or local.88 Therefore the protection and
liability ramifications of the Senate Discussion Draft for governments would be
similar in many respects to those of H.R. 354.The Senate Discussion Draft theoretically would allow a library, archive,educational, scientific, or research institution to extract government data con-
tained in a commercial database.89  However, the requester would bear heavy
burdens regarding data identification and proof of need, and the extraction would
be allowed only in the unlikely event that the information was still available in its
original format in the commercial database and separate from other portions of
the commercial database.  The requesting not-for-profit organization also would

need to pay the costs of fulfilling the user request.  From a practical perspective,

it is difficult to envision the ability of libraries and educational institutions to
successfully pursue such extractions.The adoption of a strong standard of harm also could accelerate theprivatization of government data dissemination with potentially negative results,
as noted in Chapter 2.  While privatization of some government functions may,

under appropriate circumstances, produce net benefits, the committee urges cau-
tion in the context of government S&T database privatization in light of the
public-good aspects of the data.90  Because government databases are not and
will not be legally protectable and the governmentÕs policy is to make public databroadly available, any entity can take the original data, add value, and
redisseminate them as it wishes.  In such cases, the original government data are

nonetheless supposed to be (but are not always) maintained and to continue to be
made available by the government source or archive.There are some situations in which the government seeks to transfer the datadissemination function to a private-sector party, whether not-for-profit or com-
mercial, on either a nonexclusive or an exclusive basis.  The benefit of nonexclu-

sive licensing is that several disseminators can compete in the market, and so tend
toward providing access at a reasonable price for end users.  In practice, however,
88 Section 1301(6).
89 Section 1305(b).
90 See National Research Council (1997), 
Bits of Power, note 49, pp. 116-124 for a discussion ofcircumstances in which privatization of the governmentÕs data dissemination function is appropriateand inappropriate.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS99few organizations would be willing to enter into a formal agreement to handle amajor data management and dissemination function on behalf of the government
unless they could see some reasonable opportunity to at least recoup their operat-
ing expenses.  Therefore, most such data management and dissemination func-

tions are performed at university or other not-for-profit institution data centers
that are partly subsidized by the originating government agency and are limited
either by the terms of their agreement with the government or by their institu-
tional charter (or both) to recovering operating costs, but prohibited from earning
a profit.In certain instances, government agencies have given exclusive licenses tocommercial firms for dissemination of government data.91  If the government
agency subsequently does not continue to maintain and make available the origi-
nal database, an exclusive license will result in a monopoly situation, which can
lead to higher prices.  Since stronger statutory database protection is likely to

enhance the potential for profit by commercial data distributors, it also is likely to
encourage the licensing of government data dissemination functions, perhaps on
a de facto exclusive basis and without appropriate safeguards, thus defeating the
existing open access and use law and policy of the U.S. government.  As dis-

cussed in Chapter 2, the negative aspects of this trend are further exacerbated by
other legislative initiatives that require government science agencies to purchase
data from the private sector, rather than generate those same or similar data as a
public good.Finally, the exceptions for instructional and library uses articulated in theSenate Discussion Draft and in H.R. 354 were weak.  Uses by academic institu-

tions and libraries regarded as fair use under the Senate Discussion Draft are
explicitly stated and represent a very narrow and qualified set of activities.92  For
example, display of the contents of a data collection during teaching in a normal
class session that also is viewed by students at a distance enrolled in World Wide
Web-based instruction would be in violation of the provisions of the Senate
Discussion Draft.  Numerous additional impositions on efficient approaches to

instruction were raised by the Senate Discussion Draft; however, H.R. 354 did
not even have a separate exemption for those activities.The Senate Discussion Draft, and especially H.R. 354, focused primarily onstrengthening proprietary protection without adequately balancing the public-
interest, consumer, and commercial competitive values.  The Coalition Proposal,

by attempting to minimize social costs while providing some additional protec-
tion for commercial databases, appeared to arrive at a result that would be far
more acceptable for maintaining the viability and vitality of the academic and91 See the Landsat privatization example discussed in National Research Council (1997), 
Bits ofPower, note 49, pp. 121-123.92 Section 1307.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100A QUESTION OF BALANCEresearch communities upon which innovation and broad-based economic growthultimately depend.The committee thus recommends that although private-sector databasesderived from government data should be eligible for protection, protection
should not be extended to databases collected or maintained by the govern-
ment.  Any new legislation should expressly affirm the need for continuation

of existing legal norms for wide distribution of government data and of data
created pursuant to a government mandate or funding.ASSESSMENT OF POLICY OPTIONS,WITH RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GOVERNMENT ACTIONIn this section the committee discusses a number of actions that should betaken by various government institutions to help promote access to and use of
S&T databases for the public interest.  The areas addressed include promoting

availability of government S&T data;  maintaining nonexclusive rights in gov-

ernment-funded databases by not-for-profit institutions and their employees; or-
ganizing discussions of licensing terms for not-for-profit uses of commercial
S&T databases; improving the understanding of complex economic aspects of
S&T database activities; and promoting international access to S&T data.  Al-though the committee believes that its recommended actions in these areas
ought to be undertaken whether or not any new statutory database protec-
tion is enacted by Congress, all of these actions will take on an increased
urgency and importance if relatively strong new proprietary rights in data-
bases are established by federal statute.Promoting Availability of Government Scientific and Technical DataIncreased proprietary protection for commercial databases could have a sig-nificant effect on government data collection and distribution efforts.  Because

researchers and educators likely would be more constrained in their use of data
drawn from commercial databases, they might have to request additional funds
for the purchase and administration of proprietary data or ask federal agencies to
collect and maintain more S&T data on a nonproprietary basis.  Thus budgetary

strains could increase for federal agencies trying to meet the data needs of their
own researchers as well as those related to fulfilling institutional mandates.Under appropriate circumstances and conditions, government partnering withthe private sectorÑespecially not-for-profit institutionsÑin accomplishing datacollection and maintenance can be highly beneficial and effective.  The commit-
tee fully endorses the existing policy and practice of the federal government, as
expressed through OMB Circular A-130, to make public S&T (and other) data-
bases openly available at the lowest possible prices.  It is through this policy of
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS101efficient-access pricing that the taxpayer derives maximum value from thegovernmentÕs very substantial investments in its collections of data.Consistent with current practice, government S&T agencies must not maketheir databasesÑwhether created and owned by them or under their controlÑavailable on an exclusive basis.  They also should continue to maintain under

their own control and archive all S&T databases that have value for research and
that are otherwise being disseminated on behalf of the government by a private-
sector organization or company.  Such control should be maintained through

physical possession or by appropriate contractual provisions.  The long-term

maintenance of public databases and archiving of data in readily accessible for-
mats are essential to ensure their availability for reuse in future research or to
confirm the results of research already conducted, among other uses.93  Large
quantities of government and government-funded data at all levels are lost, dis-
carded, or rendered inaccessible owing to technological change or defects.  Al-

though this constitutes a major information management and policy issue in its
own right that is beyond the scope of this report, the trend toward greater private-
sector management and dissemination of public dataÑwhich the committee be-lieves would increase under stronger statutory protection of databasesÑmakes iteven more important for government agencies to pay attention to this issue.
Without adequate safeguards to ensure long-term preservation of public data
created or disseminated on behalf of the government by private-sector entities,
even larger amounts of such data may be lost or become inaccessible over time.Finally, in making its data broadly available, the government should requirethat all private-sector disseminators or transformative users of its data identify the
government source(s) of the data being used.  Indeed, the same practice should be

followed with regard to all sources of data from the private sector as well.  Iden-
tifiers on privately disseminated government data will serve the objectives of
providing notice to all users that they can contact the government agency source
to obtain the original data, making the public aware of its governmentÕs activities,and giving proper credit where credit is due.  Improving public awareness is an

important objective, because all too often the public lacks a full appreciation of
the benefits it derives from taxpayer-funded data-related activities.The committee therefore recommends that the following actions be takenby all government entities.  Scientific and technical data owned or controlled

by the government should be made available for use by not-for-profit and
commercial entities alike on a nonexclusive basis and should be dissemi-
nated to all users at no more than the marginal cost of reproduction and
distribution, whenever possible.  While the private sector
Õs creation ofderivative databases from government data should be encouraged, the source
93 See generally National Research Council (1995), 
Preserving Scientific Data on Our PhysicalUniverse: A New Strategy for Archiving Our NationÕs Scientific Resources, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102A QUESTION OF BALANCEof the original government data must ensure that those original data remainopenly available.  Any information product derived from a government da-

tabase also should be required to carry an identifier stating the government
source(s) used.Maintaining Nonexclusive Rights by Not-for-Profits inGovernment-funded DatabasesScience best advances by promoting a culture of openness and sharing,whereas individual commercial companies best advance by maintaining control
and secrecy.  The tension between these two cultures has been attenuated through

the Òfirst saleÓ doctrine, whereby a purchaser of a book, journal, or other intellec-
tual work is free to use the facts and ideas in the work and the publisher is not able
to prevent the purchaser from placing the intellectual work in a library or passing
it on to another person for similar uses, regardless of the medium in which the
work is presented.94  As discussed in Chapter 3, this right is being superseded
increasingly by licensing arrangements in the online digital environment.  In the

academic sector, such institutional licenses typically permit users to share with
collaborators or colleagues on other campuses, so long as the sharing is not
systematic.  In fact, in some cases, universities are now able to negotiate licenses

that Òmeet or exceedÓ their users
Õ needs.
95  Nevertheless, in order to maintain a
reasonable balance between the scientific and education communitiesÕ interests
in openness and sharing, on the one hand, and the commercial communityÕsinterests in exclusivity on the other, some minimal constraints ought to be placed
on the commercial community to guarantee researchers and educators access to
and unfettered use of facts, data, and intellectual works published by their peers.The existing practice in the publication of research results has been forresearchers to pay page charges and to contractually give up exclusive copyright
in their works in order to have their articles published in the primary journals read94 17 U.S.C., section 109.
95 Personal communication from Ann Okerson, Yale University, September 1999.  An example of
this type of licensing language is contained in Academic PressÕs IDEAL license (for 200+ journals):Copying and storing is limited to single copies of a reasonable number of individualitems.  Downloading an entire issue of a journal is not permitted.  However, digital or
print copies may be included in coursepacks and reserves, or in internal corporate training
programs and drug application materials.  Authorized Users may transmit downloaded
copies of individual items to persons who are not Authorized Users for the purpose ofscholarly communication, so long as the transmission is not done on a systematic basis.At the same time, the traditional user rights under the first sale doctrine are in danger of beingsignificantly eroded by the Uniform Computer Information Transactions Act, which is currentlybeing considered for enactment at the state level. See generally, ÒA Guide to the Proposed UniformComputer Information Transactions ActÓ at <www.2bguide.com>.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS103by their peers.  Because authors transfer exclusive copyright in their work, they
may be legally obligated to ask publishers for permission to distribute copies of
their authored articles to their own students and to their close research associates.
As one participant in the committeeÕs January 1999 workshop wryly noted, ÒWehave a great system:  we pay to publish and we pay to get it back.
Ó  In addition,
the pricing structure that seems to maximize profits for commercial scientific
publishers is one that limits acquisition of journals to the elite academic libraries
and researchers that can afford them.96  Many academic institutions now have
difficulty paying library subscription rates, and their researchers, professors, and
students thus lack convenient access to many journals, even to those in which
they publish.Such concerns will only increase as electronic publishing becomes morewidespread.  It is already common practice in electronic publishing
Ñand one ofits tremendously productive featuresÑto link electronic articles to the data setsupon which the research results depend.  If legislation protecting databases is

enacted, the current practice of requiring scientific authors to give up exclusive
rights in their research articles on a take-it-or-leave-it basis could be extended to
the data sets underlying the results reported in the research articles.  Ceding

control of databases created in the not-for-profit sector, especially those created
with taxpayer support, to private-sector vendors that can establish their own
terms for access to and use of the underlying research data is thus a major
concern.  In scientific disciplines where marketplace competition is highly con-

strained or absent, there is a need to provide safeguards against monopolistic
practices.The committee therefore believes it important to initiate a Òsafety netÓ ap-
proach in the digital database context to help preserve the balance previously
provided by the Òfirst saleÓ doctrine.  This approach will help ensure public
access to data and databases developed in whole or in substantial part at federal
government expense.  Databases developed primarily with government funds

should not fall under the exclusive control of private parties such that dissemina-
tion of the data to the public or other scientists is limited.  Nor should public

access to government-funded databases be highly constrained.  The economic

basis for funding science from governmental funds is that the research produces
public goods.  One researcher
Õs use of these public goods does not decrease thevalue and benefits to others of the public goods.Specifically, for any research accomplished wholly or in substantial partwith federal funds, universities and not-for-profit organizations should be re-96 See Association for Research Libraries (1999), 
ARL Statistics:  1997-98
, Martha Kyrillidou etal., eds., Association of Research Libraries, Washington, D.C., also available online at <www.arl.org/
stats/arlstat/1997_t2.html>, showing trends in average rise in costs of serial (journal) subscriptionsbetween 1986 and 1998, pp. 8-9.  For a retrospective look at these issues see <www.lib.virginia.edu/mellon/mellon.html>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104A QUESTION OF BALANCEquired by the funding agency to retain nonexclusive rights in any resulting data-bases.  Under OMB Circular A-110, federal grant recipients have initial control

over the intellectual property and databases that have been produced from their
federally funded projects.97  The primary concern under a new statutory regime
is the inequality in bargaining power between large publishers and individual
researchers and scientific authors.  Based on past practices, the committee is

concerned that many researchers may be required to give up exclusive rights in
the databases produced at federal expense in return for having their research
results published.If new database legislation is enacted, publishers may request rights in boththe intellectual work (i.e., typically the journal article), as well as rights to the
collected data sets from which the intellectual work arose or upon which the work
may depend and which might usefully be linked to the article in electronic pub-
lishing environments.  If the negotiated contract provides for reasonable access to

and use of the government-funded data for further scientific work, it is unlikely
that the right of the researcher to independently provide access to the govern-
ment-funded data would ever have to be invoked.  However, the proposed provi-

sion provides a safety mechanism.  The retained right of the researcher to distrib-

ute the data is likely to be invoked only in the unusual situation in which data
gathered through a federally funded project or grant have been transferred through
contract from an academic institution to a commercial entity with highly con-
strained access to and use of the data.This approach has a relatively narrow application.  The proposed require-
ment would not apply generally to copyrighted works that may have been pro-
duced using federal funds (e.g., research articles), nor would it apply to state or
local government databases or to databases generally.  The requirement also

would not automatically apply to databases created with only partial (e.g., less
than half) funding from the federal government, unless specifically agreed to by
the parties.  The provision would allow not-for-profit institutions and researchers

to share underlying federally funded data with others regardless of contract pro-
visions with the private sector, but would impose no affirmative requirement on
them to share such data.  Universities and other not-for-profits, of course, could

not distribute any value-added features provided by the private-sector publisher
to the government data unless agreed to by contract with that entity or otherwise
permitted by law.Based on the foregoing discussion, the committee recommends that fed-eral funding agencies should require university and other not-for-profit re-
searchers or their employing institutions that use federal funds, wholly or in97 Office of Management and Budget (1997), Circular A-110, 
ÒUniform Administrative Require-ments for Grants and Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Not-for-profit Organizations,Ó revised November 19, 1993; as further amended August 29, 1997.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS105substantial part, in creating databases not to grant exclusive rights to suchdatabases when submitting them for publication or for incorporation into
other databases.Organizing Discussions of Licensing Terms for Not-for-Profit Usesof Commercial Scientific and Technical DatabasesWhether or not new database protection legislation is adopted, the committeebelieves that representatives from the not-for-profit research and education com-
munities should engage in a series of discussions with commercial database
publishers and vendors in different market segments in order to achieve a better
understanding of their respective needs and concerns and thus foster the develop-
ment of mutually acceptable licensing terms that can reduce uncertainty and
transaction costs.  Such discussions would be especially important in the months
and years immediately after enactment of a any new federal database statute,
since there would be many definitions and concepts that would not have been
fully defined and that would be subject to broadly divergent interpretations by
different parties.  One person
Õs legitimate derivative use may be anotherÕs harm-ful infringement.Previously established guidelines or understandings concerning copyrightedworks will not in most cases be transferable to the database context and therefore
will most likely confuse user communities, without the benefit of a fresh set of
clarifying discussions.  Further complications will arise if currently copyrighted

works, such as journals, textbooks, reference books, and other anthologies, are
also included in the definition of protected databases or Òcollections of informa-tionÓ under any new U.S. legislation, as they already are in the European Union.
In addition to promoting some mutual understanding regarding licensing terms,
clarifying discussions might help prevent unnecessary conflicts and litigation. It is unrealistic to assume that a model contract or even standard individual
contract terms could be developed to cover all or perhaps even most such transac-
tions.  As discussed in Chapter 1, a key characteristic of S&T data is the hetero-

geneity of data types, sources, and uses.  The expectation of developing a one-

size-fits-all approach would be not only illusory and impossible, but also
ultimately harmful.  To avoid becoming futile, discussions among stakeholders

must be founded on realistic and well-focused objectives that would have a
reasonable chance of success.In establishing such discussions, it is essential that representatives of allmajor stakeholders be involved so that all relevant interests and viewpoints can
be considered.  For example, the committee would not endorse a process such as
the one that resulted in the ÒAgreement on Guidelines for Classroom Copying.Ó9898 For a history of academic fair use and classroom guidelines, see Kenneth D. Crews (1993),
Copyright, Fair Use and the Challenge of Universities, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106A QUESTION OF BALANCEThat agreement has perhaps been workable for campus administrators, campuslibraries, and the photocopying centers on campuses, but not for students and
faculty, who were not involved as stakeholders in the discussions.  Examples of

both classroom guidelines99 and of existing digital licensing terms and phrases,
and their evaluation from the not-for-profit perspective,100 may be found online
on the World Wide Web already.Private-sector S&T database producers and disseminators should remain cog-nizant of the social value of their products, particularly for not-for-profit re-
search, education, and other public-interest uses.  Database vendors whose pri-

mary source of revenue lies outside the not-for-profit S&T communities should
endeavor to provide public-interest users access to their databases on favorable
terms.  Database vendors whose primary source of revenue is in the S&T research

and education community should be encouraged to provide access on favorable
terms once a reasonable return on investment has been achieved.Indeed, as noted in Chapter 2, all pricing inhibits access, especially for thoseresearchers who do not have adequate and strong institutional funding, whether
academic, research institute, or industrial.  Of course, the limitations are a matter

of degree, depending on level and pattern of pricing.  The goal should be to bring

all sectors into a cooperative system in which data are made widely and readily
available for scientific and educational use at as low a total cost (to the user
population and society as a whole) as possible, and to do that within an environ-
ment that encourages, rather than inhibits, the inquisitiveness and inventiveness
of the user while encouraging the entrepreneurship of suppliers.  It is in the

common interest of both database rights holders and usersÑand of society gener-allyÑto achieve a workable balance among the respective interests so that alllegitimate rights remain reasonably protected.The participants in these discussions would be primarily representatives ofcommercial S&T database disseminators and their government agency and not-
for-profit-sector users.  The committee makes its recommendation to the admin-

istration, rather than directly to those communities, however, because it believes
that the discussions should be held under a convener such as the Copyright
Office, which has the greatest subject matter expertise in these issues within the
government.  Such a focused venue would not only help stimulate progress on

important issues, but would also mitigate the potential for accusations of collu-
sion or conspiracy under federal antitrust laws.  The committee therefore rec-
ommends that the Copyright Office sponsor discussions between the repre-
sentatives of private-sector producers of databases and user stakeholder
representatives from government agencies and not-for-profit groups to help99 Some examples of classroom guidelines may be found online at <fairuse.stanford.edu/library/
index.html>.100 See <www.library.yale.edu>, and type 
ÒlicensingÓ in the 
ÒSearchÓ box.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS107develop a common understanding and optimal terms for the licensing ofS&T databases and data products.Improving the Understanding of Complex Economic Aspectsof Scientific and Technical Database ActivitiesAlthough a detailed economic analysis is well beyond the scope of thecommitteeÕs charge for this study, this report raises significant questions through-out regarding the adoption of statutory database protection; the economic under-
pinnings of different types and mixes of provisions, and the potential effects of
both an overall statutory regime and specific provisions on various segments of
the database industry and on the relationships among the different parties in-
volved in creating, disseminating, and using S&T databases.  Certainly, at a

minimum, the questions raised in the E.U. Database Directive and in the Senate
Discussion Draft, as well as any other questions that are ultimately identified in
the course of the legislative process, should be the subject of more detailed study
in advance of any legislatively mandated report on effects of increased protec-
tion.  Such a study would help provide a comprehensive base of knowledge with
which to officially evaluate the effects of new statutory protection of databases.
In addition to these broad economic issues, the committee suggests that research
be devoted to, among others, the following specific issues affecting the creation,
dissemination, and use of S&T databases by the government and by the not-for-
profit and for-profit sectors:1.  Is there an increase in the number of databases available that can be
related to (caused or affected by) an increase in database protection?2.  Is there an increase in the costs (or a reduction in the amount) of scientific
research that can be related to an increase in database protection?3.  What is the role of licensing restrictions on access to and use of databases
for research and education activities and what are the effects?4.  What are the effects of sole-source databases on S&T niche markets and
on the level of scientific research?5.  What are the trends in privatization of government S&T data, and what
effects has privatization had on access to and use of such data?6.  What have been the effects of the E.U. Database Directive on access to
and use of European S&T data by the European research and education commu-
nity, and by the U.S. government and by the U.S. research and education commu-
nity?The committee recommends that the Congressional Research Service,the National Science Foundation, the Department of Commerce, and other
federal science agencies, as considered appropriate, should undertake and
fund external research that investigates the changing and complex economicA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108A QUESTION OF BALANCEaspects of S&T database activities, particularly in the context of any newlegislative database protection measures that may be enacted and in support
of the legislative principle recommended above regarding the conduct of
periodic assessments of the effects of any new statutory protection of data-
bases.Promoting International Access to Scientific and Technical DataIt is a well-known truism that science knows no boundaries and that practi-cally all research that is conducted on an open basis also involves international
collaboration to some degree.  Some research, such as that in observational space

and Earth sciences, is inherently international and cannot be conducted success-
fully without either the collection of global data or access to foreign databases.101As a result, the U.S. government science agencies in recent decades have con-
cluded thousands of bilateral and multilateral general S&T cooperation and spe-
cific research program agreements.102 These agreements will take on added sig-
nificance with the implementation of the E.U. Database Directive and with
possible adoption of restrictive database protection legislation in the United States
and elsewhere, since the negotiated terms of those agreements can specify the
terms under which databases related to the research in question can be accessed
and used.  As the world
Õs largest producer and disseminator of S&T data, the U.S.government has significant leverage in negotiating appropriate terms for the ex-
change and use of public data with other nations.At the same time, the committee agrees with the AdministrationÕs concernsregarding the E.U. DirectiveÕs reciprocity provision and supports the U.S. TradeRepresentativeÕs (USTRÕs) placement of that topic on the AdministrationÕs 1998Special 301 Review.103  The committee would go one step further, however, and
suggest that the USTR and other appropriate entities within the Administration
negotiate with the Commission of the European Communities to review and
revise its E.U. Directive, based on the substantial criticisms of that new legal
regime in this report and in other position statements and articles cited above.  If
the U.S. Congress enacts a new database protection statute based on properly
balanced unfair competition principles, the committee urges the USTR, the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office, and other appropriate administration officials to101 For example, for a comprehensive listing of most internationally available data sets fromspace missions, see the NASA Goddard Space Flight CenterÕs National Space Science Data Centerhome page online at <nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov>. For a listing of many international Web sites coveringall aspects of Earth science data, see the NASA Global Change Master Directory online at <http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/pointers/pointwais.html>.102 For a discussion of some of the large international research programs, see National ResearchCouncil (1997), Bits of Power, note 49, pp. 58-61.103 See Pincus statement, March 18, 1999, Hearing, note 7, p. 33.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS109promote that statute as a model for international database protection within theWorld Intellectual Property Organization.The committee recommends that all departments and agencies of thefederal government should continue to adopt international S&T agreements
that include provisions to facilitate access to S&T data across national bound-
aries and should conduct periodic reviews of international policies and agree-
ments to promote conformity to the above principles.In addition, the committee recommends that the U.S. government shouldnegotiate with the Commission of the European Communities to revise its
highly protectionist E.U. Database Directive.RECOMMENDED APPROACH FOR THE NOT-FOR-PROFITSCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COMMUNITYFinally, there is the question of what the research and education communityshould do in the event that highly restrictive statutory protection of databases is
enacted by Congress.  Certainly, leaders in all the major not-for-profit research,

higher education, and library associations and in many individual institutions
have voiced their concerns about the legislative proposals that have been intro-
duced in the Committee on the Judiciary in the House of Representatives in both
the 105th and 106th Congress.104  As the various critics and this report point out,
such a new statutory regime could have many negative effects, among them
significant changes in the terms for access to and use of databases sold or licensed
by the commercial sector, the possibility of increased economic exploitation on a
proprietary basis of heretofore openly available S&T databases by not-for-profit
researchers and educators and their institutions, and the stimulation of further
privatization of such public-good activities by the government.The question thus raised is what actions the not-for-profit community shouldtake on its own behalf if restrictive new provisions are enacted that encourage or
exacerbate these negative effects.  Proponents of new legislation rightly point out

that any new law would not require individuals or organizations to make use of
the new protections, and that if the not-for-profits are concerned about these legal
developments as a matter of principle, they should resist the temptation to adopt
proprietary restrictions on their databases.  The committee agrees that much of

the responsibility for maintaining a policy of full and open data availability in the
academic community rests with the community, which will have to act to ensure
continuation of the broad sharing of data and research results.  Nevertheless, the
104 See the testimony given by Wulf, Reichman, and Neal at the October 23, 1997, Hearing, note8; by Stewart at the February 12, 1998, Hearing, note 9; and by Lederberg, Phelps, and Neal at theMarch 18, 1999, Hearing, note 29.  See also the position statement signed by representatives of many
of these organizations, note 7.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110A QUESTION OF BALANCEcommittee also believes that the pressures to commercialize and privatize cur-rently open data sources would increase inevitably under a regime such as the
E.U. Directive or the one proposed by H.R. 354, and that fully maintaining the
customary or traditional approaches to data exchange would prove to be difficult.
In the event that the universe of public domain S&T data is found to be shrinking
unacceptably, additional defensive measures may have to be taken to reinvigorate
a robust public-interest sector for such data.Therefore, as its last recommendation, the committee urges that the not-for-profit S&T community continue to promote and adhere to the policy of
full and open exchange of data at both the national and international levels.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111Appendixes
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.113APPENDIX ABiographical Sketches of
Committee Members113STUDY COMMITTEEROBERT J. SERAFIN (chair) is the director of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR).  Dr. Serafin began his career at Hazeltine Re-

search Corporation where he worked on the design and development of high-
resolution radar systems.  This was followed by 10 years at the IIT Research

Institute and Illinois Institute of Technology.  He then joined NCAR as manager

of the Field Observing Facility in 1973 and in 1980 became director of the
Atmospheric Technology Division, which is responsible for all of NCARÕs ob-
servational research and research support facilities, used by scientists in universi-
ties and laboratories throughout the world.  In 1989 he was appointed as NCARÕs

director.  The holder of three patents, Dr. Serafin has published approximately 50

technical and scientific papers and established the Journal of Atmospheric andOceanic Technology, and was its co-editor for several years. He has served onseveral National Research Council (NRC) panels and committees, and he chaired
the NRC committee on National Weather Service Modernization.  He is a mem-

ber of the National Academy of Engineering, a fellow of the American Meteoro-
logical Society, and a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.  Dr. Serafin received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in electrical

engineering from Notre Dame University, Northwestern University, and Illinois
Institute of Technology, respectively.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114APPENDIX AI. TROTTER HARDY is professor of law at the College of William &
Mary School of Law, where he specializes in intellectual property law, law and
computers, and tort law.  He recently wrote a major report, 
ÒSketching the Futureof Copyright in a Networked World,Ó for the Copyright Office and has published
extensively on issues relating to intellectual property law in the digital environ-
ment.  Mr. Hardy holds a BA from the University of Virginia, an MS from

American University, and a JD from Duke University, Order of the Coif.MAUREEN C. KELLY is vice president for planning at BIOSIS, the larg-
est abstracting and indexing service for the life sciences community.  She has

worked in different capacities for BIOSIS since 1969.  Previously she had pro-

duction responsibility for the bibliographic and scientific content of BIOSIS
products.  While in that position, she led the team that developed the system for

capturing and managing indexing data in support of BIOSISÕs new relationalindexing.  Ms. Kelly has authored a number of papers on managing and accessing

biological information.  She is currently secretary of the American Association

for the Advancement of Science Section on Information, Computing, and Com-
munication.  She has served on various professional society research and publish-

ing committees, including participating in the National Academy of Sciences E-
Journal Summit meetings over the past two years.  Ms. Kelly has a BA degree

from Rutgers University.PETER R. LEAVITT is a consultant and former chairman and chief execu-
tive officer of Weather Services Corp., where he has developed online real-time
meteorological databases for national and international agricultural and commod-
ity services.  He has a BS in meteorology from the Massachusetts Institute of

Technology.  Mr. Leavitt served previously on two NRC committees, as well as

on several government advisory committees regarding data use and research
issues in meteorology.LEE E. LIMBIRD is associate vice chancellor for research at Vanderbilt
University and chair of the Department of Pharmacology.  Her responsibilities as

associate vice chancellor include development of new intra- and interinstitutional
initiatives for research, with a focus on research development in genetics and
genomics; neuroscience; and structural biology, broadly defined to include bio-
physics and bioengineering.  The Office of Grants Management and Technology
Transfer also represents areas of her responsibility.  Dr. Limbird received a BA in

chemistry from the College of Wooster and a PhD in biochemistry from the
University of North Carolina.  Her area of research has been in the molecular

pathways of signal transduction by G Protein-coupled receptors using biochemi-
cal, cellular, and genetic strategies, including genetically modified mice.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A115PHILIP LOFTUS is vice president and director of Worldwide Information
Services Architecture and Technology for Glaxo Wellcome where he is respon-
sible for both the information services infrastructure and global information man-
agement.  From 1996 to 1998, he served as vice president and director of World-

wide R&D Information Systems and was responsible for developing and
implementing a global information system strategy for R&D.  Prior to that, he

was executive director for Research Information Systems at Merck Research
Laboratories, and from 1976 to 1993 he was a vice president for R&D Informa-
tion Systems and a computational scientist at ICI.  Dr. Loftus has a BSc in

chemistry and a PhD in conformational isomerism from the University of
Liverpool, and he was a Fullbright Hayes Postdoctoral Fellow at the California
Institute of Technology in 1974-1975.  He holds a postgraduate certificate in

education from the University of Liverpool.  He has published extensively in the
area of information technology applications for pharmaceutical research.HARLAN J. ONSRUD is professor in the Department of Spatial Informa-
tion Science and Engineering at the University of Maine and a research scientist
with the National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA).  He

received BS and MS degrees in civil engineering from the University of Wiscon-
sin and a JD from the University of Wisconsin Law School.  His research focuses

on (1) analysis of legal and institutional issues affecting the creation and use of
digital databases and the sharing of geographic information, (2) assessing utiliza-
tion of GIS and the social impacts of the technology, and (3) developing and
assessing strategies for supporting the diffusion of geographic information inno-
vations.  Mr. Onsrud has co-led major multiyear NCGIA research initiatives on

the use and value of geographic information, institutions sharing geographic
information, and law, information policy, and spatial databases.  Mr. Onsrud is a
licensed engineer, lawyer, and land surveyor.HARVEY S. PERLMAN is a professor of law and former dean of the
University of Nebraska College of Law.  He is an expert in trademark law and

unfair competition law.  In addition to writing many articles in these areas, Mr.

Perlman has co-authored Legal Regulation of the Competitive Process: Cases,Materials and Notes on Unfair Business Practices, which is now in its sixthedition under the title Intellectual Property and Unfair Competition (1998).  He
also was the co-reporter for the American Law InstituteÕs Restatement (Third) ofUnfair Competition and is a member of the National Conference of Commission-
ers on Uniform State Laws, which has been considering changes to the Uniform
Commercial Code Article 2(B) regarding private contracts for intellectual prop-
erty.  Mr. Perlman received his BA and JD from the University of Nebraska in

1963 and 1966, respectively.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116APPENDIX AROBERTA P. SAXON is a patent agent at Skjerven, Morrill, MacPherson,Franklin & Friel, LLP, a law firm specializing in intellectual property in San Jose,
California.  Prior to that, she was director of the chemistry laboratory at SRI

International, where she supervised research in advanced materials, atmospheric
chemistry, computational chemistry, and atomic, molecular, and optical physics
and performed research in those areas for more than 20 years.  Dr. Saxon has a

BA in chemistry from Cornell University and an MS and a PhD in chemical
physics from the University of Chicago.  She is vice chair of the Panel on Public
Affairs for the American Physical Society, and she previously served on an NRC
study for a research strategy for atomic, molecular, and optical sciences.SUZANNE SCOTCHMER is a professor of economics and public policy atthe University of California, Berkeley.  Her broad fields of research are in eco-

nomic theory and industrial organization, with current emphasis on intellectual
property, particularly as it relates to cumulative innovations, digital content, and
decentralized mechanisms by which firms share information.  Dr. Scotchmer

received her PhD in economics from the University of California, Berkeley in
1980 and her MA in statistics in 1979.MARK STEFIK is a principal scientist at the Xerox Palo Alto ResearchCenter, where he focuses on trusted system approaches for creating, protecting,
and reusing digital property in the network context.  His current and past research

activities include research on reasoning with constraints, and paradigms of pro-
gramming, as well as applications of artificial intelligence and computer science
to problems in molecular genetics, VLSI circuit design, configuration of com-
puter systems, and systems for supporting collaborative processes in work groups.
Dr. StefikÕs book, Internet Dreams: Archetypes, Myths, and Metaphors, waspublished by MIT Press in 1996.  Dr. Stefik received his BS and PhD from

Stanford University.MARTHA E. WILLIAMS is director of the Information Retrieval Re-
search Lab and a professor of Information Science at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.  Her research interests include digital database management,

online retrieval systems, systems analysis and design, chemical information sys-
tems, and electronic publishing.  She has published widely on these topics and

has been editor of the Annual Review of Information Sciences and Technology(since 1975), Computer Readable Databases: A Directory & Data Sourcebook(1976-1987), and Online Review (since 1977).  Professor Williams was chair of
the Board of Engineering Information, Inc., from 1980 to 1988, was appointed to
the National Library of MedicineÕs Board of Regents from 1978 to 1981 andserved as chair of the board in 1981.  In addition, she served on several NRC

committees, including the Numerical Data Advisory Board (1979-1982).  She has

an AB from Barat College and an MA from Loyola University.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A117STUDY DIRECTORPAUL F. UHLIR is director of international scientific and technical infor-
mation programs at the U.S. National Academy of Sciences/National Research
Council (National Academies) in Washington, D.C., where he directs science and
technology policy studies for the federal government.  His current area of empha-

sis is issues at the interface of science, technology, and law, with primary focus
on scientific data and information policy, and on the relationship of intellectual
property law to R&D policy.  Mr. Uhlir is also director of the U.S. National

Committee for CODATA.  From 1991 to 1998, he was associate executive direc-

tor of the Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications, and
from 1985 to 1991 he was senior program officer at the Space Studies Board,
where he worked on solar system exploration and Earth remote sensing studies
for NASA. Before joining the National Academies, he was a foreign affairs
officer at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the Depart-
ment of Commerce, where he worked on meteorological and land remote sensing
law and policy issues. He is the author or editor of more than 50 books, reports,
and articles. Mr. Uhlir has a BA in history from the University of Oregon, and a
JD and an MA in international relations from the University of San Diego.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118WORKSHOP AGENDAThursday, January 148:00 amContinental breakfast8:30A. Introductory remarksRobert Serafin, Study Chair8:45Keynote AddressQ. Todd Dickinson

Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks (Acting), Department ofCommerceB. Summary of S&T databases to be discussed at the workshop9:00Geographic Data PanelModerator: Harlan Onsrud, Associate Professor, University of Maine
¥Government-sector data activity:  Barbara Ryan, AssociateDirector for Operations, U.S. Geological Survey, Department
of the InteriorAPPENDIX BWorkshop Agenda and Participants
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B119¥Not-for-profit sector data activity:  James Brunt, AssociateDirector for Information Management, Long-Term Ecological
Research Network Office, University of New Mexico1¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Barry Glick, former Presidentand CEO, GeoSystems Global Corp.9:45Genomic Data PanelModerator: Philip Loftus, Vice President and Director, Glaxo Wellcome
¥Government-sector data activity:  James Ostell, Chief,Information Engineering Branch, National Center for
Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health¥Not-for-profit-sector data activity:  Chris Overton, Director,Center for Bioinformatics, University of Pennsylvania¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Myra Williams, President andCEO, Molecular Applications Group10:30Break10:45Chemical and Chemical Engineering Data PanelModerator: Roberta Saxon, Patent Agent, Skjerven, Morrill,MacPherson, et al.¥Government-sector data activity:  Richard Kayser, Chief, Physicaland Chemical Properties Division, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Department of Commerce¥Not-for-profit-sector data activity:   
James Lohr, Director,Information Industry Relations, Chemical Abstracts Service,
American Chemical Society¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Leslie Singer, President, ISI, Inc.11:30Meteorological Data PanelModerator: Robert Serafin, Director, National Center for AtmosphericResearch¥Government-sector data activity:  Ken Hadeen, Director (retired),National Climatic Data Center, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce¥Not-for-profit-sector data activity:  David Fulker, Director,Unidata Program, University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research1 Dr. Brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120APPENDIX B¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Robert Brammer, VicePresident and Chief Technology Officer, TASC12:15 pmLunch1:15C.  Economic factors in production/dissemination/use of S&T
databases in the public and private sectors
Moderator:Suzanne Scotchmer, Professor, UC Berkeley

Speaker:Richard Gilbert, Professor, UC Berkeley
2:15D.  Overview of technologies for protecting and misappropriating
digital IPR: the current situation and future prospects
Moderator:Mark Stefik, Principal Scientist, Xerox PARC

Speaker:Teresa Lunt, Principal Scientist, Xerox PARC (by video)2:45Break3:00E.1  Summary overview of existing and proposed IPR regimes
for databases
¥The status quo

¥Sui generis property rights model
¥Unfair competition/misappropriation model

Moderator:Harvey Perlman, Professor, College of Law, University
of NebraskaSpeaker:Marybeth Peters, Register of Copyrights, Library of
Congress3:45E.2  Summary of federal government information law and data
policies
Speaker:Justin Hughes, Attorney, Patent and Trademark Office,
Department of Commerce4:00F.  Breakout sessions on the existing legal and technical situation
4:15Individual breakout sessions1) Government-sector data panelModerator:Shelton Alexander, Professor, Pennsylvania State
UniversityRapporteur:Suzanne Scotchmer, Professor, UC Berkeley

Panelists:¥Barbara Ryan, Associate Director of Operations,U.S. Geological SurveyA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B121¥James Ostell, Chief, Information EngineeringBranch, National Center for Biotechnology
Information, NLM/NIH¥Richard Kayser, Chief, Physical and ChemicalProperties Division, National Institute of Standards
and Technology¥Kenneth Hadeen, Director (retired), NationalClimatic Data Center2) Not-for-profit-sector data panelModerator:Maureen Kelly, Vice President for Planning, BIOSIS

Rapporteur:Jerome Reichman, Professor, Vanderbilt University
School of LawPanelists:¥James Brunt, Associate Director for InformationManagement, Long-Term Ecological Research
Network Office, University of New Mexico2¥Chris Overton, Director, Center for Bioinformatics,University of Pennsylvania¥James Lohr, Director, Information IndustryRelations, Chemical Abstracts Service, American
Chemical Society¥David Fulker, Director, Unidata Program, UCAR3) Commercial-sector data panelModerator:Robert Serafin, Director, National Center for
Atmospheric ResearchRapporteur:Mark Stefik, Principal Scientist, Xerox PARC

Panelists:
¥Barry Glick, former President and CEO,GeoSystems Global Corp.¥Myra Williams, President and CEO, MolecularApplications Group¥Leslie Singer, President, ISI, Inc.¥Robert Brammer, Vice President and ChiefTechnology Officer, TASC5:45Adjourn5:45 -6:45 pm
Reception2 Dr. Brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122APPENDIX BFriday, January 158:00 amContinental breakfast8:30G.  Summary reports by rapporteurs from previous day
Õsbreakouts9:20H.  Instructions by workshop chair and move to breakout rooms
9:30I.   Breakout sessions
Session 1:Congress decides to enact a strong property rights
model protecting databases
Moderator:Paul Uhlir, Study Director, National Research Council

Rapporteur:Peter Leavitt, Consultant

Panelists:¥Ken Hadeen, Director (retired), National ClimaticData Center¥David Fulker, Director, Unidata Program, UCAR¥Robert Brammer, Vice President and ChiefTechnology Officer, TASC¥Jon Baumgarten, Attorney, Proskauer Rose LLP¥Peter Jaszi, Professor, American University Schoolof Law¥James Neal, Director, Johns Hopkins UniversityLibrary¥Ferris Webster, Professor, University of DelawareSession 2:Congress decides to enact an unfair competition
model protecting databases
Moderator:Harvey Perlman, Professor, College of Law, University
of NebraskaRapporteur:Philip Loftus, Vice President and Director, Glaxo
WellcomePanelists:¥Dennis Benson, Chief Information ResourcesBranch, National Center for Biotechnology
Information, NLM/NIH¥Chris Overton, Director, Center for Bioinformatics,University of Pennsylvania¥Myra Williams, President and CEO, MolecularApplications Group¥Michael Klipper, Attorney, Meyer & Klipper, PLLC¥Jonathan Band, Attorney, Morrison & Foerster, LLPA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B123¥Thomas Rindfleisch, Director, Medical Library,Stanford UniversitySession 3:Promoting access to and use of government S&T
data for the public interestÑan assessment of legal and policyoptions
Moderator:Harlan Onsrud, Associate Professor, University of MaineRapporteur:Shelton Alexander, Professor, Pennsylvania State
UniversityPanelists:¥Barbara Ryan, Associate Director for Operations,U.S. Geological Survey3¥James Brunt, Associate Director for InformationManagement, Long-Term Ecological Research
Network Office, University of New Mexico4¥Barry Glick, former President and CEO,GeoSystems Global Corp.¥Peter Weiss, Senior Policy Analyst, Office ofManagement and Budget5¥Prue Adler, Assistant Executive Director, FederalRelations and Information Policy, Association of
Research Libraries¥Eric Massant, Director of Government and IndustryAffairs, Reed Elsevier, Inc.¥Tim Foresman, Director, Spatial Analysis Lab,University of Maryland¥Kenneth Frazier, Director, University of WisconsinLibrariesSession 4:Promoting access to and use of not-for-profit-sector
S&T data for the public interestÑan assessment of legal andpolicy options
Moderator:Martha Williams, Professor and Director, Information
Retrieval Research Lab, University of Illinois at
Urbana-ChampaignRapporteur:Roberta Saxon, Patent Agent, Skjerven, Morrill,
MacPherson et al.Panelists:¥Richard Kayser, Chief, Physical and ChemicalProperties Division, NIST3 Ms. Ryan was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.
4 Dr. Brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.
5 Mr. Weiss was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124APPENDIX B¥James Lohr, Director, Information IndustryRelations, Chemical Abstracts Service, American
Chemical Society¥Leslie Singer, President, ISI, Inc.¥Allan Adler, Vice President for Governmental andLegislative Affairs, Association of American
Publishers, Inc.6¥Jerome Reichman, Professor, Vanderbilt UniversitySchool of Law¥R. Stephen Berry, Professor, University of Chicago10:45Break11:00Breakout session discussions (continued)12:45 pmLunch1:45J.  Rapporteurs
Õ summary of breakout panel results
2:45Discussion of results with workshop participants3:45K.  Concluding remarks
Robert Serafin, Chair4:00 pm
End of public workshopWORKSHOP PARTICIPANTSAllan Adler, Association of American Publishers, Inc.Prue Adler, Association of Research Libraries
Shelton Alexander, Pennsylvania State University
Dave Applegate (affiliation unknown)
Christopher Ashley, National Science Foundation
Mary Baish, American Association of Law
Jonathan Band, Morrison & Foerster, LLP
Winona Barker, National Biomedical Research Foundation
Ed Barron, Senate Committee on the Judiciary
Barbara Bauldock, U.S. Geological Survey
Jon Baumgarten, Proskauer Rose, LLP6 Mr. Adler was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B125Dennis Benson, National Library of MedicineR. Stephen Berry, University of Chicago
Robert Brammer, TASC

Lisa Brooks, National Institutes of Health
Francis Buckley, Jr., U.S. Government Printing Office

Mark Burnham, California Institute of Technology
Bonnie Carroll, Information International Associates, Inc.
William Cohen, Federal Trade Commission
Kathy Covert, Federal Geographic Data Committee
Karen Dacres, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Judge Edward Damich, U.S. Court of Federal Claims
Matthew Davis (affiliation unknown)
Deveny Deck, Vanderbilt University
Paul DeGiusti, Information Industry Association
Q. Todd Dickinson, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Anita Eisenstadt, National Science Foundation
Adam Eisgrau, American Library Association
Julie Esanu, National Research Council
Bob Etkins, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Eric Fischer, Library of Congress
Peter Folger, American Geophysical Union
Tim Foresman, University of Maryland
Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
Kenneth Frazier, University of Wisconsin Libraries
David Fulker, University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
Carole Ganz-Brown, National Science Foundation
Richard Gilbert, University of California, Berkeley
Paul Gilman, Celera Genomics, Inc.
Barry Glick, Consultant
Kenneth Hadeen, National Climatic Data Center (retired)
Kelley Heilman, Maryland State Department of Health
Stephen Heinig, Association of American Medical Colleges
Stephen Heller, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Mike Hoffman (affiliation unknown)
Justin Hughes, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Peter Jaszi, American University School of Law
Brian Kahin, Office of Science and Technology Policy
Richard Kayser, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Chris Kelly, U.S. Department of Justice
Maureen Kelly, BIOSIS
Michael Keplinger, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Ehsan Khan, U.S. Department of Energy
Michael Klipper, Meyer & Klipper, PLLCA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126APPENDIX BMakoto Kono, Fujitsu, Ltd.Stephen Koslow, National Institute of Mental Health
Patrice Laget, Delegation of the European Commission
Richard Lambert, National Institutes of Health
Charles Larson, Industrial Research Institute, Inc.
Peter Leavitt, Consultant
Robert Ledley, Georgetown University
Lynn Levine, Warren Publishing
David Lide, Consultant
Anne Linn, National Research Council
Joan Lippincott, Coalition for Networked Information
Philip Loftus, Glaxo Wellcome
James Lohr, Chemical Abstracts Service
Joe Martinez, U.S. Department of Energy
Eric Massant, Reed Elsevier, Inc.
Stephen Maurer, Attorney
Gilles McDougall, Industry Canada
Bruce McDowell, National Academy of Public Administration
Shelia McGarr (affiliation unknown)
Theodore Miles, National Science Foundation
John Moeller, U.S. Geological Survey
Christopher Mohr, Meyer & Klipper, PLLC
Kurt Molholm, Defense Technical Information Center
James Neal, Johns Hopkins University Library
Judge Pauline Newman, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
Goetz Oertel, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
Harlan Onsrud, University of Maine
James Ostell, National Institutes of Health
G. Christian Overton, University of Pennsylvania
Bob Palmer, U.S. House of Representatives
Harvey Perlman, University of Nebraska
Shira Perlmutter, U.S. Copyright Office
Marybeth Peters, U.S. Copyright Office
Larry Pettinger, U.S. Geological Survey
Tony Reichardt, NatureJerome Reichman, Vanderbilt University School of Law
Thomas Rindfleisch, Stanford University
Hedy Rossmeissl, U.S. Geological Survey
John Rumble, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Barbara Ryan, U.S. Geological Survey
Carolina Saez, U.S. Copyright Office
Roberta Saxon, Skjerven, Morrill, MacPherson, Franklin & Friel, LLP
Terri Scanlan, National Research CouncilA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B127Jean Schiro-Zavela, National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationHarold Schoolman, National Library of Medicine
Suzanne Scotchmer, University of California, Berkeley
Robert Serafin, National Center for Atmospheric Research
Leslie Singer, Institute for Scientific Information, Inc.
Mark Smith, American Association of University Professors
Mark Stefik, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center

Charles Sturrock, National Institute of Standards and Technology

Ambassador James Sweeney, Consultant
Margaret Thomson, U.S. Department of Energy
Paul Uhlir, National Research Council
John Vaughn, Association of American Universities
Ferris Webster, University of Delaware
Peter Weiss, Office of Management and Budget
Pamela Whitney, National Research Council
Martha Williams, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Myra Williams, Molecular Applications Group
James Wilson, House Committee on Science

Richard Witmer, U.S. Geological Survey
Barbara Wright, National Research Council
Susan Zevin, National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128Part IÑWorkshop Presentations1Introductory Remarks
Robert Serafin2Keynote Address
Q. Todd Dickinson3Characteristics of Scientific and Technical Databases
Geographic Data Panel
Genomic Data Panel
Chemical and Chemical Engineering Data Panel
Meteorological Data Panel4Economic Factors in the Production, Dissemination, and
Use of Scientific and Technical DatabasesRichard GilbertAPPENDIX CWorkshop 
Proceedings
ÑListing of ContentsNOTE:  For the full text of the committee
Õs Proceedings, see National Research Council (1999),Proceedings of the Workshop on Promoting Access to Scientific and Technical Data for the PublicInterest:  An Assessment of Policy Options, 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., availableonly online at < http://www.nap.edu>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C1295Overview of Technologies for Protecting and for Misappropriating
Digital Intellectual Property Rights: The Current Situation and
Future ProspectsMark Stefik and Teresa Lunt6Legal and Policy Issues
Summary Overview of Existing and Proposed Intellectual Property RightsRegimes for Databases, Marybeth PetersSummary of Federal Government Information Law and DataPolicies, Justin HughesPart IIÑDiscussion Sessions on the Current Legal and Technical Situation7Government-Sector Data

8Not-for-Profit-Sector Data

9Commercial-Sector Data

Part IIIÑDiscussion Sessions on the Potential Impacts of Legislation andAssessments of Policy Options10A Strong Property Rights Model for Protecting Databases

11An Unfair Competition Model for Protecting Databases

12Promoting Access to and Use of Government-Sector Scientific and
Technical DataÑAn Assessment of Legal and Policy Options13Promoting Access to and Use of Not-for-Profit-Sector Scientific and
Technical Data for the Public InterestÑAn Assessment of Legal andPolicy Options14Final Plenary Discussion

Appendixes
ABiographical Sketches of Study Committee and Workshop Speakers and
PanelistsBWorkshop Agenda and Participants

CRaw Knowledge: Protecting Technical Databases for Science and Industry,
Stephen M. Maurer, Attorney-at-LawDAcronyms
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130DIRECTIVE 96/9/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCILof 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databasesTHE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEANUNION,Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular
Article 57 (2), 66 and 100a thereof,Having regard to the proposal from the Commission (1),Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee (2),
Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 189b of the Treaty (3),(1) Whereas databases are at present not sufficiently protected in all Member Statesby existing legislation; whereas such protection, where it exists, has different
attributes;(2) Whereas such differences in the legal protection of databases offered by thelegislation of the Member States have direct negative effects on the functioning of the
internal market as regards databases and in particular on the freedom of natural andlegal persons to provide on-line database goods and services on the basis ofharmonized legal arrangements throughout the Community; whereas such differencesAppendix DEuropean Union Directive on the Legal
Protection of DatabasesNOTE: An official version of this document can be found online at the EUR-LEX Web site at<http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/lif/dat/1996/en_396L0009.html>.The material presented in this appendix has been reprinted from electronic files available on theInternet and is intended for use as a general reference, and not for legal research or other workrequiring authenticated primary sources.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D131could well become more pronounced as Member States introduce new legislation inthis field, which is now taking on an increasingly international dimension;(3) Whereas existing differences distorting the functioning of the internal market need
to be removed and new ones prevented from arising, while differences not adverselyaffecting the functioning of the internal market or the development of an informationmarket within the Community need not be removed or prevented from arising;
(4) Whereas copyright protection for databases exists in varying forms in theMember States according to legislation or case-law, and whereas, if differences inlegislation in the scope and conditions of protection remain between the Member
States, such unharmonized intellectual property rights can have the effect ofpreventing the free movement of goods or services within the Community;(5) Whereas copyright remains an appropriate form of exclusive right for authors
who have created databases;(6) Whereas, nevertheless, in the absence of a harmonized system ofunfair-competition legislation or of case-law, other measures are required in addition
to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of the contents of adatabase;(7) Whereas the making of databases requires the investment of considerable human,
technical and financial resources while such databases can be copied or accessed ata fraction of the cost needed to design them independently;(8) Whereas the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of the contents of a
database constitute acts which can have serious economic and technicalconsequences;(9) Whereas databases are a vital tool in the development of an information market
within the Community; whereas this tool will also be of use in many other fields;
(10) Whereas the exponential growth, in the Community and worldwide, in theamount of information generated and processed annually in all sectors of commerceand industry calls for investment in all the Member States in advanced information
processing systems;(11) Whereas there is at present a very great imbalance in the level of investment inthe database sector both as between the Member States and between the
Community and the worldÕs largest database-producing third countries;(12) Whereas such an investment in modern information storage and processingsystems will not take place within the Community unless a stable and uniform legal
protection regime is introduced for the protection of the rights of makers ofdatabases;(13) Whereas this Directive protects collections, sometimes called ÔcompilationsÕ, ofworks, data or other materials which are arranged, stored and accessed by meanswhich include electronic, electromagnetic or electro-optical processes or analogousprocesses;
(14) Whereas protection under this Directive should be extended to covernon-electronic databases;(15) Whereas the criteria used to determine whether a database should be protected
by copyright should be defined to the fact that the selection or the arrangement of thecontents of the database is the authorÕs own intellectual creation; whereas suchprotection should cover the structure of the database;A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132APPENDIX D(16) Whereas no criterion other than originality in the sense of the authorÕs intellectualcreation should be applied to determine the eligibility of the database for copyrightprotection, and in particular no aesthetic or qualitative criteria should be applied;
(17) Whereas the term ÔdatabaseÕ should be understood to include literary, artistic,
musical or other collections of works or collections of other material such as texts,sound, images, numbers, facts, and data; whereas it should cover collections of
independent works, data or other materials which are systematically or methodicallyarranged and can be individually accessed; whereas this means that a recording or anaudiovisual, cinematographic, literary or musical work as such does not fall within the
scope of this Directive;(18) Whereas this Directive is without prejudice to the freedom of authors to decidewhether, or in what manner, they will allow their works to be included in a database,
in particular whether or not the authorization given is exclusive; whereas theprotection of databases by the sui generis right is without prejudice to existing rightsover their contents, and whereas in particular where an author or the holder of a
related right permits some of his works or subject matter to be included in adatabase pursuant to a non-exclusive agreement, a third party may make use ofthose works or subject matter subject to the required consent of the author or of the
holder of the related right without the sui generis right of the maker of the databasebeing invoked to prevent him doing so, on condition that those works or subjectmatter are neither extracted from the database nor re-utilized on the basis thereof;
(19) Whereas, as a rule, the compilation of several recordings of musicalperformances on a CD does not come within the scope of this Directive, bothbecause, as a compilation, it does not meet the conditions for copyright protection
and because it does not represent a substantial enough investment to be eligible
under the sui generis right;(20) Whereas protection under this Directive may also apply to the materialsnecessary for the operation or consultation of certain databases such as thesaurus
and indexation systems;(21) Whereas the protection provided for in this Directive relates to databases inwhich works, data or other materials have been arranged systematically or
methodically; whereas it is not necessary for those materials to have been physicallystored in an organized manner;(22) Whereas electronic databases within the meaning of this Directive may also
include devices such as CD-ROM and CD-i;(23) Whereas the term ÔdatabaseÕ should not be taken to extend to computer
programs used in the making or operation of a database, which are protected by
Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the legal protection of computerprograms (4);(24) Whereas the rental and lending of databases in the field of copyright and related
rights are governed exclusively by Council Directive 92/100/EEC of 19 November1992 on rental right and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright in thefield of intellectual property (5);
(25) Whereas the term of copyright is already governed by Council Directive93/98/EEC of 29 October 1993 harmonizing the term of protection of copyright andcertain related rights (6);A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D133(26) Whereas works protected by copyright and subject matter protected by relatedrights, which are incorporated into a database, remain nevertheless protected by therespective exclusive rights and may not be incorporated into, or extracted from, the
database without the permission of the rightholder or his successors in title;(27) Whereas copyright in such works and related rights in subject matter thusincorporated into a database are in no way affected by the existence of a separate
right in the selection or arrangement of these works and subject matter in a database;(28) Whereas the moral rights of the natural person who created the database belongto the author and should be exercised according to the legislation of the Member
States and the provisions of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary andArtistic Works; whereas such moral rights remain outside the scope of this Directive;(29) Whereas the arrangements applicable to databases created by employees are
left to the discretion of the Member States; whereas, therefore nothing in thisDirective prevents Member States from stipulating in their legislation that where adatabase is created by an employee in the execution of his duties or following the
instructions given by his employer, the employer exclusively shall be entitled toexercise all economic rights in the database so created, unless otherwise provided bycontract;
(30) Whereas the authorÕs exclusive rights should include the right to determine theway in which his work is exploited and by whom, and in particular to control thedistribution of his work to unauthorized persons;
(31) Whereas the copyright protection of databases includes making databasesavailable by means other than the distribution of copies;(32) Whereas Member States are required to ensure that their national provisions
are at least materially equivalent in the case of such acts subject to restrictions as are
provided for by this Directive;(33) Whereas the question of exhaustion of the right of distribution does not arise inthe case of on-line databases, which come within the field of provision of services;
whereas this also applies with regard to a material copy of such a database made bythe user of such a service with the consent of the rightholder; whereas, unlikeCD-ROM or CD-i, where the intellectual property is incorporated in a material
medium, namely an item of goods, every on-line service is in fact an act which willhave to be subject to authorization where the copyright so provides;(34) Whereas, nevertheless, once the rightholder has chosen to make available a
copy of the database to a user, whether by an on-line service or by other means ofdistribution, that lawful user must be able to access and use the database for thepurposes and in the way set out in the agreement with the rightholder, even if such
access and use necessitate performance of otherwise restricted acts;(35) Whereas a list should be drawn up of exceptions to restricted acts, taking intoaccount the fact that copyright as covered by this Directive applies only to the
selection or arrangements of the contents of a database; whereas Member Statesshould be given the option of providing for such exceptions in certain cases; whereas,however, this option should be exercised in accordance with the Berne Convention
and to the extent that the exceptions relate to the structure of the database; whereasa distinction should be drawn between exceptions for private use and exceptions forreproduction for private purposes, which concerns provisions under national
legislation of some Member States on levies on blank media or recording equipment;A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134APPENDIX D(36) Whereas the term Ôscientific researchÕ within the meaning of this Directive
covers both the natural sciences and the human sciences;(37) Whereas Article 10 (1) of the Berne Convention is not affected by this
Directive;(38) Whereas the increasing use of digital recording technology exposes thedatabase maker to the risk that the contents of his database may be copied and
rearranged electronically, without his authorization, to produce a database ofidentical content which, however, does not infringe any copyright in the arrangementof his database;
(39) Whereas, in addition to aiming to protect the copyright in the original selectionor arrangement of the contents of a database, this Directive seeks to safeguard theposition of makers of databases against misappropriation of the results of the
financial and professional investment made in obtaining and collection [sic] the contentsby protecting the whole or substantial parts of a database against certain acts by a useror competitor;
(40) Whereas the object of this sui generis right is to ensure protection of anyinvestment in obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents of a database for thelimited duration of the right; whereas such investment may consist in the deployment
of financial resources and/or the expending of time, effort and energy;(41) Whereas the objective of the sui generis right is to give the maker of a databasethe option of preventing the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of all or a
substantial part of the contents of that database; whereas the maker of a database isthe person who takes the initiative and the risk of investing; whereas this excludessubcontractors in particular from the definition of maker;
(42) Whereas the special right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization
relates to acts by the user which go beyond his legitimate rights and thereby harm theinvestment; whereas the right to prohibit extraction and/or re-utilization of all or asubstantial part of the contents relates not only to the manufacture of a parasitical
competing product but also to any user who, through his acts, causes significantdetriment, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the investment;(43) Whereas, in the case of on-line transmission, the right to prohibit re-utilization is
not exhausted either as regards the database or as regards a material copy of thedatabase or of part thereof made by the addressee of the transmission with theconsent of the rightholder;
(44) Whereas, when on-screen display of the contents of a database necessitates thepermanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of such contents toanother medium, that act should be subject to authorization by the rightholder;
(45) Whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization doesnot in any way constitute an extension of copyright protection to mere facts or data;(46) Whereas the existence of a right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or
re-utilization of the whole or a substantial part of works, data or materials from adatabase should not give rise to the creation of a new right in the works, data ormaterials themselves;
(47) Whereas, in the interests of competition between suppliers of informationproducts and services, protection by the sui generis right must not be afforded insuch a way as to facilitate abuses of a dominant position, in particular as regards the
creation and distribution of new products and services which have an intellectual,A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D135documentary, technical, economic or commercial added value; whereas, therefore,the provisions of this Directive are without prejudice to the application of Communityor national competition rules;
(48) Whereas the objective of this Directive, which is to afford an appropriate anduniform level of protection of databases as a means to secure the remuneration of themaker of the database, is different from the aim of Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movementof such data (7), which is to guarantee free circulation of personal data on the basis
of harmonized rules designed to protect fundamental rights, notably the right toprivacy which is recognized in Article 8 of the European Convention for theProtection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; whereas the provisions of
this Directive are without prejudice to data protection legislation;(49) Whereas, notwithstanding the right to prevent extraction and/or re-utilization ofall or a substantial part of a database, it should be laid down that the maker of a
database or rightholder may not prevent a lawful user of the database from extractingand re-utilizing insubstantial parts; whereas, however, that user may not unreasonablyprejudice either the legitimate interests of the holder of the sui generis right or the
holder of copyright or a related right in respect of the works or subject mattercontained in the database;(50) Whereas the Member States should be given the option of providing for
exceptions to the right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of asubstantial part of the contents of a database in the case of extraction for privatepurposes, for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, or where
extraction and/or re-utilization are/is carried out in the interests of public security or
for the purposes of an administrative or judicial procedure; whereas such operationsmust not prejudice the exclusive rights of the maker to exploit the database and theirpurpose must not be commercial;
(51) Whereas the Member States, where they avail themselves of the option topermit a lawful user of a database to extract a substantial part of the contents for thepurposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, may limit that permission to
certain categories of teaching or scientific research institution;(52) Whereas those Member States which have specific rules providing for a rightcomparable to the sui generis right provided for in this Directive should be permitted
to retain, as far as the new right is concerned, the exceptions traditionally specifiedby such rules;(53) Whereas the burden of proof regarding the date of completion of the making of
a database lies with the maker of the database;(54) Whereas the burden of proof that the criteria exist for concluding that asubstantial modification of the contents of a database is to be regarded as a
substantial new investment lies with the maker of the database resulting from suchinvestment;(55) Whereas a substantial new investment involving a new term of protection may
include a substantial verification of the contents of the database;(56) Whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization inrespect of a database should apply to databases whose makers are nationals or
habitual residents of third countries or to those produced by legal persons notA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136APPENDIX Destablished in a Member State, within the meaning of the Treaty, only if such thirdcountries offer comparable protection to databases produced by nationals of aMember State or persons who have their habitual residence in the territory of the
Community;(57) Whereas, in addition to remedies provided under the legislation of the MemberStates for infringements of copyright or other rights, Member States should provide
for appropriate remedies against unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of thecontents of a database;(58) Whereas, in addition to the protection given under this Directive to the structure
of the database by copyright, and to its contents against unauthorized extractionand/or re-utilization under the sui generis right, other legal provisions in the MemberStates relevant to the supply of database goods and services continue to apply;
(59) Whereas this Directive is without prejudice to the application to databasescomposed of audiovisual works of any rules recognized by a Member StateÕslegislation concerning the broadcasting of audiovisual programmes;
(60) Whereas some Member States currently protect under copyright arrangementsdatabases which do not meet the criteria for eligibility for copyright protection laiddown in this Directive; whereas, even if the databases concerned are eligible for
protection under the right laid down in this Directive to prevent unauthorizedextraction and/or re-utilization of their contents, the term of protection under thatright is considerably shorter than that which they enjoy under the national
arrangements currently in force; whereas harmonization of the criteria for determiningwhether a database is to be protected by copyright may not have the effect ofreducing the term of protection currently enjoyed by the rightholders concerned;
whereas a derogation should be laid down to that effect; whereas the effects of such
derogation must be confined to the territories of the Member States concerned,HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:CHAPTER ISCOPEArticle 1
Scope1. This Directive concerns the legal protection of databases in any form.
2. For the purposes of this Directive, ÔdatabaseÕ shall mean a collection of
independent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodicalway and individually accessible by electronic or other means.
3. Protection under this Directive shall not apply to computer programs used in themaking or operation of databases accessible by electronic means.Article 2Limitations on the scopeThis Directive shall apply without prejudice to Community provisions relating to:A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D137(a) the legal protection of computer programs;(b) rental right, lending right and certain rights related to copyright in the field ofintellectual property;
(c) the term of protection of copyright and certain related rights.CHAPTER II
COPYRIGHTArticle 3Object of protection1. In accordance with this Directive, databases which, by reason of the selection orarrangement of their contents, constitute the authorÕs own intellectual creation shall beprotected as such by copyright. No other criteria shall be applied to determine their
eligibility for that protection.2. The copyright protection of databases provided for by this Directive shall notextend to their contents and shall be without prejudice to any rights subsisting in
those contents themselves.Article 4
Database authorship1. The author of a database shall be the natural person or group of natural persons
who created the base or, where the legislation of the Member States so permits, the
legal person designated as the rightholder by that legislation.2. Where collective works are recognized by the legislation of a Member State, theeconomic rights shall be owned by the person holding the copyright.
3. In respect of a database created by a group of natural persons jointly, theexclusive rights shall be owned jointly.Article 5Restricted actsIn respect of the expression of the database which is protectable by copyright, theauthor of a database shall have the exclusive right to carry out or to authorize:(a) temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or
in part;(b) translation, adaptation, arrangement and any other alteration;(c) any form of distribution to the public of the database or of copies thereof. The
first sale in the Community of a copy of the database by the rightholder or with hisconsent shall exhaust the right to control resale of that copy within the Community;(d) any communication, display or performance to the public;
(e) any reproduction, distribution, communication, display or performance to thepublic of the results of the acts referred to in (b).A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138APPENDIX DArticle 6Exceptions to restricted acts1. The performance by the lawful user of a database or of a copy thereof of any ofthe acts listed in Article 5 which is necessary for the purposes of access to thecontents of the databases and normal use of the contents by the lawful user shall not
require the authorization of the author of the database. Where the lawful user isauthorized to use only part of the database, this provision shall apply only to thatpart.
2. Member States shall have the option of providing for limitations on the rights setout in Article 5 in the following cases:(a) in the case of reproduction for private purposes of a non-electronic database;
(b) where there is use for the sole purpose of illustration for teaching or scientificresearch, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenon-commercial purpose to be achieved;
(c) where there is use for the purposes of public security of [sic] for the purposes of anadministrative or judicial procedure;(d) where other exceptions to copyright which are traditionally authorized under
national law are involved, without prejudice to points (a), (b) and (c).3. In accordance with the Berne Convention for the protection of Literary andArtistic Works, this Article may not be interpreted in such a way as to allow its
application to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices the rightholderÕslegitimate interests or conflicts with normal exploitation of the database.CHAPTER IIISUI GENERIS RIGHTArticle 7Object of protection1. Member States shall provide for a right for the maker of a database which showsthat there has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in eitherthe obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to prevent extraction and/or
re-utilization of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluated qualitatively and/orquantitatively, of the contents of that database.2. For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) ÔextractionÕ shall mean the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial
part of the contents of a database to another medium by any means or in any form;(b) Ôre-utilizationÕ shall mean any form of making available to the public all or a
substantial part of the contents of a database by the distribution of copies, by renting,by on-line or other forms of transmission. The first sale of a copy of a databasewithin the Community by the rightholder or with his consent shall exhaust the right to
control resale of that copy within the Community;Public lending is not an act of extraction or re-utilization.3. The right referred to in paragraph 1 may be transferred, assigned or granted under
contractual licence.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D1394. The right provided for in paragraph 1 shall apply irrespective of the eligibility ofthat database for protection by copyright or by other rights. Moreover, it shall applyirrespective of eligibility of the contents of that database for protection by copyright
or by other rights. Protection of databases under the right provided for in paragraph1 shall be without prejudice to rights existing in respect of their contents.5. The repeated and systematic extraction and/or re-utilization of insubstantial parts
of the contents of the database implying acts which conflict with a normal exploitationof that database or which unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the makerof the database shall not be permitted.Article 8Rights and obligations of lawful users1. The maker of a database which is made available to the public in whatever mannermay not prevent a lawful user of the database from extracting and/or re-utilizing
insubstantial parts of its contents, evaluated qualitatively and/or quantitatively, for anypurposes whatsoever. Where the lawful user is authorized to extract and/or re-utilizeonly part of the database, this paragraph shall apply only to that part.
2. A lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in whatevermanner may not perform acts which conflict with normal exploitation of the databaseor unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the maker of the database.
3. A lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in any mannermay not cause prejudice to the holder of a copyright or related right in respect of theworks or subject matter contained in the database.Article 9Exceptions to the sui generis rightMember States may stipulate that lawful users of a database which is made availableto the public in whatever manner may, without the authorization of its maker, extractor re-utilize a substantial part of its contents:
(a) in the case of extraction for private purposes of the contents of a non-electronicdatabase;(b) in the case of extraction for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific
research, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenon-commercial purpose to be achieved;(c) in the case of extraction and/or re-utilization for the purposes of public security or
an administrative or judicial procedure.Article 10
Term of protection1. The right provided for in Article 7 shall run from the date of completion of the
making of the database. It shall expire fifteen years from the first of January of theyear following the date of completion.2. In the case of a database which is made available to the public in whatever manner
before expiry of the period provided for in paragraph 1, the term of protection byA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140APPENDIX Dthat right shall expire fifteen years from the first of January of the year following thedate when the database was first made available to the public.3. Any substantial change, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the contents of
a database, including any substantial change resulting from the accumulation ofsuccessive additions, deletions or alterations, which would result in the databasebeing considered to be a substantial new investment, evaluated qualitatively or
quantitatively, shall qualify the database resulting from that investment for its ownterm of protection.Article 11Beneficiaries of protection under the sui generis right1. The right provided for in Article 7 shall apply to database [sic] whose makers orrightholders are nationals of a Member State or who have their habitual residence inthe territory of the Community.
2. Paragraph 1 shall also apply to companies and firms formed in accordance withthe law of a Member State and having their registered office, central administrationor principal place of business within the Community; however, where such a
company or firm has only its registered office in the territory of the Community, itsoperations must be genuinely linked on an ongoing basis with the economy of aMember State.
3. Agreements extending the right provided for in Article 7 to databases made inthird countries and falling outside the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall beconcluded by the Council acting on a proposal from the Commission. The term of
any protection extended to databases by virtue of that procedure shall not exceed
that available pursuant to Article 10.CHAPTER IV
COMMON PROVISIONSArticle 12RemediesMember States shall provide appropriate remedies in respect of infringements of therights provided for in this Directive.Article 13Continued application of other legal provisionsThis Directive shall be without prejudice to provisions concerning in particularcopyright, rights related to copyright or any other rights or obligations subsisting inthe data, works or other materials incorporated into a database, patent rights, trade
marks, design rights, the protection of national treasures, laws on restrictive practicesand unfair competition, trade secrets, security, confidentiality, data protection andprivacy, access to public documents, and the law of contract.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D141Article 14Application over time1. Protection pursuant to this Directive as regards copyright shall also be available inrespect of databases created prior to the date referred to Article 16 (1) which onthat date fulfil the requirements laid down in this Directive as regards copyright
protection of databases.2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where a database protected under copyrightarrangements in a Member State on the date of publication of this Directive does not
fulfil the eligibility criteria for copyright protection laid down in Article 3 (1), thisDirective shall not result in any curtailing in that Member State of the remaining termof protection afforded under those arrangements.
3. Protection pursuant to the provisions of this Directive as regards the right providedfor in Article 7 shall also be available in respect of databases the making of whichwas completed not more than fifteen years prior to the date referred to in Article 16
(1) and which on that date fulfil the requirements laid down in Article 7.4. The protection provided for in paragraphs 1 and 3 shall be without prejudice toany acts concluded and rights acquired before the date referred to in those
paragraphs.5. In the case of a database the making of which was completed not more thanfifteen years prior to the date referred to in Article 16 (1), the term of protection by
the right provided for in Article 7 shall expire fifteen years from the first of Januaryfollowing that date.Article 15Binding nature of certain provisionsAny contractual provision contrary to Articles 6 (1) and 8 shall be null and void.Article 16Final provisions1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions necessary to comply with this Directive before 1 January 1998.
When Member States adopt these provisions, they shall contain a reference to thisDirective or shall be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their officialpublication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member
States.2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the provisions ofdomestic law which they adopt in the field governed by this Directive.
3. Not later than at the end of the third year after the date referred to in paragraph 1,and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the EuropeanParliament, the Council and the Economic and Social Committee a report on the
application of this Directive, in which, inter alia, on the basis of specific informationsupplied by the Member States, it shall examine in particular the application of the suigeneris right, including Articles 8 and 9, and shall verify especially whether theA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142APPENDIX Dapplication of this right has led to abuse of a dominant position or other interferencewith free competition which would justify appropriate measures being taken,including the establishment of non-voluntary licensing arrangements. Where
necessary, it shall submit proposals for adjustment of this Directive in line withdevelopments in the area of databases.Article 17This Directive is addressed to the Member States.Done at Strasbourg, 11 March 1996.For the European ParliamentThe President
K. H•NSCHFor the CouncilThe President
L. DINI(1) OJ No C 156, 23. 6. 1992, p. 4 andOJ No C 308, 15. 11. 1993, p. 1.(2) OJ No C 19, 25. 1. 1993, p. 3.(3) Opinion of the European Parliament of 23 June 1993 (OJ No C 194, 19. 7.
1993, p. 144), Common Position of the Council of 10 July 1995 (OJ No C 288, 30.10. 1995, p. 14), Decision of the European Parliament of 14 December 1995 (OJNo C 17, 22 1. 1996) and Council Decision of 26 February 1996.
(4) OJ No L 122, 17. 5. 1991, p. 42. Directive as last amended by Directive
93/98/EEC (OJ No L 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.)(5) OJ No L 346, 27. 11. 1992, p. 61.(6) OJ No L 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.
(7) OJ No L 281, 23. 11. 1995, p. 31.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118WORKSHOP AGENDAThursday, January 148:00 amContinental breakfast8:30A. Introductory remarksRobert Serafin, Study Chair8:45Keynote AddressQ. Todd Dickinson

Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks (Acting), Department ofCommerceB. Summary of S&T databases to be discussed at the workshop9:00Geographic Data PanelModerator: Harlan Onsrud, Associate Professor, University of Maine
¥Government-sector data activity:  Barbara Ryan, AssociateDirector for Operations, U.S. Geological Survey, Department
of the InteriorAPPENDIX BWorkshop Agenda and Participants
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B119¥Not-for-profit sector data activity:  James Brunt, AssociateDirector for Information Management, Long-Term Ecological
Research Network Office, University of New Mexico1¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Barry Glick, former Presidentand CEO, GeoSystems Global Corp.9:45Genomic Data PanelModerator: Philip Loftus, Vice President and Director, Glaxo Wellcome
¥Government-sector data activity:  James Ostell, Chief,Information Engineering Branch, National Center for
Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health¥Not-for-profit-sector data activity:  Chris Overton, Director,Center for Bioinformatics, University of Pennsylvania¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Myra Williams, President andCEO, Molecular Applications Group10:30Break10:45Chemical and Chemical Engineering Data PanelModerator: Roberta Saxon, Patent Agent, Skjerven, Morrill,MacPherson, et al.¥Government-sector data activity:  Richard Kayser, Chief, Physicaland Chemical Properties Division, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Department of Commerce¥Not-for-profit-sector data activity:   
James Lohr, Director,Information Industry Relations, Chemical Abstracts Service,
American Chemical Society¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Leslie Singer, President, ISI, Inc.11:30Meteorological Data PanelModerator: Robert Serafin, Director, National Center for AtmosphericResearch¥Government-sector data activity:  Ken Hadeen, Director (retired),National Climatic Data Center, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce¥Not-for-profit-sector data activity:  David Fulker, Director,Unidata Program, University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research1 Dr. Brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120APPENDIX B¥Commercial-sector data activity:  Robert Brammer, VicePresident and Chief Technology Officer, TASC12:15 pmLunch1:15C.  Economic factors in production/dissemination/use of S&T
databases in the public and private sectors
Moderator:Suzanne Scotchmer, Professor, UC Berkeley

Speaker:Richard Gilbert, Professor, UC Berkeley
2:15D.  Overview of technologies for protecting and misappropriating
digital IPR: the current situation and future prospects
Moderator:Mark Stefik, Principal Scientist, Xerox PARC

Speaker:Teresa Lunt, Principal Scientist, Xerox PARC (by video)2:45Break3:00E.1  Summary overview of existing and proposed IPR regimes
for databases
¥The status quo

¥Sui generis property rights model
¥Unfair competition/misappropriation model

Moderator:Harvey Perlman, Professor, College of Law, University
of NebraskaSpeaker:Marybeth Peters, Register of Copyrights, Library of
Congress3:45E.2  Summary of federal government information law and data
policies
Speaker:Justin Hughes, Attorney, Patent and Trademark Office,
Department of Commerce4:00F.  Breakout sessions on the existing legal and technical situation
4:15Individual breakout sessions1) Government-sector data panelModerator:Shelton Alexander, Professor, Pennsylvania State
UniversityRapporteur:Suzanne Scotchmer, Professor, UC Berkeley

Panelists:¥Barbara Ryan, Associate Director of Operations,U.S. Geological SurveyA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B121¥James Ostell, Chief, Information EngineeringBranch, National Center for Biotechnology
Information, NLM/NIH¥Richard Kayser, Chief, Physical and ChemicalProperties Division, National Institute of Standards
and Technology¥Kenneth Hadeen, Director (retired), NationalClimatic Data Center2) Not-for-profit-sector data panelModerator:Maureen Kelly, Vice President for Planning, BIOSIS

Rapporteur:Jerome Reichman, Professor, Vanderbilt University
School of LawPanelists:¥James Brunt, Associate Director for InformationManagement, Long-Term Ecological Research
Network Office, University of New Mexico2¥Chris Overton, Director, Center for Bioinformatics,University of Pennsylvania¥James Lohr, Director, Information IndustryRelations, Chemical Abstracts Service, American
Chemical Society¥David Fulker, Director, Unidata Program, UCAR3) Commercial-sector data panelModerator:Robert Serafin, Director, National Center for
Atmospheric ResearchRapporteur:Mark Stefik, Principal Scientist, Xerox PARC

Panelists:
¥Barry Glick, former President and CEO,GeoSystems Global Corp.¥Myra Williams, President and CEO, MolecularApplications Group¥Leslie Singer, President, ISI, Inc.¥Robert Brammer, Vice President and ChiefTechnology Officer, TASC5:45Adjourn5:45 -6:45 pm
Reception2 Dr. Brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122APPENDIX BFriday, January 158:00 amContinental breakfast8:30G.  Summary reports by rapporteurs from previous day
Õsbreakouts9:20H.  Instructions by workshop chair and move to breakout rooms
9:30I.   Breakout sessions
Session 1:Congress decides to enact a strong property rights
model protecting databases
Moderator:Paul Uhlir, Study Director, National Research Council

Rapporteur:Peter Leavitt, Consultant

Panelists:¥Ken Hadeen, Director (retired), National ClimaticData Center¥David Fulker, Director, Unidata Program, UCAR¥Robert Brammer, Vice President and ChiefTechnology Officer, TASC¥Jon Baumgarten, Attorney, Proskauer Rose LLP¥Peter Jaszi, Professor, American University Schoolof Law¥James Neal, Director, Johns Hopkins UniversityLibrary¥Ferris Webster, Professor, University of DelawareSession 2:Congress decides to enact an unfair competition
model protecting databases
Moderator:Harvey Perlman, Professor, College of Law, University
of NebraskaRapporteur:Philip Loftus, Vice President and Director, Glaxo
WellcomePanelists:¥Dennis Benson, Chief Information ResourcesBranch, National Center for Biotechnology
Information, NLM/NIH¥Chris Overton, Director, Center for Bioinformatics,University of Pennsylvania¥Myra Williams, President and CEO, MolecularApplications Group¥Michael Klipper, Attorney, Meyer & Klipper, PLLC¥Jonathan Band, Attorney, Morrison & Foerster, LLPA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B123¥Thomas Rindfleisch, Director, Medical Library,Stanford UniversitySession 3:Promoting access to and use of government S&T
data for the public interestÑan assessment of legal and policyoptions
Moderator:Harlan Onsrud, Associate Professor, University of MaineRapporteur:Shelton Alexander, Professor, Pennsylvania State
UniversityPanelists:¥Barbara Ryan, Associate Director for Operations,U.S. Geological Survey3¥James Brunt, Associate Director for InformationManagement, Long-Term Ecological Research
Network Office, University of New Mexico4¥Barry Glick, former President and CEO,GeoSystems Global Corp.¥Peter Weiss, Senior Policy Analyst, Office ofManagement and Budget5¥Prue Adler, Assistant Executive Director, FederalRelations and Information Policy, Association of
Research Libraries¥Eric Massant, Director of Government and IndustryAffairs, Reed Elsevier, Inc.¥Tim Foresman, Director, Spatial Analysis Lab,University of Maryland¥Kenneth Frazier, Director, University of WisconsinLibrariesSession 4:Promoting access to and use of not-for-profit-sector
S&T data for the public interestÑan assessment of legal andpolicy options
Moderator:Martha Williams, Professor and Director, Information
Retrieval Research Lab, University of Illinois at
Urbana-ChampaignRapporteur:Roberta Saxon, Patent Agent, Skjerven, Morrill,
MacPherson et al.Panelists:¥Richard Kayser, Chief, Physical and ChemicalProperties Division, NIST3 Ms. Ryan was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.
4 Dr. Brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.
5 Mr. Weiss was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124APPENDIX B¥James Lohr, Director, Information IndustryRelations, Chemical Abstracts Service, American
Chemical Society¥Leslie Singer, President, ISI, Inc.¥Allan Adler, Vice President for Governmental andLegislative Affairs, Association of American
Publishers, Inc.6¥Jerome Reichman, Professor, Vanderbilt UniversitySchool of Law¥R. Stephen Berry, Professor, University of Chicago10:45Break11:00Breakout session discussions (continued)12:45 pmLunch1:45J.  Rapporteurs
Õ summary of breakout panel results
2:45Discussion of results with workshop participants3:45K.  Concluding remarks
Robert Serafin, Chair4:00 pm
End of public workshopWORKSHOP PARTICIPANTSAllan Adler, Association of American Publishers, Inc.Prue Adler, Association of Research Libraries
Shelton Alexander, Pennsylvania State University
Dave Applegate (affiliation unknown)
Christopher Ashley, National Science Foundation
Mary Baish, American Association of Law
Jonathan Band, Morrison & Foerster, LLP
Winona Barker, National Biomedical Research Foundation
Ed Barron, Senate Committee on the Judiciary
Barbara Bauldock, U.S. Geological Survey
Jon Baumgarten, Proskauer Rose, LLP6 Mr. Adler was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B125Dennis Benson, National Library of MedicineR. Stephen Berry, University of Chicago
Robert Brammer, TASC

Lisa Brooks, National Institutes of Health
Francis Buckley, Jr., U.S. Government Printing Office

Mark Burnham, California Institute of Technology
Bonnie Carroll, Information International Associates, Inc.
William Cohen, Federal Trade Commission
Kathy Covert, Federal Geographic Data Committee
Karen Dacres, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Judge Edward Damich, U.S. Court of Federal Claims
Matthew Davis (affiliation unknown)
Deveny Deck, Vanderbilt University
Paul DeGiusti, Information Industry Association
Q. Todd Dickinson, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Anita Eisenstadt, National Science Foundation
Adam Eisgrau, American Library Association
Julie Esanu, National Research Council
Bob Etkins, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Eric Fischer, Library of Congress
Peter Folger, American Geophysical Union
Tim Foresman, University of Maryland
Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
Kenneth Frazier, University of Wisconsin Libraries
David Fulker, University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
Carole Ganz-Brown, National Science Foundation
Richard Gilbert, University of California, Berkeley
Paul Gilman, Celera Genomics, Inc.
Barry Glick, Consultant
Kenneth Hadeen, National Climatic Data Center (retired)
Kelley Heilman, Maryland State Department of Health
Stephen Heinig, Association of American Medical Colleges
Stephen Heller, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Mike Hoffman (affiliation unknown)
Justin Hughes, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Peter Jaszi, American University School of Law
Brian Kahin, Office of Science and Technology Policy
Richard Kayser, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Chris Kelly, U.S. Department of Justice
Maureen Kelly, BIOSIS
Michael Keplinger, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Ehsan Khan, U.S. Department of Energy
Michael Klipper, Meyer & Klipper, PLLCA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126APPENDIX BMakoto Kono, Fujitsu, Ltd.Stephen Koslow, National Institute of Mental Health
Patrice Laget, Delegation of the European Commission
Richard Lambert, National Institutes of Health
Charles Larson, Industrial Research Institute, Inc.
Peter Leavitt, Consultant
Robert Ledley, Georgetown University
Lynn Levine, Warren Publishing
David Lide, Consultant
Anne Linn, National Research Council
Joan Lippincott, Coalition for Networked Information
Philip Loftus, Glaxo Wellcome
James Lohr, Chemical Abstracts Service
Joe Martinez, U.S. Department of Energy
Eric Massant, Reed Elsevier, Inc.
Stephen Maurer, Attorney
Gilles McDougall, Industry Canada
Bruce McDowell, National Academy of Public Administration
Shelia McGarr (affiliation unknown)
Theodore Miles, National Science Foundation
John Moeller, U.S. Geological Survey
Christopher Mohr, Meyer & Klipper, PLLC
Kurt Molholm, Defense Technical Information Center
James Neal, Johns Hopkins University Library
Judge Pauline Newman, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
Goetz Oertel, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
Harlan Onsrud, University of Maine
James Ostell, National Institutes of Health
G. Christian Overton, University of Pennsylvania
Bob Palmer, U.S. House of Representatives
Harvey Perlman, University of Nebraska
Shira Perlmutter, U.S. Copyright Office
Marybeth Peters, U.S. Copyright Office
Larry Pettinger, U.S. Geological Survey
Tony Reichardt, NatureJerome Reichman, Vanderbilt University School of Law
Thomas Rindfleisch, Stanford University
Hedy Rossmeissl, U.S. Geological Survey
John Rumble, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Barbara Ryan, U.S. Geological Survey
Carolina Saez, U.S. Copyright Office
Roberta Saxon, Skjerven, Morrill, MacPherson, Franklin & Friel, LLP
Terri Scanlan, National Research CouncilA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B127Jean Schiro-Zavela, National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationHarold Schoolman, National Library of Medicine
Suzanne Scotchmer, University of California, Berkeley
Robert Serafin, National Center for Atmospheric Research
Leslie Singer, Institute for Scientific Information, Inc.
Mark Smith, American Association of University Professors
Mark Stefik, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center

Charles Sturrock, National Institute of Standards and Technology

Ambassador James Sweeney, Consultant
Margaret Thomson, U.S. Department of Energy
Paul Uhlir, National Research Council
John Vaughn, Association of American Universities
Ferris Webster, University of Delaware
Peter Weiss, Office of Management and Budget
Pamela Whitney, National Research Council
Martha Williams, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Myra Williams, Molecular Applications Group
James Wilson, House Committee on Science

Richard Witmer, U.S. Geological Survey
Barbara Wright, National Research Council
Susan Zevin, National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128Part IÑWorkshop Presentations1Introductory Remarks
Robert Serafin2Keynote Address
Q. Todd Dickinson3Characteristics of Scientific and Technical Databases
Geographic Data Panel
Genomic Data Panel
Chemical and Chemical Engineering Data Panel
Meteorological Data Panel4Economic Factors in the Production, Dissemination, and
Use of Scientific and Technical DatabasesRichard GilbertAPPENDIX CWorkshop 
Proceedings
ÑListing of ContentsNOTE:  For the full text of the committee
Õs Proceedings, see National Research Council (1999),Proceedings of the Workshop on Promoting Access to Scientific and Technical Data for the PublicInterest:  An Assessment of Policy Options, 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., availableonly online at < http://www.nap.edu>.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C1295Overview of Technologies for Protecting and for Misappropriating
Digital Intellectual Property Rights: The Current Situation and
Future ProspectsMark Stefik and Teresa Lunt6Legal and Policy Issues
Summary Overview of Existing and Proposed Intellectual Property RightsRegimes for Databases, Marybeth PetersSummary of Federal Government Information Law and DataPolicies, Justin HughesPart IIÑDiscussion Sessions on the Current Legal and Technical Situation7Government-Sector Data

8Not-for-Profit-Sector Data

9Commercial-Sector Data

Part IIIÑDiscussion Sessions on the Potential Impacts of Legislation andAssessments of Policy Options10A Strong Property Rights Model for Protecting Databases

11An Unfair Competition Model for Protecting Databases

12Promoting Access to and Use of Government-Sector Scientific and
Technical DataÑAn Assessment of Legal and Policy Options13Promoting Access to and Use of Not-for-Profit-Sector Scientific and
Technical Data for the Public InterestÑAn Assessment of Legal andPolicy Options14Final Plenary Discussion

Appendixes
ABiographical Sketches of Study Committee and Workshop Speakers and
PanelistsBWorkshop Agenda and Participants

CRaw Knowledge: Protecting Technical Databases for Science and Industry,
Stephen M. Maurer, Attorney-at-LawDAcronyms
A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130DIRECTIVE 96/9/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCILof 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databasesTHE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEANUNION,Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular
Article 57 (2), 66 and 100a thereof,Having regard to the proposal from the Commission (1),Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee (2),
Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 189b of the Treaty (3),(1) Whereas databases are at present not sufficiently protected in all Member Statesby existing legislation; whereas such protection, where it exists, has different
attributes;(2) Whereas such differences in the legal protection of databases offered by thelegislation of the Member States have direct negative effects on the functioning of the
internal market as regards databases and in particular on the freedom of natural andlegal persons to provide on-line database goods and services on the basis ofharmonized legal arrangements throughout the Community; whereas such differencesAppendix DEuropean Union Directive on the Legal
Protection of DatabasesNOTE: An official version of this document can be found online at the EUR-LEX Web site at<http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/lif/dat/1996/en_396L0009.html>.The material presented in this appendix has been reprinted from electronic files available on theInternet and is intended for use as a general reference, and not for legal research or other workrequiring authenticated primary sources.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D131could well become more pronounced as Member States introduce new legislation inthis field, which is now taking on an increasingly international dimension;(3) Whereas existing differences distorting the functioning of the internal market need
to be removed and new ones prevented from arising, while differences not adverselyaffecting the functioning of the internal market or the development of an informationmarket within the Community need not be removed or prevented from arising;
(4) Whereas copyright protection for databases exists in varying forms in theMember States according to legislation or case-law, and whereas, if differences inlegislation in the scope and conditions of protection remain between the Member
States, such unharmonized intellectual property rights can have the effect ofpreventing the free movement of goods or services within the Community;(5) Whereas copyright remains an appropriate form of exclusive right for authors
who have created databases;(6) Whereas, nevertheless, in the absence of a harmonized system ofunfair-competition legislation or of case-law, other measures are required in addition
to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of the contents of adatabase;(7) Whereas the making of databases requires the investment of considerable human,
technical and financial resources while such databases can be copied or accessed ata fraction of the cost needed to design them independently;(8) Whereas the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of the contents of a
database constitute acts which can have serious economic and technicalconsequences;(9) Whereas databases are a vital tool in the development of an information market
within the Community; whereas this tool will also be of use in many other fields;
(10) Whereas the exponential growth, in the Community and worldwide, in theamount of information generated and processed annually in all sectors of commerceand industry calls for investment in all the Member States in advanced information
processing systems;(11) Whereas there is at present a very great imbalance in the level of investment inthe database sector both as between the Member States and between the
Community and the worldÕs largest database-producing third countries;(12) Whereas such an investment in modern information storage and processingsystems will not take place within the Community unless a stable and uniform legal
protection regime is introduced for the protection of the rights of makers ofdatabases;(13) Whereas this Directive protects collections, sometimes called ÔcompilationsÕ, ofworks, data or other materials which are arranged, stored and accessed by meanswhich include electronic, electromagnetic or electro-optical processes or analogousprocesses;
(14) Whereas protection under this Directive should be extended to covernon-electronic databases;(15) Whereas the criteria used to determine whether a database should be protected
by copyright should be defined to the fact that the selection or the arrangement of thecontents of the database is the authorÕs own intellectual creation; whereas suchprotection should cover the structure of the database;A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132APPENDIX D(16) Whereas no criterion other than originality in the sense of the authorÕs intellectualcreation should be applied to determine the eligibility of the database for copyrightprotection, and in particular no aesthetic or qualitative criteria should be applied;
(17) Whereas the term ÔdatabaseÕ should be understood to include literary, artistic,
musical or other collections of works or collections of other material such as texts,sound, images, numbers, facts, and data; whereas it should cover collections of
independent works, data or other materials which are systematically or methodicallyarranged and can be individually accessed; whereas this means that a recording or anaudiovisual, cinematographic, literary or musical work as such does not fall within the
scope of this Directive;(18) Whereas this Directive is without prejudice to the freedom of authors to decidewhether, or in what manner, they will allow their works to be included in a database,
in particular whether or not the authorization given is exclusive; whereas theprotection of databases by the sui generis right is without prejudice to existing rightsover their contents, and whereas in particular where an author or the holder of a
related right permits some of his works or subject matter to be included in adatabase pursuant to a non-exclusive agreement, a third party may make use ofthose works or subject matter subject to the required consent of the author or of the
holder of the related right without the sui generis right of the maker of the databasebeing invoked to prevent him doing so, on condition that those works or subjectmatter are neither extracted from the database nor re-utilized on the basis thereof;
(19) Whereas, as a rule, the compilation of several recordings of musicalperformances on a CD does not come within the scope of this Directive, bothbecause, as a compilation, it does not meet the conditions for copyright protection
and because it does not represent a substantial enough investment to be eligible
under the sui generis right;(20) Whereas protection under this Directive may also apply to the materialsnecessary for the operation or consultation of certain databases such as thesaurus
and indexation systems;(21) Whereas the protection provided for in this Directive relates to databases inwhich works, data or other materials have been arranged systematically or
methodically; whereas it is not necessary for those materials to have been physicallystored in an organized manner;(22) Whereas electronic databases within the meaning of this Directive may also
include devices such as CD-ROM and CD-i;(23) Whereas the term ÔdatabaseÕ should not be taken to extend to computer
programs used in the making or operation of a database, which are protected by
Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the legal protection of computerprograms (4);(24) Whereas the rental and lending of databases in the field of copyright and related
rights are governed exclusively by Council Directive 92/100/EEC of 19 November1992 on rental right and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright in thefield of intellectual property (5);
(25) Whereas the term of copyright is already governed by Council Directive93/98/EEC of 29 October 1993 harmonizing the term of protection of copyright andcertain related rights (6);A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D133(26) Whereas works protected by copyright and subject matter protected by relatedrights, which are incorporated into a database, remain nevertheless protected by therespective exclusive rights and may not be incorporated into, or extracted from, the
database without the permission of the rightholder or his successors in title;(27) Whereas copyright in such works and related rights in subject matter thusincorporated into a database are in no way affected by the existence of a separate
right in the selection or arrangement of these works and subject matter in a database;(28) Whereas the moral rights of the natural person who created the database belongto the author and should be exercised according to the legislation of the Member
States and the provisions of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary andArtistic Works; whereas such moral rights remain outside the scope of this Directive;(29) Whereas the arrangements applicable to databases created by employees are
left to the discretion of the Member States; whereas, therefore nothing in thisDirective prevents Member States from stipulating in their legislation that where adatabase is created by an employee in the execution of his duties or following the
instructions given by his employer, the employer exclusively shall be entitled toexercise all economic rights in the database so created, unless otherwise provided bycontract;
(30) Whereas the authorÕs exclusive rights should include the right to determine theway in which his work is exploited and by whom, and in particular to control thedistribution of his work to unauthorized persons;
(31) Whereas the copyright protection of databases includes making databasesavailable by means other than the distribution of copies;(32) Whereas Member States are required to ensure that their national provisions
are at least materially equivalent in the case of such acts subject to restrictions as are
provided for by this Directive;(33) Whereas the question of exhaustion of the right of distribution does not arise inthe case of on-line databases, which come within the field of provision of services;
whereas this also applies with regard to a material copy of such a database made bythe user of such a service with the consent of the rightholder; whereas, unlikeCD-ROM or CD-i, where the intellectual property is incorporated in a material
medium, namely an item of goods, every on-line service is in fact an act which willhave to be subject to authorization where the copyright so provides;(34) Whereas, nevertheless, once the rightholder has chosen to make available a
copy of the database to a user, whether by an on-line service or by other means ofdistribution, that lawful user must be able to access and use the database for thepurposes and in the way set out in the agreement with the rightholder, even if such
access and use necessitate performance of otherwise restricted acts;(35) Whereas a list should be drawn up of exceptions to restricted acts, taking intoaccount the fact that copyright as covered by this Directive applies only to the
selection or arrangements of the contents of a database; whereas Member Statesshould be given the option of providing for such exceptions in certain cases; whereas,however, this option should be exercised in accordance with the Berne Convention
and to the extent that the exceptions relate to the structure of the database; whereasa distinction should be drawn between exceptions for private use and exceptions forreproduction for private purposes, which concerns provisions under national
legislation of some Member States on levies on blank media or recording equipment;A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134APPENDIX D(36) Whereas the term Ôscientific researchÕ within the meaning of this Directive
covers both the natural sciences and the human sciences;(37) Whereas Article 10 (1) of the Berne Convention is not affected by this
Directive;(38) Whereas the increasing use of digital recording technology exposes thedatabase maker to the risk that the contents of his database may be copied and
rearranged electronically, without his authorization, to produce a database ofidentical content which, however, does not infringe any copyright in the arrangementof his database;
(39) Whereas, in addition to aiming to protect the copyright in the original selectionor arrangement of the contents of a database, this Directive seeks to safeguard theposition of makers of databases against misappropriation of the results of the
financial and professional investment made in obtaining and collection [sic] the contentsby protecting the whole or substantial parts of a database against certain acts by a useror competitor;
(40) Whereas the object of this sui generis right is to ensure protection of anyinvestment in obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents of a database for thelimited duration of the right; whereas such investment may consist in the deployment
of financial resources and/or the expending of time, effort and energy;(41) Whereas the objective of the sui generis right is to give the maker of a databasethe option of preventing the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of all or a
substantial part of the contents of that database; whereas the maker of a database isthe person who takes the initiative and the risk of investing; whereas this excludessubcontractors in particular from the definition of maker;
(42) Whereas the special right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization
relates to acts by the user which go beyond his legitimate rights and thereby harm theinvestment; whereas the right to prohibit extraction and/or re-utilization of all or asubstantial part of the contents relates not only to the manufacture of a parasitical
competing product but also to any user who, through his acts, causes significantdetriment, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the investment;(43) Whereas, in the case of on-line transmission, the right to prohibit re-utilization is
not exhausted either as regards the database or as regards a material copy of thedatabase or of part thereof made by the addressee of the transmission with theconsent of the rightholder;
(44) Whereas, when on-screen display of the contents of a database necessitates thepermanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of such contents toanother medium, that act should be subject to authorization by the rightholder;
(45) Whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization doesnot in any way constitute an extension of copyright protection to mere facts or data;(46) Whereas the existence of a right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or
re-utilization of the whole or a substantial part of works, data or materials from adatabase should not give rise to the creation of a new right in the works, data ormaterials themselves;
(47) Whereas, in the interests of competition between suppliers of informationproducts and services, protection by the sui generis right must not be afforded insuch a way as to facilitate abuses of a dominant position, in particular as regards the
creation and distribution of new products and services which have an intellectual,A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D135documentary, technical, economic or commercial added value; whereas, therefore,the provisions of this Directive are without prejudice to the application of Communityor national competition rules;
(48) Whereas the objective of this Directive, which is to afford an appropriate anduniform level of protection of databases as a means to secure the remuneration of themaker of the database, is different from the aim of Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movementof such data (7), which is to guarantee free circulation of personal data on the basis
of harmonized rules designed to protect fundamental rights, notably the right toprivacy which is recognized in Article 8 of the European Convention for theProtection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; whereas the provisions of
this Directive are without prejudice to data protection legislation;(49) Whereas, notwithstanding the right to prevent extraction and/or re-utilization ofall or a substantial part of a database, it should be laid down that the maker of a
database or rightholder may not prevent a lawful user of the database from extractingand re-utilizing insubstantial parts; whereas, however, that user may not unreasonablyprejudice either the legitimate interests of the holder of the sui generis right or the
holder of copyright or a related right in respect of the works or subject mattercontained in the database;(50) Whereas the Member States should be given the option of providing for
exceptions to the right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of asubstantial part of the contents of a database in the case of extraction for privatepurposes, for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, or where
extraction and/or re-utilization are/is carried out in the interests of public security or
for the purposes of an administrative or judicial procedure; whereas such operationsmust not prejudice the exclusive rights of the maker to exploit the database and theirpurpose must not be commercial;
(51) Whereas the Member States, where they avail themselves of the option topermit a lawful user of a database to extract a substantial part of the contents for thepurposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, may limit that permission to
certain categories of teaching or scientific research institution;(52) Whereas those Member States which have specific rules providing for a rightcomparable to the sui generis right provided for in this Directive should be permitted
to retain, as far as the new right is concerned, the exceptions traditionally specifiedby such rules;(53) Whereas the burden of proof regarding the date of completion of the making of
a database lies with the maker of the database;(54) Whereas the burden of proof that the criteria exist for concluding that asubstantial modification of the contents of a database is to be regarded as a
substantial new investment lies with the maker of the database resulting from suchinvestment;(55) Whereas a substantial new investment involving a new term of protection may
include a substantial verification of the contents of the database;(56) Whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization inrespect of a database should apply to databases whose makers are nationals or
habitual residents of third countries or to those produced by legal persons notA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136APPENDIX Destablished in a Member State, within the meaning of the Treaty, only if such thirdcountries offer comparable protection to databases produced by nationals of aMember State or persons who have their habitual residence in the territory of the
Community;(57) Whereas, in addition to remedies provided under the legislation of the MemberStates for infringements of copyright or other rights, Member States should provide
for appropriate remedies against unauthorized extraction and/or re-utilization of thecontents of a database;(58) Whereas, in addition to the protection given under this Directive to the structure
of the database by copyright, and to its contents against unauthorized extractionand/or re-utilization under the sui generis right, other legal provisions in the MemberStates relevant to the supply of database goods and services continue to apply;
(59) Whereas this Directive is without prejudice to the application to databasescomposed of audiovisual works of any rules recognized by a Member StateÕslegislation concerning the broadcasting of audiovisual programmes;
(60) Whereas some Member States currently protect under copyright arrangementsdatabases which do not meet the criteria for eligibility for copyright protection laiddown in this Directive; whereas, even if the databases concerned are eligible for
protection under the right laid down in this Directive to prevent unauthorizedextraction and/or re-utilization of their contents, the term of protection under thatright is considerably shorter than that which they enjoy under the national
arrangements currently in force; whereas harmonization of the criteria for determiningwhether a database is to be protected by copyright may not have the effect ofreducing the term of protection currently enjoyed by the rightholders concerned;
whereas a derogation should be laid down to that effect; whereas the effects of such
derogation must be confined to the territories of the Member States concerned,HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:CHAPTER ISCOPEArticle 1
Scope1. This Directive concerns the legal protection of databases in any form.
2. For the purposes of this Directive, ÔdatabaseÕ shall mean a collection of
independent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodicalway and individually accessible by electronic or other means.
3. Protection under this Directive shall not apply to computer programs used in themaking or operation of databases accessible by electronic means.Article 2Limitations on the scopeThis Directive shall apply without prejudice to Community provisions relating to:A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D137(a) the legal protection of computer programs;(b) rental right, lending right and certain rights related to copyright in the field ofintellectual property;
(c) the term of protection of copyright and certain related rights.CHAPTER II
COPYRIGHTArticle 3Object of protection1. In accordance with this Directive, databases which, by reason of the selection orarrangement of their contents, constitute the authorÕs own intellectual creation shall beprotected as such by copyright. No other criteria shall be applied to determine their
eligibility for that protection.2. The copyright protection of databases provided for by this Directive shall notextend to their contents and shall be without prejudice to any rights subsisting in
those contents themselves.Article 4
Database authorship1. The author of a database shall be the natural person or group of natural persons
who created the base or, where the legislation of the Member States so permits, the
legal person designated as the rightholder by that legislation.2. Where collective works are recognized by the legislation of a Member State, theeconomic rights shall be owned by the person holding the copyright.
3. In respect of a database created by a group of natural persons jointly, theexclusive rights shall be owned jointly.Article 5Restricted actsIn respect of the expression of the database which is protectable by copyright, theauthor of a database shall have the exclusive right to carry out or to authorize:(a) temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or
in part;(b) translation, adaptation, arrangement and any other alteration;(c) any form of distribution to the public of the database or of copies thereof. The
first sale in the Community of a copy of the database by the rightholder or with hisconsent shall exhaust the right to control resale of that copy within the Community;(d) any communication, display or performance to the public;
(e) any reproduction, distribution, communication, display or performance to thepublic of the results of the acts referred to in (b).A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138APPENDIX DArticle 6Exceptions to restricted acts1. The performance by the lawful user of a database or of a copy thereof of any ofthe acts listed in Article 5 which is necessary for the purposes of access to thecontents of the databases and normal use of the contents by the lawful user shall not
require the authorization of the author of the database. Where the lawful user isauthorized to use only part of the database, this provision shall apply only to thatpart.
2. Member States shall have the option of providing for limitations on the rights setout in Article 5 in the following cases:(a) in the case of reproduction for private purposes of a non-electronic database;
(b) where there is use for the sole purpose of illustration for teaching or scientificresearch, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenon-commercial purpose to be achieved;
(c) where there is use for the purposes of public security of [sic] for the purposes of anadministrative or judicial procedure;(d) where other exceptions to copyright which are traditionally authorized under
national law are involved, without prejudice to points (a), (b) and (c).3. In accordance with the Berne Convention for the protection of Literary andArtistic Works, this Article may not be interpreted in such a way as to allow its
application to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices the rightholderÕslegitimate interests or conflicts with normal exploitation of the database.CHAPTER IIISUI GENERIS RIGHTArticle 7Object of protection1. Member States shall provide for a right for the maker of a database which showsthat there has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in eitherthe obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to prevent extraction and/or
re-utilization of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluated qualitatively and/orquantitatively, of the contents of that database.2. For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) ÔextractionÕ shall mean the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial
part of the contents of a database to another medium by any means or in any form;(b) Ôre-utilizationÕ shall mean any form of making available to the public all or a
substantial part of the contents of a database by the distribution of copies, by renting,by on-line or other forms of transmission. The first sale of a copy of a databasewithin the Community by the rightholder or with his consent shall exhaust the right to
control resale of that copy within the Community;Public lending is not an act of extraction or re-utilization.3. The right referred to in paragraph 1 may be transferred, assigned or granted under
contractual licence.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D1394. The right provided for in paragraph 1 shall apply irrespective of the eligibility ofthat database for protection by copyright or by other rights. Moreover, it shall applyirrespective of eligibility of the contents of that database for protection by copyright
or by other rights. Protection of databases under the right provided for in paragraph1 shall be without prejudice to rights existing in respect of their contents.5. The repeated and systematic extraction and/or re-utilization of insubstantial parts
of the contents of the database implying acts which conflict with a normal exploitationof that database or which unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the makerof the database shall not be permitted.Article 8Rights and obligations of lawful users1. The maker of a database which is made available to the public in whatever mannermay not prevent a lawful user of the database from extracting and/or re-utilizing
insubstantial parts of its contents, evaluated qualitatively and/or quantitatively, for anypurposes whatsoever. Where the lawful user is authorized to extract and/or re-utilizeonly part of the database, this paragraph shall apply only to that part.
2. A lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in whatevermanner may not perform acts which conflict with normal exploitation of the databaseor unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the maker of the database.
3. A lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in any mannermay not cause prejudice to the holder of a copyright or related right in respect of theworks or subject matter contained in the database.Article 9Exceptions to the sui generis rightMember States may stipulate that lawful users of a database which is made availableto the public in whatever manner may, without the authorization of its maker, extractor re-utilize a substantial part of its contents:
(a) in the case of extraction for private purposes of the contents of a non-electronicdatabase;(b) in the case of extraction for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific
research, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenon-commercial purpose to be achieved;(c) in the case of extraction and/or re-utilization for the purposes of public security or
an administrative or judicial procedure.Article 10
Term of protection1. The right provided for in Article 7 shall run from the date of completion of the
making of the database. It shall expire fifteen years from the first of January of theyear following the date of completion.2. In the case of a database which is made available to the public in whatever manner
before expiry of the period provided for in paragraph 1, the term of protection byA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140APPENDIX Dthat right shall expire fifteen years from the first of January of the year following thedate when the database was first made available to the public.3. Any substantial change, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the contents of
a database, including any substantial change resulting from the accumulation ofsuccessive additions, deletions or alterations, which would result in the databasebeing considered to be a substantial new investment, evaluated qualitatively or
quantitatively, shall qualify the database resulting from that investment for its ownterm of protection.Article 11Beneficiaries of protection under the sui generis right1. The right provided for in Article 7 shall apply to database [sic] whose makers orrightholders are nationals of a Member State or who have their habitual residence inthe territory of the Community.
2. Paragraph 1 shall also apply to companies and firms formed in accordance withthe law of a Member State and having their registered office, central administrationor principal place of business within the Community; however, where such a
company or firm has only its registered office in the territory of the Community, itsoperations must be genuinely linked on an ongoing basis with the economy of aMember State.
3. Agreements extending the right provided for in Article 7 to databases made inthird countries and falling outside the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall beconcluded by the Council acting on a proposal from the Commission. The term of
any protection extended to databases by virtue of that procedure shall not exceed
that available pursuant to Article 10.CHAPTER IV
COMMON PROVISIONSArticle 12RemediesMember States shall provide appropriate remedies in respect of infringements of therights provided for in this Directive.Article 13Continued application of other legal provisionsThis Directive shall be without prejudice to provisions concerning in particularcopyright, rights related to copyright or any other rights or obligations subsisting inthe data, works or other materials incorporated into a database, patent rights, trade
marks, design rights, the protection of national treasures, laws on restrictive practicesand unfair competition, trade secrets, security, confidentiality, data protection andprivacy, access to public documents, and the law of contract.A Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D141Article 14Application over time1. Protection pursuant to this Directive as regards copyright shall also be available inrespect of databases created prior to the date referred to Article 16 (1) which onthat date fulfil the requirements laid down in this Directive as regards copyright
protection of databases.2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where a database protected under copyrightarrangements in a Member State on the date of publication of this Directive does not
fulfil the eligibility criteria for copyright protection laid down in Article 3 (1), thisDirective shall not result in any curtailing in that Member State of the remaining termof protection afforded under those arrangements.
3. Protection pursuant to the provisions of this Directive as regards the right providedfor in Article 7 shall also be available in respect of databases the making of whichwas completed not more than fifteen years prior to the date referred to in Article 16
(1) and which on that date fulfil the requirements laid down in Article 7.4. The protection provided for in paragraphs 1 and 3 shall be without prejudice toany acts concluded and rights acquired before the date referred to in those
paragraphs.5. In the case of a database the making of which was completed not more thanfifteen years prior to the date referred to in Article 16 (1), the term of protection by
the right provided for in Article 7 shall expire fifteen years from the first of Januaryfollowing that date.Article 15Binding nature of certain provisionsAny contractual provision contrary to Articles 6 (1) and 8 shall be null and void.Article 16Final provisions1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions necessary to comply with this Directive before 1 January 1998.
When Member States adopt these provisions, they shall contain a reference to thisDirective or shall be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their officialpublication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member
States.2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the provisions ofdomestic law which they adopt in the field governed by this Directive.
3. Not later than at the end of the third year after the date referred to in paragraph 1,and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the EuropeanParliament, the Council and the Economic and Social Committee a report on the
application of this Directive, in which, inter alia, on the basis of specific informationsupplied by the Member States, it shall examine in particular the application of the suigeneris right, including Articles 8 and 9, and shall verify especially whether theA Question of Balance: Private Rights and the Public Interest in Scientific and Technical DatabasesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142APPENDIX Dapplication of this right has led to abuse of a dominant position or other interferencewith free competition which would justify appropriate measures being taken,including the establishment of non-voluntary licensing arrangements. Where
necessary, it shall submit proposals for adjustment of this Directive in line withdevelopments in the area of databases.Article 17This Directive is addressed to the Member States.Done at Strasbourg, 11 March 1996.For the European ParliamentThe President
K. H•NSCHFor the CouncilThe President
L. DINI(1) OJ No C 156, 23. 6. 1992, p. 4 andOJ No C 308, 15. 11. 1993, p. 1.(2) OJ No C 19, 25. 1. 1993, p. 3.(3) Opinion of the European Parliament of 23 June 1993 (OJ No C 194, 19. 7.
1993, p. 144), Common Position of the Council of 10 July 1995 (OJ No C 288, 30.10. 1995, p. 14), Decision of the European Parliament of 14 December 1995 (OJNo C 17, 22 1. 1996) and Council Decision of 26 February 1996.
(4) OJ No L 122, 17. 5. 1991, p. 42. Directive as last amended by Directive
93/98/EEC (OJ No L 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.)(5) OJ No L 346, 27. 11. 1992, p. 61.(6) OJ No L 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.
(7) OJ No L 281, 23. 11. 1995, p. 31.