DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9734Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research forCrisis Management104 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06790-4 | DOI 10.17226/9734Committee on Computing and Communications Research to Enable Better Use ofInformation Technology in Government, Commission on Physical Sciences,Mathematics, and Applications, National Research CouncilSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Computing and Communications Research to EnableBetter Use of Information Technology in GovernmentComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON
INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
RESEARCH forCrisis ManagementSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by
the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members
are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the
National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The

members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for
their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foun-dation under grant EIA-9809120.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsor.International Standard Book Number 0-309-06790-1
Additional copies of this report are available from:National Academy Press2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Box 285
Washington, DC  20055

800-624-6242
202-334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
(http://www.nap.edu)Copyright 1999 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of AmericaSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors

engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. William
A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.
Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-
ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both theNational Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-
viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH TO ENABLE BETTER USE OF INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY IN GOVERNMENTWILLIAM L. SCHERLIS, Carnegie Mellon University, ChairW. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
DAVID DeWITT, University of Wisconsin at Madison
SUSAN DUMAIS, Microsoft Research
WILLIAM EDDY, Carnegie Mellon University
EVE GRUNTFEST, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
DAVID KEHRLEIN, GovernorÕs Office of Emergency Services,State of CaliforniaSALLIE KELLER-McNULTY, Los Alamos National Laboratory
MICHAEL R. NELSON, IBM
CLIFFORD NEUMAN, Information Sciences Institute, University ofSouthern CaliforniaStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorJON EISENBERG, Program Officer and Study Director
RITA GASKINS, Project AssistantivSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairFRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JAMES CHIDDIX, Time Warner Cable
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
A.G. (SANDY) FRASER, AT&T
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
JAMES GRAY, Microsoft Corporation
PATRICK M. HANRAHAN, Stanford University
JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, Interval Research
JOHN MAJOR, Wireless Knowledge
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DONALD NORMAN, Nielsen Norman Group
RAYMOND OZZIE, Groove Networks
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
LEE SPROULL, Boston University
LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel CorporationStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Senior Program Officer
ALAN S. INOUYE, Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Program Officer
GAIL PRITCHARD, Program Officer
JANET BRISCOE, Office Manager
DAVID DRAKE, Project Assistant
MARGARET MARSH, Project Assistant
DAVID PADGHAM, Project Assistant (offsite)
MICKELLE RODGERS, Senior Project Assistant
SUZANNE OSSA, Senior Project AssistantvSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONSPETER M. BANKS, Veridian ERIM International, Inc., Co-chairW. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, Co-chairWILLIAM F. BALLHAUS, JR., Lockheed Martin Corp.
SHIRLEY CHIANG, University of California at Davis
MARSHALL H. COHEN, California Institute of Technology
RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University
SAMUEL H. FULLER, Analog Devices, Inc.
JERRY P. GOLLUB, Haverford College
MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD, University of California at Santa Barbara
MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University
WESLEY T. HUNTRESS, JR., Carnegie Institution
CAROL M. JANTZEN, Westinghouse Savannah River Company
PAUL G. KAMINSKI, Technovation, Inc.
KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota
JOHN R. KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Co. (retired)
MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania
DUSA McDUFF, State University of New York at Stony Brook
JANET NORWOOD, U.S. Commissioner of Labor Statistics (retired)
M. ELISABETH PAT…-CORNELL, Stanford UniversityNICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory
ROBERT J. SPINRAD, Xerox PARC (retired)NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director (through July 1999)MYRON F. UMAN, Acting Executive Director (as of August 1999)viSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
As part of its new Digital Government program, the National ScienceFoundation (NSF) requested that the Computer Science and Telecommu-
nications Board (CSTB) undertake an in-depth study of how information
technology research and development could more effectively support

advances in the use of information technology in government.  CSTB
ÕsCommittee on Computing and Communications Research to Enable Bet-
ter Use of Information Technology in Government was established to
organize two specific application-area workshops and conduct a broader
study, based on these and other workshops, of how information technol-
ogy research can enable improved and new government services, opera-
tions, and interactions with citizens.The committee was asked to identify ways to foster interaction amongcomputing and communications researchers, federal managers, and pro-
fessionals in specific domains that can lead to collaborative research ef-
forts.  By establishing research links between these communities and cre-
ating testbeds aimed at meeting relevant requirements, NSF hopes to
stimulate thinking in the computing and communications research com-
munity and throughout government about possibilities for advances in
technology that will support a variety of digital government initiatives.The first phase of the project focused on two illustrative applicationareas that are inherently governmental in natureÑcrisis management andfederal statistics.  The study committee convened two workshops to bring

together stakeholders from the individual domains with researchers in
computing and communications systems.  The workshops were designed
viiSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEto facilitate interaction between the communities of stakeholders, providespecific feedback to mission agencies and NSF, and identify good ex-
amples of information technology research challenges that would also
apply throughout the government.  The first of these workshops, 
ÒRe-search in Information Technology to Support Crisis Management,Ó was
held on December 1-2, 1998, in Washington, D.C., and is summarized in
this volume.  A second workshop, 
ÒInformation Technology Research forFederal Statistics,Ó was held February 9-10, 1999.  The National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration (NASA), one of the participating agencies
in a federal interagency applications team addressing crisis management,1was a co-sponsor of the studyÕs workshop on crisis management.Participants in the crisis management workshop were drawn fromthe information technology research, information technology research
management, and crisis management communities (see Appendix A).
Building on CSTBÕs earlier work,2 the workshop focused specifically on
how to move forward from the current technology baseline to future
possibilities for addressing the information technology needs of crisis
managers through research.  The workshop provided an opportunity for

these separate communities to interact and to learn how they might more
effectively collaborate in developing improved systems to support crisis
management in the long term.Two keynote speeches outlined the status and current trends in thecrisis management and information technology research communities.  A

set of case studies (summarized in Appendix B) and a subsequent panel
explored a range of ways in which information technology is currently
used in crisis management and articulated a set of challenges to the full
development and exploitation of information technology for crisis man-
agement.  The next panel described trends in key information technolo-

giesÑcomputing and storage information management, databases, wire-less communications, and wearable computersÑto establish a baselinefor defining future research efforts.  Through a set of parallel breakout
1In February 1997, the Federal Information Services and Applications Council (FISAC) ofthe National Science and Technology CouncilÕs Computing Information and Communica-tions Research and Development (CIC R&D) Subcommittee created an interagency applica-tions team to address crises management.  This group, now referred to as the Information
Technology for Crisis Management (ITCM) Team, was established to promote collabora-
tions among federal, state, local, and international governmental organizations and othersectors of the economy in order to identify, develop, test, and implement computing, infor-mation, and communications technologies for crises management applications.2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1997.
Computing and Communications in the Extreme.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.(summarized in Appendix C).Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixsessions, workshop participants explored opportunities for collaborativeresearch between the information technology and crisis management com-
munities and identified a set of important research topics.  The workshop

concluded with panels that considered research management issues re-
lated to collaboration between the two communities and how the results
of the workshop related to the broader context of digital government.
This summary report is based on these presentations and discussions.The development of specific requirements is, of course, beyond thescope of a single workshop, and therefore this report cannot presume to
be a comprehensive analysis of the information technology requirements
posed by crisis management.3  Nor is it an effort aimed at identifying
immediate solutions (or ways of funding and deploying them).  Rather, it

examines opportunities for engaging the information technology research
and crisis management communities in longer-term research activities of
mutual interest and illustrates substantive and process issues relating to
collaboration between them.The organization and content of this report approximately follow thatof the workshop.  For clarity of presentation, the committee has in several

instances aggregated sessions in this reporting.  Also, where possible,

related points drawn from throughout the workshop have been com-
bined into consolidated discussions.  In preparing this summary, the com-

mittee has drawn on the contributions of speakers, panelists, and partici-
pants in the workshop, who provided a rich set of illustrations of the role
of information technology in crisis management, issues regarding its use,
possible research opportunities, and process and implementation issues
related to such research.  Workshop participants and reviewers of the

report provided clarification and additional examples subsequent to the
workshop.  To these the committee has added some additional context-

setting material and examples.  But this summary report remains prima-

rily a reporting on the presentations and discussions at the workshop.Synthesis of the workshop experience into a more general, broaderset of findings and recommendations for information technology research
in the digital government context is deferred to the main report from this
committee.  This second phase of the project will draw on the two work-

shops organized by the study committee, as well as additional briefings
and other work on the topic of digital government, to develop a final
synthesis report that will provide recommendations for refining the NSFÕsDigital Government program and providing more broad-based advice
across the government in this arena.3The interagency ITCM team is working to develop such requirements.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACESupport for this project came from NSF and NASA.  The committee
acknowledges Larry Brandt of the NSF and Anngienetta Johnson of NASA
along with the other members of the interagency Information Technology
for Crisis Management team for their encouragement and support of this
project.  This is a reporting of workshop discussions, and the committee

thanks all participants for their insights expressed in the workshop pre-
sentations, discussions, breakout sessions, and subsequent interactions.The committee also wishes to thank the CSTB staff for their assistancewith the workshop and the preparation of the report.  Jon Eisenberg,

CSTB program officer, made significant contributions to the organization
of the workshop and the assembly of the report.  His excellent facilitation,

hard work, and valuable insights were pivotal in producing this report.
Jane Bortnick Griffith, interim CSTB director in 1998, played a key role in
helping conceive and initiate this project.  The committee also thanks Rita

Gaskins, who assisted in organizing committee meetings, marshalling
committee members, organizing the workshop, and preparing the report.
Finally, the committee is grateful to the reviewers for helping to sharpen
and improve the report through their comments.  Responsibility for the

report remains with the committee.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersThis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the National Research CouncilÕs (NRCÕs) Report Review Com-mittee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and

critical comments that will assist the authors and the NRC in making the
published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge.  The contents of the review comments and draft manu-

script remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative pro-
cess.  We wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in

the review of this report:Charles N. Brownstein, Corporation for National Research Initiatives,Melvyn Ciment, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies,
David Cowen, University of South Carolina,
David J. Farber, University of Pennsylvania,
Andrew C. Gordon, University of Washington,
John R. Harrald, George Washington University,
John D. Hwang, City of Los Angeles Information Technology Agency,
David Maier, Oregon Graduate Institute,
Lois Clark McCoy, National Institute for Urban Search and Rescue,
Thomas OÕKeefe, California Department of Forestry andFire Protection,xiSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSJohn Poindexter, Syntek, andGio Wiederhold, Stanford University.Although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this
report rests solely with the study committee and the NRC.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents1INTRODUCTION1
What Is Crisis Management?, 2
The Response Phase:  Difficult Challenges for
Information Technology, 5Information Technology Users in Crises, 6Citizens, 6
Crisis Responders, 6
Government and Other Crisis Management Organizations, 7
Business, 9Information Technology Challenges and Opportunities inCrisis Management, 10Previous Study, 10
This Workshop Report, 112INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT
TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT13

Computing and Storage, 13
Information Management, 15
Databases, 17
Wireless Communications, 19
Trends in Wearable Computers, 22xiiiSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTS3INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH
OPPORTUNITIES25

Information Management, 25Information Acquisition, 26
Integration and Interoperability, 26
Data Delivery, 29
Geographical Information System Performance, 29Information for People, 29Presenting and Using Information, 31
Supporting Effective Communications and Coordination, 31
Supporting Effective Real-Time Decision MakingUnder Uncertainty and Stress, 32Handling Information Overload, 33
Overcoming Language and Other Barriers toCommunication, 34Warning Citizens at Risk, 34
Learning from Experience, 36
Using Wearable Computing, 37Information Infrastructure, 38Robustness, 39
Infrastructure for Citizens, 40Modeling and Simulation, 41Role of Modeling and Simulation, 41
Research Opportunities, 42Electronic Commerce, 44Problems Caused by the Increased Use of andDependence on Electronic Commerce, 44Benefits of Electronic Commerce in Crisis Management, 45
Pitfalls of Traditional Electronic Commerce inCrisis Management, 45Research Opportunities, 464ACHIEVING AN IMPACT IN THE CRISIS
MANAGEMENT COMMUNITY48

Interactions Between the Information Technology Researchand Crisis Management Communities, 48Management Challenges to Using Information Technologyin Crisis Management, 515THE BROADER CONTEXT:  INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY IN GOVERNMENT54

Information Technology Challenges Across Government, 58
Achieving Innovation, 59Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvAPPENDIXESADetailed Workshop Agenda and Participants65

BBrief Case Studies of Crises71

CSynopsis of the CSTB Report 
Computing andCommunications in the Extreme82Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Introduction
Crises, whether natural disasters such as hurricanes or earthquakes,or human-made disasters, such as terrorist attacks, are events with dra-
matic, sometimes catastrophic impact.  Natural disasters in the United

States and its territories were recently estimated as having taken a toll of
roughly 6,000 lives between 1975 and 1994, and catastrophic natural di-
sasters have caused dollar losses of about  $500 billion during the past two

decades, with frequent periods since 1989 when losses averaged about
$1 billion per week.1   A single hurricane, Mitch, killed more than 11,000
people and destroyed a substantial portion of the infrastructure in several
Central American countries in November 1998.Crisis managementÑan activity encompassing the immediate re-sponse to such events, recovery efforts, and mitigation and preparedness
efforts to reduce the impact of future crisesÑpresents problems of large
scale and high complexity (measurable in numbers of people and amount
and diversity of data, databases, and applications), unpredictable nature
of the local infrastructure and other capabilities, and urgency.  Crisis

management is an activity in which government plays a key role and in
which a broad range of players at all levels of government are involved.As part of a broader study exploring how information technology1Denis S. Mileti.  1999. 
 Disasters by Design:  A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United
States.  An activity of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction.  Joseph
Henry Press, Washington, D.C.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTresearch can enable improved and new government services, operations,and interactions with citizens, the Computer Science and Telecommuni-
cations BoardÕs (CSTBÕs) Committee on Computing and CommunicationsResearch to Enable Better Use of Information Technology in Government
organized a workshop focused on crisis management (Appendix A).  This

workshop, on which this summary is based, explored how information
technology (IT) research can contribute to more effective crisis manage-
ment.WHAT IS CRISIS MANAGEMENT?Crises are extreme events that cause significant disruption and putlives and property at riskÑsituations distinct from Òbusiness as usual.ÓThe first panel of the six that made presentations at the workshop de-
scribed a number of different crisis scenarios, covering a scope and scale
ranging from localized effects of flash flooding to the regionwide impact
of earthquakes and hurricanes to the impacts in cyberspace posed by Y2K
computer bugs.2  These case studies, which included both natural disas-
ters and human-made disasters such as nuclear accidents and the effects
of a terrorist bombing, provide a sense of the sorts of challenges faced in
the crisis management community, as well as a concrete context for the
IT-focused discussions that follow.  The reader who is unfamiliar with

such disaster scenarios may wish to read the case study overviews in
Appendix B, which are based on the experiences of crisis managers who
participated in the workshop.As used in this report, the term Òcrisis managementÓ encompasses
activities ranging from the immediate response to mitigation and pre-
paredness efforts that are aimed at reducing the impact of future events
and take place over a longer time period.3  The following four, commonly
described phases of crisis management are referred to throughout this
report:2The workshop from which this report stems focused largely on civilian crisis manage-ment, and most of the examples are related to natural disasters as opposed to such threatsas the use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists.  However, the essential nature of

crisis response in all these cases is not dissimilar.  Many of the requirements established by
the urgent, disruptive nature of both and the research opportunities discussed in this reportare generally applicable to both.3Two notes on usage.  The term 
Òcrisis managementÓ is sometimes used to refer only to
the response phase and not to other elements of coping with crises such as mitigationefforts to reduce the impact of disasters in the future.  Also, in some contexts a distinction is

made between Òcrisis managementÓ and 
Òconsequence management.Ó  This distinction has
been made in a series of presidential decision directives and in the recently added terrorismSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION3¥Crisis response is dedicated to the immediate protection of life andproperty.  It requires urgent action and the coordinated application of

resources, facilities, and efforts beyond those regularly available to handle
routine problems. The response phase includes action taken before the
actual crisis event (e.g., when a hurricane warning is received), in re-
sponse to the immediate impact of a crisis, and as sustained effort during
the course of the emergency. Actions taken during the buildup of a crisis
situation are designed to increase an organizationÕs ability to respondeffectively and might include briefing government officials, reviewing
plans, preparing information for release to the public, updating lists of
resources, and testing warning and communications systems.4  Preimpact
warning systems may be activated, resources mobilized, emergency op-
erations centers activated, emergency instructions issued to the public,
and evacuation begun.  The emphasis is on saving lives, controlling the

situation, and minimizing the effects of the disaster.Crisis response includes the logistics of getting medical care, food,water, shelter, and rescue teams to the scene. Regional, state, and federal
resources may be provided to assist with helping those affected and re-
ducing secondary damage, and response support facilities may be estab-
lished.Eventually, in the aftermath, crisis response becomes a more routineoperation and the challenge shifts from the need to get information
quickly and comprehensivelyÑbut not necessarily entirely accuratelyÑto an emphasis on process, accuracy, and accountability with systems
called on to work more in a production mode.  For example, activities

following the Exxon Valdez disaster ultimately became what might be
termed the worldÕs largest rock-washing operation.¥Recovery encompasses both short-term activity intended to return
annex to the Federal Response Plan, the document that lays out federal agency responsibili-ties for responding to a crisis (Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  April

1999. Federal Response Plan.  FEMA-9230.1 PL, FEMA, Washington, D.C., available online at<http://www.fema.gov/r-n-r/frp>).  There, 
Òcrisis managementÓ is used to refer to the
predominantly law enforcement responsibilities to Òprevent, preempt, and terminate threatsor acts of terrorism and apprehend and prosecute the perpetrators,Ó whereas ÒconsequencemanagementÓ refers to measures to protect health and safety, restore services, and provide
emergency relief to those affected.  For the purposes of this report, the term 
Òcrisis manage-mentÓ is understood to encompass the full range of responses to a crisis, but the report does
not specifically address requirements unique to law enforcement activities.4Some of this discussion is adapted from Office of Emergency Services Planning Section.May 1998.  California Emergency Plan.  Planning Section, Governor
Õs Office of EmergencyServices, State of California.  Available online from the State of California Governor
Õs Officeof Emergency Services Web site at <http://www.oes.ca.gov>.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTvital life-support systems to operation and longer-term activities designedto return infrastructure systems to predisaster conditions.  This process is

much slower than response, involves administrative work, and is subject
to regulations of many kinds (e.g., building codes).  Much of this work

takes place in an office and requires an appropriate set of tools and sup-
porting network (voice and data) capabilities.¥Mitigation, now recognized as the foundation of successful crisismanagement,5 is the ongoing effort to reduce the impact of disasters on
people and property.  Mitigation includes steps such as keeping homes

from being constructed in known floodplains, proper engineering of
bridges to withstand earthquakes, strengthening crisis service facilities
such as fire stations and hospitals, and establishing effective building
codes to protect property from hurricanes.  Mitigation can be a slow,

time-consuming processÑorganizing a community buyout of homes in athreatened area (e.g., in a floodplain) can take many years, for example,
because of the politics and the myriad players.  The process is administra-

tively intensive and involves countless situation- and location-specific
detailsÑa circumstance in which the use of computer systems clearlyapplies.  Predictive models are also an important tool in mitigation ef-

forts.  Elevation data combined with hydrological models, for example,

permit prediction of areas likely to be affected by riverbed flood.  Ground-

shaking-intensity modeling allows prediction of the impacts of earth-
quakes on sites for storage of hazardous materials.¥Preparedness covers a range of activities taken in advance of a crisis.It includes day-to-day training and exercises as part of increased readi-
ness, as well as development and revision of plans to guide crisis re-
sponse and to increase available resources.  Preparedness is enhanced by

training crisis responders who may be called into action in the event of an
emergency.  Information technology contributes to a variety of prepared-

ness efforts.  For instance, the software tool HAZUS, a product developed

by the National Institute for Building Sciences in cooperation with the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), simulates a postulated
earthquake and provides a map-based analysis of casualties, infrastruc-
ture and building damage, and dollar losses expected.  Another dimen-

sion of preparedness is the development, improvement, and testing of
information and communication resources required for all phases of crisis
management.  Systems for remote sensing (Box 1.1) are identified and

developed, and the use of information technology tools is practiced, in-
cluding how to integrate the multiple information resources that are likely

to be needed in a crisis.5See, e.g., Dennis S. Mileti.  1999.  
Disasters by Design.  Joseph Henry Press, Washington,D.C.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION5THE RESPONSE PHASE:DIFFICULT CHALLENGES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYCrisis response is characterized by the generation and distribution oflarge amounts of unstructured, multimedia data that must be acquired,
processed, integrated, and disseminated in real time.  As such, this phase
poses many of the most difficult information technology challenges in
crisis management and is the context for much of the discussion in this
report.The incident command system, a model commonly used to describethe functions required for command, control, and coordination of the
response to a crisis, illustrates the range of activities undertaken as part of
crisis response. 6  The incident commander provides overall command
and control for the response effort.  Additional command functions, typi-

cally carried out by command staff, include disseminating information to
media, coordinating with other agencies participating in the response,
and ensuring the safety of crisis responders.  The incident commander is

supported by general staff sections that provide the following functions:7BOX 1.1  Remote Sensing
Remote sensing plays an important role in many phases of crisis management,and a number of remote sensing tools are often used to capture spatial informa-tion.  For example, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) makes

use of Department of Defense satellites and assigns them, usually just before orafter a major emergency, to fly over the affected area and photograph it, a practicethat Clay Hollister observed is very useful and can be done reliably and quickly.
FEMA receives the sensor information within 24 hours of the flyover, and it isimmediately distributed to the federal coordinating officerÕs team in the field for usein crisis response planning.  FEMA does not receive the actual photographs but

rather uses and extrapolates the raw data to make maps showing degrees andpockets of damage where, for example, a storm hitOne application of remote sensing that FEMA is working to develop, in con-junction with states, is the mapping of flood potential using synthetic aperture radarand light detection and ranging techniques.  Flood maps developed from these
sources are expected to be much more accurate and useful for response in the
field, as well as for the other phases of emergency management.6See, e.g., Emergency Management Institute.  1998.  
Incident Command System.  Indepen-
dent Study Course IS-195.  Emergency Management Institute, Federal Emergency Manage-

ment Agency, Emmitsburg, Md.7Exercise of military command requires a similar set of functions, and an analogous stan-dard framework is used.  A task force will typically have divisions responsible for person-
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENT¥Planning and intelligenceÑcollection, evaluation, processing, anddissemination of information on situation and resources; documentation
of the incident and the response to it;¥OperationsÑdirection and coordination of response operations;¥LogisticsÑmanagement of facilities, services, and material neededto support responders; and¥Finance and administrationÑtracking of incident costs and reim-bursement accounting.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY USERS IN CRISESCrises touch many people, ranging from the crisis responders who tryto reduce the loss of life and property to those in the affected communities
who rely on warnings and other information to inform their own, indi-
vidual responses.  Because of the central role of information and commu-
nications for each group, information technology research challenges arise
when considering how to improve crisis management from the perspec-
tive of each group of users.CitizensInformation technology aimed at citizens is becoming an increasinglyimportant tool for crisis management.  Expanding access to tools such as

the Internet and cell phones provides new possibilities for informing and
interacting with citizens affected directly by a crisis, as well as for sup-
porting crisis responders.  At the same time, however, citizens have be-

come much more dependent on complex infrastructure services (e.g., cash
machines and other electronic commerce) whose advent has also increased

expectations for speed and ease of access to relief funds.  Tele-registration

is an example of a technology aimed at improving the services provided
to citizens following a disaster (Box 1.2).Crisis RespondersCrisis response requires effective delivery to and use of informationby many different actors.  These crisis responders might be in an incident

command post, orchestrating efforts to respond to a disaster, or located innel; intelligence; operations; logistics; plans and policy; and command, control, communi-cations, and computer systems.  See, e.g., Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS).  1995.  
Unified ActionArmed Forces (Joint Pub 0-2).  JCS, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., p. IV-13.
Available online at <http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/new_pubs/jp0_2.pdf>.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION7the field, requiring situational information about the disaster itself as wellas about their own location and that of other field responders.  Common

to all crisis responders is the dynamic, stressful nature of the situation and
the potential for information overload.  Many will have to integrate infor-

mation from a wide range of sources and be able to coordinate activities
among a potentially large, diverse set of  individuals and organizations.
Government and Other Crisis Management OrganizationsGovernment at all levels may be involved in responding to a crisis,with counties, cities, and towns providing the primary response to most
emergencies.  Thus a major objective is providing these jurisdictions with

the resources to meet their disaster needs and maintain continuity of
government.  During the threat of, or in the midst of actual disaster condi-

tions, local authorities must put emergency response plans into immedi-
ate operation and take actions required to cope with disaster situations.
Special districts (e.g., for fire protection) also play an important role in
emergency preparedness and response.State emergency management offices provide planning, coordinatingresponse and recovery, mitigation, and training.  They are responsible for

coordinating the provision of mutual aid and the allocation of essential
supplies and resources; receiving and disseminating emergency alertsBOX 1.2  Tele-registration for Disaster Assistance
One component of FEMAÕs National Emergency Management Information Sys-tem (NEMIS; see Box 1.3) is tele-registration in the aftermath of a disaster.  Clay
Hollister observed in his remarks at the workshop that the federal disaster programused to operate almost entirely with pencils and paper. In the past, FEMA person-
nel met eye-to-eye with disaster victims, at a table or in a tent, sometimes in pour-ing rain or snow, even if it meant that victims had to wait in line for as long as 24hours.  Registration had always been done that way
Ñit was preferred because itprovided a personal approach.When it was first suggested that victims could call toll-free telephone numbersinstead of waiting in line to register, the idea was widely rejected.  Still, there were

some who saw this as a promising approach.  For a time, FEMA was conducting
both paper and telephone registrations.  Following the Northridge, California, earth-
quake, however, disaster personnel recognized that they could not use in-person
registration to process the claims of the hundreds of thousands of people affectedby the disaster.  Since that event, tele-registration has become the norm.  Its obvi-
ous advantages are convenience for victims of natural disasters, improved infor-
mation management for FEMA, and better use of human resourcesÑthe peoplehandling the tele-registrationÑwho can be located outside the affected area.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTand warnings; monitoring and prioritizing resource requests in coordina-tion with federal disaster operations; and, in conjunction with the federal
government, directing and coordinating recovery programs to mitigate
future disasters and to recover disaster costs.  Other state agencies also

play a role in crisis management, cooperating as appropriate with state
emergency management officials, each other, and other political subdivi-
sions to prepare for, respond to, and mitigate the effects of an emergency.At the federal level, overall responsibility for most emergency pre-paredness and operational activities is assigned to FEMA.8  To manage its
activities, FEMA has recently put a new information technology tool, the
National Emergency Management Information System (NEMIS), into pro-
duction (Box 1.3).  Assignments for other federal agencies, based on their
regular functions and capabilities in areas ranging from transportation to
health and medical service, are detailed in the Federal Response Plan.9Federal emergency management activities include administering of natu-
ral disaster relief programs and responding to technological and other
emergencies requiring federal assistance.  Initial requests for federal as-

sistance are normally coordinated with FEMA by state officials unless
other, more specific procedures are agreed on and contained in mutually
approved contingency plans.Nongovernmental organizations also play a significant role in crisisresponse.  The American Red Cross, also a signatory to the Federal Re-

sponse Plan, provides disaster relief to individuals and families, as well as
emergency mass care in coordination with government and private agen-
cies.  Other volunteer agencies, such as the Salvation Army, provide im-

portant services and resources.  Following a disaster, these organizations

continue to provide services for their constituents, as well as for the gov-
ernmental agencies that have need of their unique services.  Frequently,

these organizations are preidentified through statewide information and
referral networks and are trained to maximize their efficiency and ability
to be integrated into response-and-relief efforts.8A newly issued annex to the Federal Response Plan (Federal Emergency ManagementAgency (FEMA).  April 1999. 
Federal Response Plan.  FEMA-9230.1 PL, FEMA, Washington,D.C., available online at <http://www.fema.gov/r-n-r/frp>) on terrorism gives responsi-
bility for crisis management, which has a significant law enforcement component for thissort of crisis, to the Department of Justice and responsibility for consequence management,that is, coping with the effects of attacks, to FEMA.9The Federal Response Plan (Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  April
1999. Federal Response Plan.  FEMA-9230.1 PL, FEMA, Washington, D.C., available online at<http://www.fema.gov/r-n-r/frp>) is the master document describing the federal
governmentÕs plans for providing assistance to states in dealing with significant disasters,including planning assumptions, policies, and specific assignments of responsibility to fed-eral departments and agencies in providing assistance.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9BusinessBusinesses also play an important role in crisis response, due to bothself-interest and the significant resources they can bring to bear.  Business

and industry leaders recognize that mitigation and preparedness mea-
sures can make a difference in terms of a company surviving a disaster, a
significant positive outcome for a community that depends on its ser-BOX 1.3  FEMAÕs National Emergency Management
Information SystemThe National Emergency Management Information System (NEMIS) is a $70million, 5-year hardware and software automation project initiated in May 1996.This enterprisewide system allows FEMA to better manage the agencyÕs disasterrelief program, including recording preliminary assessments of damage, perform-
ing incident monitoring, preparing the package requesting a presidential declara-tion of disaster, tele-registering disaster victims (Box 1.2), collecting and managingdata from home inspections, issuing relief checks, and training.  Other functions of

NEMIS include coordinating and managing the distribution of donated goods andservices; logging requests for information from the public; providing support fordisaster field offices, including requisitioning supplies, equipment, and services
and requesting, allocating, and obligating disaster funding; processing assistanceand supporting a FEMA customer helpline; managing requests for and disburse-ment of assistance for public infrastructure damage; and managing hazard mitiga-
tion grants.  In addition NEMIS provides a set of common functions, known as
NEMIS-Wide, that includes a reference library, correspondence tracker, databasefor managing the deployment of response workers, and geographical information
system tool.Through the FEMA network, NEMIS provides service to the agencyÕs head-quarters, national processing service centers, 10 regional facilities, standby ware-
houses, and disaster field offices.  NEMIS is also designed to improve access to
state emergency managers.  For example, state emergency management offices
can dial into NEMIS to check on the status of grants or applicants.  As of Decem-
ber 1998, FEMA had used this system to respond to three disasters, and the sys-tem was put into production in early 1999.FEMA chief information officer Clay Hollister characterized the system as hav-ing a significant effect on the FEMA culture because it automates a great deal ofdecision making.  For example, now that the new system is in place, an applicant

for relief funds can call a toll-free telephone number, and an inspector is automat-ically dispatched to the house to verify that the applicant in fact lives there and toassess the damage.  The inspector enters information on the damage into a hand-

held computer and downloads the results of the inspection into the NEMIS system.When the application is determined to be valid, a check is issued.SOURCE:  Adapted in part from Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  1999.
NEMIS Overview.  FEMA, Washington, D.C.  Available online at <http://www.nemishome.
fema.gov/overview/ov_homepage2.htm>.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTvices.  For example, because of the critical role of infrastructures such as
gas, electric, telecommunications (including wireless), water, waste-wa-
ter, and petroleum pipeline industries, the participation and effective co-
ordination of emergency responses with utilities is critical.  Emergency

planning assists not only businesses but also the community at large by
clearly articulating decision-making authority and identifying successors;
identifying actions necessary to protect company property and records
during disasters; and providing such things as a listing of critical prod-
ucts and services, contacts with local emergency management officials,
and methods to provide and accept goods and services from other com-
panies during a crisis situation.  (These issues are discussed in the context

of electronic commerce in Chapter 3.)INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES ANDOPPORTUNITIES IN CRISIS MANAGEMENTPrevious StudyAll phases of crisis managementÑresponse, recovery, mitigation,planning, and preparednessÑare information- and communication-in-tensive efforts that impose demanding requirements on underlying in-
formation technologies.  Indeed, based on an earlier series of workshops

involving computing and communications researchers and crisis man-
agement professionals, a previous CSTB committee concluded that pre-
paring for and responding to crises pose demands that cannot be readily
satisfied with existing information technology tools, products, and ser-
vices.  Their report, 
Computing and Communications in the Extreme (Na-tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1996), identified opportunitiesfor incremental and more radical innovation in several areas, such as
communications (requirements for communications networks extending
from hand-held radios and the public telephone network to high-speed
digital networks for voice, video, and data); information processing and
management technologies (support for resource discovery, dealing with
uncertainty, modeling and simulation, and multimedia fusion and inte-
gration of information); and technologies to support the instant bureau-
cracies that form and must collaborate in managing a given crisis (in-
cluding support in stressful contexts and to meet needs for ease of use,
ease of learning, adaptability, and judgment in decision making) (see
Appendix C).Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION11This Workshop ReportThis workshop report builds on that earlier experience and can bedistinguished from it in several ways.  Since the mid-1990s, some aspects
of the information technology base available for crisis management have
changed.  The leading example is the Internet, which in the past several

years has become a pervasive element of the communications infrastruc-
ture that is being used in all aspects of crisis management, providing at
least part of the means for information exchange between organizations
and for individualized interactions with citizens, just as it does through-
out government and society at large.  More generally, citizens and crisis

responders alike with access to computers and the Internet are more likely
to make regular use of networked information resources.   Another

change, spurred by the rapid emergence of the Internet, has been the
rapid growth of electronic commerce, which presents both new challenges
and new opportunities for crisis management.Moreover, the context of this inquiry differs from that for the earliereffort.  This workshop report summarizes the first phase of a study that is

examining the application of information technology research across gov-
ernment.  An effort thus has been made to explore a range of crisis man-

agement activities, including some that have analogues elsewhere in gov-
ernment, such as how government and individual citizens, or government
and business, interact.  Also, the overall study of which this workshop

report is a part more strongly emphasizes the process by which the IT
research community can collaborate with the crisis management commu-
nity and by which IT innovation can be translated into improvements in
the technologies and systems used in government.Experience has shown that research and application communitiesboth potentially benefit from interaction.  The introduction of new IT

frequently enables organizations not only to optimize the delivery of ex-
isting capabilities but also to deliver entirely new capabilities.  That is,

advances in information technology research represent opportunities not
only for increased efficiency but also for a change in the way government
works, including the delivery of new kinds of services and new ways of
interacting with citizens.   Collaboration with government agencies also

represents a significant opportunity for IT researchers.  Government in

general, and crisis management in particular, provides a set of real, fre-
quently large-scale application domains in which to test new ideasÑap-plications that have texture, richness, and veracity that are not available
in laboratory studies.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTA first step in such interactions is the discussion of needs and theidentification of opportunities.  Chapter 3 of this workshop report ex-

plores a number of research topics that emerged during the discussions
summarized hereÑopportunities that were identified as addressing thedemanding requirements of crisis management and presenting interest-
ing research problems in their own right.  In addition to yielding these

specific opportunities, the discussions resulted in another outcome:  an

increased recognition of the potential of such interaction.  Indeed, both

crisis management professionals and IT researchers who had expressed
some initial skepticism about the benefits of such research indicated after
the workshop that the discussions had increased their awareness of the
interesting challenges and possible opportunities offered by the conduct
of IT research for crisis management.The development of a comprehensive set of specific requirements or afull, prioritized research agenda is, of course, beyond the scope of a single
workshop, and this report does not presume to do either.  Nor is it an

effort aimed at identifying immediate solutions (or ways of funding and
deploying them). Rather, it examines opportunities for engaging the in-
formation technology research and crisis management communities in
longer-term research activities of mutual interest and illustrates substan-
tive and process issues relating to collaboration between them.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132Information Technology Trends
Relevant to Crisis ManagementIn one session of the workshop, panelists were asked to project howtrends in information technology research might affect crisis manage-
ment.  They discussed both the current state of technologies and future

developments, and as part of their analysis identified broad areas of po-
tential growth where new information technology research would have a
significant impact.  In the area of computing and storage, Paul Smith

discussed trends in high-performance computing, including supercom-
puter speeds and very large storage devices.   Barry Leiner discussed

software issues in finding, integrating, and sharing the enormous amount
of information available in current and future information networks.  In

the related area of databases, David Maier outlined trends in the develop-
ment of database systems to support complex applications and data types.

In the area of wireless communications, Phillip Karn gave an overview of
the development of cellular, digital, and satellite communications devices
for voice and packet data.  Finally, Daniel Siewiorek described the rapid

development of computers designed to be worn in the field and touched
on what has been learned about how people interact with these devices.COMPUTING AND STORAGEPaul Smith, from the U.S. Department of EnergyÕs (DOEÕs) office re-sponsible for the safety, security, and reliability of the nationÕs nuclear
weapons stockpile, discussed high-performance computing trends.  These

were recently explored through a series of workshops conducted by DOESummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTon data and visualization corridorsÑpathways through which scientificdata can be exchanged and users can work collaboratively.1  Smith started
by noting that visualizations based on large simulations, information in
large scientific databases, and real-time observations, which depend on
high-performance computing, are a valuable tool that would have many
applications in crisis management.One component of the DOE-sponsored workshops was the develop-ment of a time line (1999 through 2004) for various computing perfor-
mance parameters.  For example, the computing speed of the fastest ma-

chines is expected to increase by a factor of more than 30 by 2004.2   The
size of a typical data query (with a constant transfer time) is projected to
grow from 30 terabytes at the upper limit now to 100 terabytes and even
1 petabyte (1 million gigabytes, the equivalent of 109 books or almost 2
million audio compact disks) directed to archives that are 100 petabytes in
size.  Different applications require different balances of cycle speed ver-

sus memory to achieve a specific result within a certain time.  Systems

must advance in a balanced manner.  The balancing process also must

take into account storage capabilities, speed of data access, and network
speed.Research is under way on storage technology to try to reduce the costand footprint of petabyte  storage systems. In general, the development of

storage technology is well financed, and the market is driving advances
targeted at the low end, such as personal computers, as well as the high
end, such as  large-scale business and corporate systems.  However, at the

very high end (e.g., intelligence and space systems), special efforts will be
required to achieve storage increases.  According to Smith, advances in

storage technologies may be impeded by problems with device reliability,
the physical transparency of devices to end users, the security of network
data, and resource control and management.1See Paul H. Smith and John van Rosendale, eds. 1998.  Data and Visualization Corridors:Report on the 1998 DVC Workshop Series. Technical Report, California Institute of Technol-ogy, Pasadena, California.2 Microprocessor performance has increased rapidly throughout the last decade and has
become equivalent in many cases to that of large machines.  This trend has enabled super-
computers to progress very rapidly, with sustained performance projected to reach 1
petaflop by 2007.  A number of forces are driving these advances.  One is the progress in
electronics, particularly those to which MooreÕs law applies and the associated decrease inthe feature size on microprocessors.  Achieving this progress will require using different

technologies.  The industry currently relies on optical lithography, for example, but in a few
years it is expected to have to convert to a different process, such as X-ray or electron beamlithography.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT15In its high-performance computing program, the DOE is pursuing astrategy of leveraging commercial building blocks by combining many
processors and linking together small storage devices of a size driven by
the commercial marketplace to make larger or scalable systems.  Chal-

lenges associated with this strategy include how to design the informa-
tion management or data management software needed to exploit these
capabilities.INFORMATION MANAGEMENTBarry Leiner of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives dis-cussed software issues in finding, integrating, and sharing the enormous
amount of information available in current and future information net-
works, as well as issues related to availability.  These are issues that the

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has been explor-
ing and for which it has established a useful framework for thinking
about trends in information management (Table 2.1).   The following ele-
ments are necessary to provide information that enables workers to per-
form their jobs well, whether in a collaborative or individual setting:3TABLE 2.1  Trends in Capabilities for Information Management
CapabilityCurrent LevelGoal
Federated repositoriesTens (custom)Thousands (generic)
Items per repositoryThousandsMillions
Size of ÒlargeÓ item1 MB100 MB
Typical response times10 s100 ms

ModePlay and displayCorrelate and manipulate
InteroperabilitySyntacticSemantic
FiltersBibliographicContextual

LanguageMultilingualTranslingual
Context and tagsForms and tagsSemistructured
SOURCE:  Information Technology Office, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.  1999.
Information Management Program Goals.  Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.  Available
online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ito/research/im/goals.html>.3The discussion here is adapted in part from Information Technology Office, DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Information Management Program Goals.  In-
formation Technology Office, DARPA, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.  Avail-

able online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ito/research/im/goals.html>.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENT¥Robust infrastructure.  A crisis can threaten the integrity and perfor-
mance of critical information infrastructure.  How can the infrastructure

be better protected?  How can it be designed to provide graceful degrada-

tion when under stress?¥Information search and retrieval.  Decision-making processes in all
sectors rely on enormous amounts of information, which is continually
being augmented and updated.  How can users effectively query diverse

information sources?  How can they effectively manage the information

they receive in order to support their activities?¥Compatibility of formats.  Shared information can be represented in a
diverse range of formats, which vary according to the syntactic structure,
extent of meaning captured in the representation (e.g., an HTML table vs.
a table in a relational database), and nuances of meaning within catego-
ries (e.g., various bibliographic representations in use in libraries).  How

can diverse formats be reconciled and managed?¥Building of knowledge-sharing organizations.  The ready availability
of electronic information reduces barriers to communication, information
sharing, and collaboration.  What are possible effects on how people and

organizations carry out their business?4The issue of infrastructure availability is a significant challenge incrisis management.  One approach is to design systems that can degrade

gracefully.  Another is to design the system at a level that can be as-

suredÑwhich is what the Department of Defense (DOD) traditionally hasdone in building its own systems.  A drawback of the latter approach is

that DOD is less able to exploit advances in civilian technology.  Neither

approach seems optimal.5   One alternative being explored would selec-
tively provide key information to areas that incur great damage.  For

example, when communications are degraded, only relatively recent in-
formation would be transmitted to affected areas, with ÒprepositionedÓinformation resources providing the rest of the information needed.  This
4This issue is one of those proposed in the AdministrationÕs Information Technology forthe Twenty-First Century (IT2) initiative under the heading ÒSocial, Economic, andWorkforce Implications of Information Technology and Information Technology Develop-ment.Ó5Commenting on the need for collaboration in information management technology,Leiner cited the tremendous synergy between the civilian and military requirements forcrisis management.  Although, the military requirements are more stringent because of the
need to be able to react anywhere, anytime, anyplace, there is civilian-sector technology
that lends itself to meeting those requirements (e.g., laptops provide portable computing inthe field, and commercial satellites provide suitable communications capabilities for manycircumstances).Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT17approach requires knowing in advance what a user will require.   Unlike
the case with disasters such as hurricanes, for which officials have an
advance idea of where the storm might hit and what information must be
available, there are many other sorts of less predictable crises, that can
occur anywhere in the world at any time.  An approach that depends on a

preplanned distribution strategy cannot meet the requirements of such
contingencies.Beyond the challenge of taking the tremendous amount of informa-tion on the Web and making it accessible to crisis management teams
when they need it is the goal of making this information, as well as knowl-
edge representations, available in a way that supports collaboration by ad
hoc teams assembled rapidly in a crisis.DATABASESDavid Maier of the Oregon Graduate Institute discussed severaltrends in the development of database systems to support more complex
applications and data types.¥Support for application logic.  Databases are increasingly managing
not only the data but also the application logic, which consists of instruc-
tions on how to manipulate the data.  This trend began in the mid-1980s,

when stored procedures and object databases began appearing on the
market.  Support for application logic then emerged in both database

engines and affiliated tools.  An example of the former is database en-

gines storing multimedia types; an example of the latter is tools that con-
vert data into HTMLÑthe language used to represent Web pagesÑtosupport user interfaces.  The trend toward integration of application logic

was successful for several reasons.  One reason is the ability to mask

heterogeneity.  In a large enterprise using many different types of ma-

chines, an application that can be written using only database services is
more easily moved than one that depends on platform-specific services
such as a file system.  A second reason is manageability.  Applications are

changing rapidly and acquiring new functions, so help from a database
system is useful.  The database can help deploy, configure, and manage

applications that use data and can help recover both the data and the
application after something goes wrong.  Finally, incorporating applica-

tion logic into databases helps provide scalability in applications, which
have become quite complicated, require access to distributed data, and
must support large numbers of users.  For example, transactions can be

initiated with a store or airline without any human intermediary, and so
the availability of sales representatives no longer limits the number of
users that can access the database at once.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENT¥Data type extensibility. The ability to add additional data types pro-vides a database with additional information about an application.  Thus,

rather than simply identifying an image representation inserted in a data-
base as a large, untyped sequence of bits, the database understands the
type of  image and how it can be manipulated. The result is that the user

can search and manipulate complex types directly in the database system
rather than in the external application program, leading to a reduction in
application complexity and improved consistency of the data in the data-
base.6¥Data warehousing.  Database developers are realizing that users
want their products to provide support for executing complex decision
support queries on the same systems that process online transactions,
spanning multiple data sources.  At one time, it was believed that rela-

tional databases would enable users to run complex decision support
queries.  But in fact, systems optimized for transaction throughput do not

support efficient analytical queries, and vice versa.  Today, because data

can be duplicated for an affordable price, a separate copy of the data can
be used in a database system organized for efficient support of decision
support queries.   In addition, many tools are available for moving opera-

tional data into a warehouse, extracting and cleaning them, and loading
them in parallel.  The warehouses hold much more data than do opera-

tional transaction-processing systems, often terabytes of information.
Database languages and query processors have extensions for efficient
data analysis.  For example, they could analyze all sales for a large retailer

such as Wal-Mart and display it by store, by department, and by quarter.
Such tasks frequently involve analyzing hundreds of millions to billions
of records.7 ¥Development of application servers.  To support applications with
many users, a middle tier is evolving between the database and desktop.
This application server acts as an intermediary between clients and back-
end databases.  The client portion of an application might simply be a

form in a Web browser that captures some information about what data
and operations are needed.  The application server determines what back-
6In an object database, extensions involve adding new classes of data.  In relational data-
bases, pluggable modules called extenders or cartridges are added.7This approach does not necessarily apply to database management in crisis managementapplications.  A well-managed company such as Wal-Mart can be in control of all its data
and can make at least the formats consistent.  The ad hoc composition that characterizes

much of crisis management information processing is not centrally managed, due to thelarge number of independent organizations involved, and can present huge challenges foranalysis.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT19end database(s) to contact and performs the computationally expensiveparts of operations.  Maier said that the database companies are starting

to figure out how their products can make this middle layer easier to
construct and manage.  A benefit of this approach is that, rather than

trying to update 10,000 clients with a new application (including worry-
ing about providing and controlling remote access to each), one could
simply update 10 application servers with new logic.Amid all these advances, databases continue to have limitations.  One
is the disk-centric focus of current database system products.  For ex-

ample, some people still argue that a large enterprise should not deploy
servers in all the locations where it conducts business but should instead
have one large server to which each business site is connected.  In other

words, the focus is still on data storage rather than on data movement,
which Maier pointed to as a key to the future of database technology.
Database systems should involve data staging and movement, rather than
just holding data in readiness for future queries.Another current limitation of databases is that they do not handleunexpected types of data wellÑa formal structure known as a schemamust first be defined.  That is, if a user uncovers some interesting infor-

mation of a new type and wants to preserve it and its structure for ma-
nipulation and delivery later, the current generation of database system
products generally cannot readily accommodate the new information.
For database systems to expand in scope, this Òschema firstÓ requirement
must be relaxed.WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONSPhilip Karn of Qualcomm discussed some past, current, and futuretrends in wireless communications, which have been driven by a combi-
nation of increased demands for end-to-end performance and the need to
achieve greater efficiency in use of the finite radio spectrum.8In the mid- to late 1970s, analog two-way radio systems were com-monplace.  Analog technology continues to be used in combination with

sophisticated control systems and is the workhorse for two-way public
service and emergency communications.  Also at that time, DARPA be-

gan funding a substantial amount of research in packet radio.  The con-

cept was that packet radio networks could be dropped into remote areas8For an extended discussion of the history of wireless communications development seeComputer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1997.The Evolution of Untethered Communications.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTto fill gaps in existing systems.  Much of that early research is now start-
ing to bear fruit in operational systems, Karn said.In the early to mid-1980s, advanced mobile phone service (AMPS),which uses traditional analog voice modulation, was developed and de-
ployed.  The major innovation was its use of digital control channels, so

that calls could be switched automatically from one cell site to another,
allowing the user to treat an AMPS cellular telephone in much the same
manner as a wireline telephone.In the late 1980s, demand for cellular telephone service increased.Qualcomm started trying to apply well-established spread-spectrum tech-
niques to improve the efficiency of cellular telephony.  In the early 1990s,
the company launched tests of code division multiple access (CDMA),
which is based on the spread-spectrum technologies used in the military.
At that time there were a number of competing digital systems. Now in
limited use in North America, Asia, and Eastern Europe, CDMA was first
launched commercially in Hong Kong in 1995.  Two schemes (GSM and

IS-54) based on time division multiple access (TDMA) operate according
to similar principles but are not compatible with each other.By the mid-1990s, digital cellular systems were widely deployed. GSMis used primarily in Europe but also in Japan and the United States.  IS-54

is also used in the United States and elsewhere in North America.Similar underlying technologies, particularly high-speed digital sig-nal processing, video compression, and audio compression, are used in
the direct broadcasting satellite business, which is among the most rap-
idly developing consumer technologies.  Low-Earth-orbit satellite net-

works are close to commercial operation and, if successful, will provide
access to disaster-stricken remote areas where there is no cellular cover-
age.  The prices are relatively low compared to those for today
Õs satellitesystems but are high enough that competition with a terrestrial system
will be difficult.  Therefore, many see these satellite services primarily as

a way of filling in the gaps in terrestrial cellular coverage in remote areas.Another interesting development is Part 15 ad hoc networks.  Part 15of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules applies to low-
power unlicensed devices.  Certain segments of radio spectrum are set

aside for use by low-power devices that meet a relatively simple set of
technical requirements.  Metricoms
Õs Ricochet modems are an example ofa Part 15 ad hoc network that employs a mesh network topology.Efforts are also finally under way to set wireless standards for thenext generation of wireless telephony, which, given the multitude of pos-
sible design choices in digital systems, is important. This is an important
issue for emergency communications because interoperability problems
inhibit rapid network deployment.  Historically, the wireless industry has

been characterized by proprietary protocols, and getting true inter-Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT21operable standards has been difficult, except when they are championedby large companies that are still licensing the technology.Advances in digital wireless have been enabled by four importanttechnologies.  Spread-spectrum technologies simplify spectrum manage-

ment and can enhance privacy.  Because the industry is close to the theo-

retical channel capacity limits established by Claude Shannon in the 1940s,
low-bit-rate voice coding is increasingly important.  Error-control coding
is another enabling technology that maximizes system capacity. In addi-
tion, application-specific integrated circuits have been crucial to making
these systems work efficiently at low power.  Further increases in system
capacity will come at high costs.  Companies could deploy more and

smaller cells, use directional antennas, or implement more flexible chan-
nel management strategies.A recent FCC mandate to improve capabilities for pinpointing thepositions of cellular telephones when they are used to report emergencies
of course has direct implications for crisis management.  Existing tech-

nologies can only identify in which cell the caller is located.Particularly relevant to crisis management is the provision of dataservices by wireless carriers.  In the early 1990s, carriers developed cellu-
lar digital packet data (CDPD), an overlay for the existing AMPS analog
network, to provide some basic capability to send Internet Protocol (IP)
data packets over cellular frequencies.9  Although CDPD is becoming
more widely available, it is still not supported in many rural areas.  CDPD

systems are also slow, and the wider the area covered, the slower a sys-
tem will be.  Furthermore, CDPD is expensive; charges when the service

was first offered were about 15 cents per kilobyte.   The low adoption rate

was interpreted as being indicative of low demand for wireless data ser-
vices.  CDPD is now being sold by carriers on a flat-rate basis, and its use

is increasing.The potential exists to provide support for IP packet data in digitalcellular services.  The existing infrastructure generally does not support

this capability, in part because the transition to digital services was man-
aged for fast deployment of voice-only service.  This situation is begin-

ning to change.A related trend is the development of new modulation and channel-access schemes specifically designed for packet data instead of voice.  For
9Amateur packet radio was developed in the early 1980s in both terrestrial and satelliteversions.  For many years it has provided support for emergency and disaster communica-

tions.  Today, as cellular telephones and other commercial systems are meeting most of the
operational requirements for disaster communications, the primary role of amateur packetradio has shifted toward technical experimentation and education.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTexample, QualcommÕs new high data rate technology is somewhat like anasymmetrical digital subscriber line technology for cellular systems.  In-

stead of guaranteeing a particular quality of service, these systems per-
form the best they can in current conditions, optimizing overall system
throughput.TRENDS IN WEARABLE COMPUTERSDaniel Siewiorek of Carnegie Mellon University discussed trends inwearable computers.  He demonstrated an early-generation wearable

computer that was designed in about 1994 and supported a marine in
performing a 600-element inspection of an amphibious tractor.  This sys-

tem, which employed a head-mounted display to replace a clipboard, was
awkward to use in many situations.  It did not use voice input, which

might be overheard by an enemy, but relied instead on a keypad inter-
face.  Field studies showed that the wearable computer saved 70 percent

of the time needed to perform an inspection and enter the data into a
logistics computer that would then generate work orders for mechanics.To indicate the possible roles of wearable computers, an analogy be-tween computing and electrical motors is useful. About 100 years ago, big
dynamos produced energy, and people brought their work (e.g., drill
presses) to the dynamos.  Later, the fractional-horsepower motor was

invented, and it could be incorporated into an individual drill press and
moved out into small job shops.10  That change was analogous to the
transition from mainframe to desktop computing.  Today, a car may have

50 electric motors, which pop the gas tank lid, run the windshield wipers,
lock the doors, and so on.  Their function is transparent to the user; there

is no need for a 500-page userÕs manual to unlock a car.  Wearable com-
puters are likely to follow analogous trends toward pervasive deploy-
ment of computer devices.  One forecast is that a user might have five IP

addresses assigned to his or her body.As electronics become faster, smaller, and more portable, human fac-tor issues are becoming more important, because it is not yet known how
humans will interact with wearable technology.  A considerable amount

of experimentation is under way in this area.  For example, researchers at

Carnegie Mellon University have built 16 generations of wearable com-10An historical analysis of how this change in organizational practiceÑthe shift to usingindividual motorsÑwas instrumental in realizing significant gains in manufacturing pro-ductivity is given in Paul A. David.  1990.  
ÒThe Dynamo and the Computer: An HistoricalPerspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox.Ó American Economic Review, 80(2):355-361.
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT23puting over the past 8 years and have learned much about critical factorsaffecting wearability such as placement on the body.  Placement at some

regions of the body may be more favorable because a device will move
less as a person goes through the motions of a task.   On the other hand,

the degree to which device weight and thickness affect task performance
and comfort can vary with body location.  Body heat and device heat

conduction also can affect wearer comfort significantly.  A wearable de-

vice can act as a vapor barrier, affecting the comfort of a wearer working
on an airplane in a hot environment.  Intel Corporation discovered that a

personÕs lap is more sensitive to dissipated heat than the fingers.  Laptopcomputers are now designed to dissipate heat without making the user
feel uncomfortable, for example by dumping heat through the keyboard.Researchers have found that users tend to have high expectations forwearable devices.  The user of a wearable computer is much less patient

than one using a desktop model, expects an instant response to inputs,
and wants the computer to be as easy to use as a flashlight.  The demand

is for a device that a user can simply turn on and operate, without re-
course to a userÕs manual.Siewiorek also noted potential hazards in the use of this technology.Given too much information, the user may focus too heavily on the com-
puter and lose touch with the physical world.  Interaction design is also a

significant issue.  Users may also lose initiative, doing only what the

computer tells them to do.Applying MooreÕs law to the computing power needed to supporthuman interfaces, one can predict the performance and styles of inter-
faces that will become feasible.  In the early 1980s, computers could per-

form about 1 million instructions per second (MIPS), enough to support a
textual alphanumeric interface with a keyboard.   Graphical user inter-

faces with a mouse and icons became supportable when processor speeds
reached 10 MIPS.  Handwriting recognition systems require 30 MIPS;

speech recognition systems, about 100 MIPS.  These latest interfaces
Ñspeech synthesis output, multimedia data typesÑmay take some time todevelop, potentially requiring 5 to 10 years to develop data representa-
tions for three-dimensional gesturing, position sensing, and stereo visual
and audio output.Energy is a key factor driving wearable computer technology.  In-
deed, more than half of the weight of todayÕs wearable devices is in bat-teries.  Projections show that it is possible to reduce energy use by an

order of magnitude, but that as this is done, the fraction of the total
energy used by the various system components shifts.  For example, as

computing becomes more efficient, the radio uses a much greater propor-
tion of system power, and the energy needed to transmit data becomes a
greater factor.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTThe type of information being sent has a major impact on energyneeds.  A National Research Council study looked at how much battery

weight is needed to acquire and transmit a particular piece of informa-
tion.11  For example, it is estimated that about 1/100th of a gram in battery
weight is needed to perform speech recognition on voice input and trans-
mit the information as text, and about 1/2,000th of a gram to digitize and
transmit voice as audio.  But compression and transmission of video

would require about 10 grams of batteries.  The battery weight required

to distribute real-time data with full-color video among mobile users in
the battlefield would be quite large.11National Research Council.  1997.  
Energy-Efficient Technologies for the Dismounted Sol-dier.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.253Information Technology
Research Opportunities
INFORMATION MANAGEMENTWorkshop participants identified several areas in which improve-ments in information technology could have a significant influence on the
management of information during each of the four different phases of
crisis management (see Chapter 1).  A fundamental goal of the use of

information systems in crisis management is the ability to supply decision
makers at all levels with the information they need when they need it.
The information users who must be served during a crisis include, among
others, crisis managers themselves, field workers, and victims or poten-
tial victims of a disaster.  Supplying decision makers with information

requires a number of capabilities.  First, the appropriate data must be

acquired, either as a preparedness activity or during the response to a
crisis.  Crisis responders require retrieval and access mechanisms to allow

them to find and reduce to the essential items the information they need.
Delivery mechanisms are needed to get appropriate information to the
right people.  Success in each phase of crisis management depends on

successful information management in the preceding phase.  For example,

the response relies on the development of an effective mobilization data-
base and plan in the preparedness phase, and integration of crisis re-
sponse resources depends on the effective tracking of people and other
resources during mobilization.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTInformation AcquisitionSeveral research topics were described to improve acquisition of bet-ter information for use in responding to crises.  One challenge is discrep-

ancies between the data stored in crisis respondersÕ geographical infor-
mation system (GIS) databases and the Òground truth.Ó  For example,

crisis responders may have access to rough, outdated information on
storage facilities of hazardous materials but may lack up-to-date, detailed
information about what kind of material a particular building contains,
even though such information is known to the operator of an industrial
facility.  New data management paradigms are needed that would permit

geographically and administratively distributed GIS repositories to oper-
ate with one another in a more seamless and transparent fashion.1Improving the collection of both input and response data during(rather than only after) a crisis is obviously important for keeping crisis
responders informed during a crisis.  In addition, mining the data after

the event would facilitate formulating improved response plans for fu-
ture crises by determining which response measures and mitigation ef-
forts were effective.  Such data sets would be invaluable in validating and

improving the quality of crisis models.Integration and InteroperabilityIntegration of information from a variety of sources and organiza-tions is a fundamental issue facing crisis responders.  Requirements for

integrating data are not uniformÑthe requirements for speed, complete-
ness, and quality of the information and the integration among organiza-
tions all vary depending on the phase and location of the crisis.  Early in

the response to a crisis, integration must proceed rapidly, often in an ad
hoc fashion.  Describing a California Department of Forestry incident

management team that manages large incidents including fires, floods,
and earthquake, Thomas OÕKeefe observed at the workshop that these
teams must be able to go anywhere at a half-hourÕs notice and must
manage the up-to-several-thousand crisis responders arriving within 24
to 36 hours.  Just getting this number of people to an incident quickly is a
major challenge that represents only the first part of the problem.  Inte-

grating them for optimal performance is much more complex.  Integra-

tion efforts must extend both vertically within an organization and hori-
zontally among organizationsÑsometimes across a large number of
organizations.  Response to a major crisis in the United States, for in-
1The Open GIS Consortium, with participation from government and industry, is work-ing to develop standards for such sharing of geographical data.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES27stance, involves local, state, and federal governments as well as private-sector businesses and organizations.  A crisis with international dimen-

sions may be even more complex.  Jack Harrald cited the recent crisis in

Rwanda, in which hundreds of organizations and hundreds of thousands
of people were involved.  Indeed, at one point during the Rwanda crisis,

each of more than 100 international organizations were producing infor-
mation that in many cases was inconsistent.A number of significant nontechnical barriers impede implementa-tion of solutions, including organizational resistance to sharing data or to
interoperating, lack of overall system architectures, security constraints
that make information sharing difficult, and both the absence of appli-
cable standards and nonadherence to extant standards.2In addition, workshop participants identified a number of ways inwhich research on interoperability and integration could make a signifi-
cant contribution to improved crisis management.  First, given the dy-

namic, rapidly developing nature of crises, improved techniques for the
dynamic discovery of information relevant to a crisis and for the fusion of
information from multiple sources are important.  Central to discovery

and fusion of information are techniques that help determine the accu-
racy, reliability, or ÒqualityÓ of the information that is discovered and
processed.Some key approaches to integrating information and facilitatinginteroperability of information systems involve the creation and manage-
ment of metadata, the information that describes the format and content
of other information, such as the fields in documents or annotations of
video sequences.Standardization of the metadata describing the format of the manydatabases involved in crisis management systems could be achieved
through agreement on XML DTDs (document type definitions, which are
formal descriptions of what can appear in a document and how docu-
ments are structured),3 and more work should be done in this area.  Meta-
data that describes the content or important topics covered by informa-
tion objects and databases is more difficult to standardize but is a crucial
part of integrating heterogeneous information resources.  This type of
2Many other factors make it difficult to achieve interoperability.  See Computer Science
and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1999.  
Realizing the Potential ofC4I:  Fundamental Challenges. 
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., for a discussion
of factors affecting all organizations as well as special challenges faced in a U.S. military
context.3XML is the eXtensible Markup Language being developed by the World Wide WebConsortium.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTmetadata is often expressed using a predefined vocabulary, representedas a list of categories or more structured forms such as taxonomies and
ontologies.  Many taxonomies already exist in government agencies, and

many others are being created.  Developing technology to support the

development and merging of taxonomies, as well as the application of
these taxonomies to information objects, is an important research chal-
lenge.  As part of these efforts ways must be found of coping with the

evolution of metadata.  Another challenge is to find ways to address

heterogeneous standards, much as systems today must support multiple
image or document format standards.Although metadata, ontologies, and the like are important tools forintegrating data, further work is needed on approaches to both system
interoperability (ensuring that systems can successfully exchange data)
and semantic interoperability (allowing data arising from heterogeneous
systems to be successfully interpreted), particularly when data integra-
tion must be conducted ad hoc and on the fly.The response to a crisis is characterized by the distributed generationof large amounts of unstructured, multimedia data that must be acquired,
processed, integrated into the current situation model, and disseminated
in real time to be useful to crisis responders.  Technology that automati-

cally captures the context of each piece of data would significantly in-
crease its value.  Even relatively simple techniques such as automatically

geo-locating all input data elements would be beneficial.Techniques are needed to filter both incorrect and duplicative dataitems and to summarize and automatically convert unstructured data
inputs into progressively more structured forms for subsequent analysis
by both humans and models.  Much of the unstructured data will be in

the form of text, so research on text filtering, summarization, extraction,
and event detection will be particularly relevant.  Speech will be another

important source of information, and exploiting it will require research
on recognition in noisy environments, segmentation, and indexing. Video
will become increasingly important, and techniques for video segmenta-
tion, summarization, and indexing will be required.  Integrating and ex-

ploiting the rich information content in multiple video sources, such as
might be obtained from crisis responders in the field, are additional chal-
lenges.Given that crisis management depends on the integration of informa-tion coming from multiple organizations and government agencies, each
of which may have policy constraints regarding confidentiality, a chal-
lenge is to develop techniques that permit integration for the purpose of
crisis management consistent with maintaining those constraints.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES29Data DeliveryOne important element of data delivery is ensuring that data will beavailable when and where needed.  Replication
Ñthe periodic copyingand distribution of updated versions of database contentsÑis clearly akey component in availability.  But simply replicating data in a safe loca-

tion outside the region affected by a crisis is not necessarily effective if the
crisis cuts all communication paths to the replicated data.  One obvious

solution is to increase the number of replicas, but determining what is an
optimal design requires understanding the appropriate trade-offs both in
the cost of providing and managing local storage and in the performance
penalty entailed in keeping the replicas updated and consistent.  Data

delivery in a crisis situation is an example of the issue that David Maier
pointed to in his discussion of limitations of todayÕs database systems (seeÒDatabasesÓ in Chapter 2)
Ñthe need for database systems that includedata staging and movement rather than just serving as repositories.The delivery of large amounts of information in real time or near-realtime, for example, video or high-resolution satellite imagery, is a signifi-
cant challenge, particularly when existing infrastructure has been dam-
aged or delivering to mobile units is required.  One option pointed to by

workshop participants was the use of digital direct broadcast satellite
services by crisis response teams deployed in the field.  The Defense

Advanced Research Project AgencyÕs (DARPAÕs) battlefield awarenessdata dissemination project was cited as having developed technology that
might be adaptable to the data delivery requirements of crisis response.Geographical Information System PerformanceAn additional area of particular concern noted by workshop partici-pants was the performance of GISs, which play an important role in crisis
management.  Participants noted that the major database system vendors

such as Oracle, IBM, Informix, and NCR are rapidly improving both the
functionality and scalability of the spatial capabilities of their standard
database products.  Over the next couple of years it is likely that the

majority of large spatial data sets will reside in commercial database sys-
tems and not in specialized GISs.  As managing terabyte-sized spatial

data sets becomes as routine in the future as managing terabyte-sized
commercial data sets is today, database vendors will need to provide a
sufficient level of GIS performance.INFORMATION FOR PEOPLELike any other human-computer interfaces, crisis management sys-tems should be developed using good user-centered design methods,Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTincluding an early focus on users and their tasks; ongoing empirical mea-surement and evaluation of systems; iterative design and testing; and
integrated focus on the end-to-end systems, which considers the larger
social context in which they are deployed.However, crisis management poses a number of unique challenges(e.g., situations are nonroutine, rapidly changing, often very high risk,
and so forth).  Interfaces must be designed so that they can operate effec-
tively in a high-stress environment, as well as be intuitive, given that they
may be operated by users who have had only minimal training or who
may not have operated a system since the last crisisÑin a crisis, no onecan effectively digest a thick user manual.Many of the most difficult human-technology interface issues are evi-dent in the initial response stage of crisis management, but some occur in
the recovery, mitigation, and preparedness phases as well.  (In addition,

as discussed below, there are important reasons to use the same tools and
interfaces across all these phases.)  The response phase is characterized by

the need to observe, understand, and integrate a wide range of informa-
tion sources; communicate and coordinate among the many different roles
of and requirements for information; and, most important, make rapid
decisions.The following general observations cut across many of the more spe-cific comments below:¥There is no MooreÕs law on human perception, attention, or cognitive andproblem-solving capabilities.  The scarce resource in human-computer inter-
faces is human attention.  The situation is exacerbated in a crisis, because
the novelty of the situation consumes attention that would otherwise be
available.  The issue of information overload is discussed further below.
¥Crises are nonroutine and complex. Thus they pose challenges for
training and iterative design and evaluation of systems.  In addition,

humans resort to well-learned and practiced behaviors during times of
crisis and stress.  Creative problem-solving is difficult under these cir-

cumstances.¥Communication and collaboration are critical. Crises involve a variety
of phases, organizations, information needs, and roles for individuals.
Often people who have not worked closely together are brought together
in demanding circumstances.¥Crisis responders are best able to make effective use of tools that they alsouse routinely. Priority should be given to developing tools and interfacesthat are useful in both routine and crisis situations.  For example, most

users today are familiar with the Web browser user interface.¥Decision making is key.  People in all roles need to organize, abstract,
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES31and share information rapidly and flexibly in support of effective direc-tion and coordination of crisis response activities.Presenting and Using InformationCrisis responders need to get information quickly and flexibly.TodayÕs interfaces often exacerbate this problem by relying on a limitedset of input and output capabilities.  Researchers should continue to push

the hardware and software envelope to support new interaction styles
(e.g., richer visualization, perceptual user interfaces, multimodal input,
support for a range of motor and language capabilities) to eliminate this
impedance mismatch. Advances are required at the cognitive level as
well, where peopleÕs rich but fallible memories and vast amounts of gen-eral and domain-specific knowledge often do not match well with the
information required by computer decision support systems.  A richer

range of interaction styles is also important to match the userÕs environ-ment.  For someone who is driving a vehicle, for example, an audio inter-

face may be more appropriate than a screen display.  At the forefront of

all design improvements should be the goal of better leveraging and aug-
menting of natural human capabilities.Information presentation must be flexible.  People need to extract
relevant information rapidly, but which information is relevant varies
across individuals and at different phases of crisis management.  Not all

the data collected during a crisis needs to be disseminated to all the vari-
ous decision makers during the crisis (although capture of all the infor-
mation may be invaluable later for analysis and training purposes).  Some

crisis responders need to get the Òbig picture,Ó others need to abstract and
integrate information, and others need access to finer and finer details.
User interfaces that support integration of information with easily con-
figurable ÒviewsÓ are needed.  One approach might be to define a set of
well-tailored products aimed at predefined crisis responder ÒcustomermodelsÓ that then can also be fully customized by the user.  Developing
improved systems requires a better understanding of user requirements,
information presentation techniques, information access strategies, and
the development of flexible and modular architectures for information
selection and presentation.Supporting Effective Communications and CoordinationIn crisis management situations, crisis responders are quickly broughttogether, both physically and virtually.  Multiple existing infrastructures,

bureaucracies, and individuals are quickly assembled into a virtual team.
People need to quickly develop community and working relationships.  A
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENThybrid of centralized and decentralized approaches to controlling andmanaging information resources is required.Communications of all forms (one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one,and many-to-many) must be supported.  Interactions will take place

among crisis responders and between crisis responders and citizens.
People need to speak the Òsame languageÓ (or find ways of translating
among languages)Ña challenge that encompasses both multilingual is-sues (e.g., facility in 27 different languages was required in a recent Cali-
fornia crisis) and semantic mismatches (which are more difficult to de-
tect).Situational awareness provides an important background channel ofactivity (e.g., the command center ÒhubbubÓ) and must be maintained inelectronic environments.  Situational action depends critically on having

a good sense of the overall state of events.  In addition, a common under-

standing of the general state of affairs gives all decision makers better
information for making necessary trade-offs.Supporting Effective Real-Time Decision MakingUnder Uncertainty and StressCrisis situations are characterized by rich, rapidly changing informa-tion flows and by tremendous uncertainty.  People in stressful situations

and conditions of information overload tend to resort to  ineffective deci-
sion-making strategies.  Simply providing access to information is not

enough to support decision makers.  Much more effective systems are

required for helping crisis responders evaluate, filter, and integrate infor-
mation.  As one workshop participant put it, in a crisis, support must be

provided to overwhelmed and distracted individuals who are, for ex-
ample, less able to take on new projects or use new information technolo-
gies.  This situation is different from more routine circumstances in which

the traditional rule-based systems for decision support operate.  Simula-

tions and preparedness drills help in many ways, but training for unpre-
dictable events is a difficult challenge.  Current interfaces also do not

typically provide support for quickly prioritizing tasks (though such tools
have been developed in some fields such as medicine).Several measures can be taken to help mitigate these design chal-lenges. Increased automation was one approach suggested to compensate
for decreased capabilities and to reduce stress level.  Mixed-initiative

systems, which combine features of directly manipulable and agent-based
systems, could also support more effective decision making in crisis situ-
ations.  Systems could be asked to monitor important situations and high-

light changes that signify problems.  Systems could also suggest courses

of actions based on the situation.  For example, automatic triggers in a
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES33disaster where many people are displaced from their homes could sug-gest to an emergency manager what resources (e.g., blankets or cots)
might be necessary.  Better methods for users to interact with agents and

more effective tools for automated reasoning would help.   The utility of

such systems will be enhanced if they incorporate emergency manage-
ment current plans and the underlying assumptions.  For example, if a

plan has crisis responders entering a flood-stricken area to evacuate resi-
dents, a system designed to know planned entry and exit routes could
provide an automated early warning if the plan becomes infeasible be-
cause a bridge along the route has failed.Another approach to coping with the needs of users under stress is toimprove the ease of use of systems through a better understanding of the
varied needs and capabilities of users.  For example, systems that can

monitor a userÕs performance would allow systems to adapt in real timeto the changing capabilities of users under stress.Another area to explore is development of stress filters for the audio,visual, and textual (i.e., e-mail) information that is provided to crisis re-
sponders.  For instance, one of the major problems during crisis response
is the transfer of stress among the responders, a self-compounding prob-
lem akin to what happens in a noisy restaurant when customers speak
louder in an attempt to make themselves heard.  Systems that detect and

defuse such stressful spirals would be usefulAnother issue important to effective decision making is understand-ing the uncertainty in presented information.  Although people realize at
an intellectual level that information, whether based on field reports or
the output of a simulation, may be uncertain, there are few external aids
to reinforce this.  Displays tend to show crisp and clear boundaries, report

numbers to several places of accuracy, and so on.  Information presenta-

tion techniques that better represent the inherent uncertainty would fa-
cilitate a direct, intuitive, and more accurate understanding of the state of
knowledge.Handling Information OverloadThe process of collecting, organizing, and disseminating informationduring the course of a crisis is time consuming.  A single person in a

command post may need to listen to and integrate information from doz-
ens of people in the field to get a complete picture of what is happening
during a disaster. Disaster situations force emergency managers to con-
tend with 100 to 1,000 times the normal number of variables, and the
impacts of this stress level should not be underestimated.  The scale of

information collection and dissemination during a significant emergency
is vast.  In a Santa Ana fire, for example, 15,000 radio transmissions might
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENToccur in a day.  Person-to-person, verbal communications cannot cope
with this sort of information traffic volume, and no one can keep track of
the entire picture.  Workshop participants suggested that innovations in

speech recognition technology may be helpful in meeting this challenge.
In addition, other computing and communications technologies are being
developed that can help identify, retrieve, filter, prioritize, and integrate
diverse sources of information to support a wide range of decision mak-
ers.  Some users will need access to details and others will need a higher-
level picture of a given situation.  Systems that provide situational aware-

ness and a shared view of the information can help in communicating
with others.Overcoming Language and Other Barriers to CommunicationDuring routine and emergency incidents, 911 emergency operators,as well as firefighters, paramedics, and law enforcement officers, must
deal with people who speak languages other than English.  Language

barriers are, of course, also a factor in military operations.  Workshop

participants pointed to the potential represented by the DARPA multilin-
gual interview system developed for use in Bosnia (described in more
detail in Box 3.1) in helping crisis responders communicate with citizens
not fluent in English.  Participants observed that this device
Õs potentialbenefit for the delivery of public safety services could be large.  Poten-

tially, PC-based versions could be placed in every law enforcement, fire,
and emergency medical dispatch center in the nation.  A wearable version

might be widely used by the fire service, paramedics, law enforcement
agencies, correctional facilities, and hospitals.  It would also be useful to

build translator systems to cope with other communications barriers be-
tween crisis responders and citizens.  Devices could be built to facilitate

field communications with the hearing and speech impaired as well.Warning Citizens at RiskEarly warning systems have been developed for many hazards, in-cluding earthquakes, tornadoes, nuclear plant accidents, and tsunamis.
In the case of earthquakes, even a few secondsÕ warning can be useful.
This was the case, for instance, following the Loma Prieta earthquake.
Rescue workers were able to receive a few secondsÕ notice of an after-
shock, giving them a chance to move to a safer location.  Warning sys-

tems also play an important role in flash floods.  In that case, there have

been significant advances in detection but less progress in the dissemina-
tion of information from the detection systems and in the response to the
warnings.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES35In all crises, providing up-to-date information to large segments ofthe public is important because it permits them to take appropriate ac-
tions, helps prevent panic, can speed remediation efforts, and can prevent
follow-on crises.  Widespread broadcasts are not necessarily the best ap-

proachÑthey can provide only limited situation-specific information andcannot provide details tailored to the needs of individuals, such as what
evacuation route to use.  Also, broadcast warnings are not well suited to

disasters that have limited geographical impact.  False alarms have the

effect of decreasing the attention people give to warnings.New technologies like Òcall by locationÓ and zoned alert broadcasts
could help by providing more focused (and presumably more accurate)
warnings, and more detailed advice on what actions to take.  One ap-

proach identified as worthy of further investigation is what is known as a
reverse 911 system, whereby the usual direction of interaction between
citizens and emergency managers is reversed.  In a crisis such as a fire or

flash flood, such a system could automatically call all the households and
businesses that might be affected, warn them of the impending danger,
and instruct them on what evasive action should be taken.The approach can be extended beyond simply making calls overwireline telephones.  For instance, the Federal Communications Commis-

sion has mandated that cell phone systems be capable of providing accu-
rate information on location.  One could envision exploiting this capabil-

ity to include automatic dissemination of information to cell phone usersBOX 3.1  Fielding a Multilingual Interview System
One new technology developed by the Defense Advanced Research ProjectsAgency (DARPA) that has been rapidly translated into a fielded product is theMultilingual Interview System.  The basic technology is simple, consisting of a

speech recognition system that recognizes which of a set of 200 or 300 phraseshas been uttered, consults an index, and pulls out a CD recording of that phrasespoken in another language.  The system enables the user to get yes-or-no an-

swers to basic questions, as well as directions using maps.  Such devices must be
designed to be portable and easy to update.  To construct a prototype, DARPA
packaged this system into a laptop device with a power supply and other compo-
nents.  The system has been provided in this form to users in the field in Bosnia,
where it has aided in such activities as interviewing Bosnians about the locationsof mine fields.A hand-held version is being developed by DARPA that could be placed in acoat pocket.  Those who have used this technology have been very interested in
its possible applications, and there appears to be a potentially strong commercial
market, according to workshop participant Ronald Larsen.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTas they enter danger areas (e.g., a canyon where a there is a threat due toa flash flood).Community education as part of mitigation efforts is another impor-tant approach, and one where information technology can play an impor-
tant role.  In general people have tremendous misperceptions of the risks
involved in crisis situations and tend to believe that a disaster will not
affect them.  What can be done to get people to prepare for the time when

Òtoday is the dayÓ?  One approach is suggested by the observation that itis easier to get peopleÕs attention in areas that have suffered throughmany crises.  Simulations combined with virtual reality display systems

that illustrate the likely outcome of a crisis such as a flood to those who
would likely be affected by such an event occurringÑÒa virtual realitystress inducerÓÑmay be useful in convincing them to take appropriatemitigation measures.Learning from ExperienceEmergency preparedness drills and other planning activities are criti-cally important and help to mitigate some of the communications and
coordination difficulties encountered in a crisis, but they are not enough.
It should be possible to do a better job of learning from events.  The basis
for such learning could take several forms, including postcrisis analysis,
use of audit trails, and, for later learning, using Internet resources to share
experiences and materials.  Improved means for capturing and sharing

post-crisis analyses would help in identifying a variety of planning prob-
lems up front.Archiving of data generated during a crisis would help with suchanalysis and would also be an aid to training.  Several research sugges-

tions at the workshop centered on audit trails of crisis situations and their
use in subsequent training.  There are difficult issues here regarding sec-

ond-guessing of specific decisions made during a crisis, but with appro-
priate security and abstraction of events this could be a  valuable resource

for enabling more realistic training.To support exploitation of past experiences, research might be donetoward creating an infrastructure to support the reporting and easy ex-
traction of useful, high-quality information on incidents.4  This goal is
nontrivial and requires the development of capabilities that include the
capture of information in real time, including data from information sys-4These points originally arose in the Systems and Network ÒInfrastructure: Modeling andSimulationÓ breakout group (see Appendix A) but are included here because they relate
closely to this discussion.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES37tems as well as video and audio; tools to create and manage metadata;ontologies and indexing capabilities to support access and retrieval; de-
livery mechanisms to share previously captured experiences, including
near-real-time availability to permit use of prior knowledge during the
course of a crisis; and capabilities for adding commentary to captured
information and conducting after-the-fact analysis.  In addition, the cap-

turing of such information in computational modelsÑallowing computersystems to reason based on the collected knowledgeÑcould be useful forboth training and operational applications.In collecting audit trails, it is important to capture not only the actualstate of events at a given time but also when and where information was
received.  For example, a fire might have jumped a firebreak at 0130, but

this fact might not have been detected until 0150, and the information
might not have reached the headquarters for the area until 0205.  Because

one of the goals of collecting audit trails is to test the effectiveness of
different communication and information management strategies, it must
be possible to reconstruct ÒflowsÓ of information and determine where
information bottlenecks or loss occurred or where delays or error were
introduced.Workshop participants also noted that process and workflow tech-niques could be applied to the response phase of crisis management so as
to find ways of capturing and representing Òbest practices.Ó   Of particu-
lar interest was finding a way of sharing these practices across adminis-
trative domains, which requires finding ways of translating organization-
specific practices into practices that are applicable to a broader set of
organizations.Another critical means of supporting crisis managers is to providethem with just-in-time training and help.  The rudimentary technologies

available today for providing such assistance, such as context-sensitive
help mechanism, are inadequate, and research here would be helpful.Using Wearable ComputingParticipants identified some opportunities that development of low-cost, high-performance ÒwearableÓ systems incorporating GIS capabili-
ties might offer.  Such systems, which would be designed to be usable by
untrained experts in the field, would operate using wireless communica-
tions (either terrestrially based or via satellite as such capabilities are
deployed; see ÒWireless  Communications
Ó in Chapter 2) as well as in a
disconnected or only occasionally connected mode. They would need to
be capable of storing, manipulating, and displaying both standard spatial
features (e.g., roads and rivers) and transmitting and receiving real-time
imagery, voice, and video.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTOne can envision a firefighterÕs assistant for fighting forest and brushfires.  In a wearable form with voice recognition software for hands-off

operation, such a computer could provide critical pieces of information
such as wind speed, fire boundaries, and temperatures in a visual display
format.  Equipped with high-precision Global Positioning System receiv-

ers, the wearable device could also provide responders with situational
awareness about each firefighter.Workshop participants also suggested that wearable computerswould be of considerable value in urban search-and-rescue operations,
such as the operation mounted in response to the Oklahoma City bomb-
ing.  Such tasks could be assisted by the advent of tools that allow crisis

responders to use, update, and refine maps on the fly during a rescue.
One might, for instance, provide each rescue worker with detailed infor-
mation, such as building blueprints, on the environment they are working
in.  An important caveat is that search and rescue personnel may be

reluctant to overly depend on information of uncertain accuracy pro-
vided by such a system when they are working in an unstable, dangerous
building environment.  Thus, wearable computers might be more imme-

diately applied to capture of critical information from the field rather than
delivery of information to rescuers.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTUREAs discussed above, crisis management is an information and com-munication-intensive activity. Information infrastructure is key to all as-
pects of crisis management.  In preparedness efforts, networks are used

to provide training and conduct virtual exercises.  In crisis response,

networks support information interchange among crisis responders and
the provision of warnings and other information to citizens and after the
disaster strikes are used to register claims for disaster relief funds.  The

global disaster information network, GDIN,5 for example, is a concept
for an activity to provide access to disaster information resources, pro-
duce integrated information products, and deliver information to deci-
sion makers.5The Disaster Information Task Force, responding to a request from Vice President Gore,articulated the GDIN concept in its report Harnessing Information and Technology for DisasterManagementÑThe Global Disaster Information Network (Disaster Information Task Force.  1997.
Washington, D.C.).  At the request of the transition team considering issues related to
implementation of a disaster information network, the National Research Council issued a
report on how such a network could best provide information for decision makers.  See
National Research Council.  1999.  
Reducing Disaster Losses Through Better Information.  Na-tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES39RobustnessMeeting the information requirements of crisis management dependson a communications infrastructure that is robust in the face of damage,
particularly as greater reliance is placed on information technology to
cope with crises and their aftermath.  Whereas for some applications

infrastructure can be brought in from outside the disaster area (as in
mobile GIS systems or satellite terminals to provide commander centers
with communications), in a number of other cases crisis response would
benefit from a more survivable infrastructure.  Two examples of such

applications are tele-registration for disaster victims and the coordination
of crisis response activities among a large number of actors (see Boxes 1.2
and 1.3 in Chapter 1).A second, related requirement for communications infrastructure isthe ability to adapt to changing demands, manage traffic congestion, and
permit priority overrides for emergency usage.  In a crisis, loading charac-

teristics may diverge from normal patterns and exceed normal loadsÑatjust the time when large portions of the infrastructure may have suffered
physical damage.   These scaling and robustness questions arise in a num-

ber of large networks that are key to public safety, such as air traffic
control; police, fire, and safety communications networks; and 911 and
other emergency dispatch systems.  These issues also arise in efforts to

leverage the public Internet and private networks built using Internet
technologies.Several networking research questions arise from these requirements.Networks that are self-adaptive, would, for example, be able to rapidly
configure and assemble themselves as, for example,  wireless infrastructure
elements deployed in response to a crisis.  Also, networks that can recon-

figure themselves quickly in response to the effects of damage and changes
in demand will be of much greater utility.    Infrastructure that is able to

degrade gracefully as components of the infrastructure are affected by a
crisis would be less likely to completely fail in a crisis situation.By their nature, crises result in a change in the normal demands forcommunications.  There is likely to be more traffic, as well as traffic of

varying priorities.  A research question that addresses this requirement is

how to build networks that allow applications to interact with the infra-
structure so as to allow the incorporation of capabilities such as priority
override features or the recognition and management of information
surges during a crisis.  Also, because of the need to maximize a crisis

responderÕs ability to utilize communications resources, it would be use-ful to develop interfaces that allow the combined use of both private and
public infrastructure during a crisis, permitting crisis responders to ex-
ploit whatever infrastructure elements are available in the aftermath of aSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTcrisis.  Finally, efforts cannot be directed solely at improving the infra-
structure.  Work needs to be done at the applications level to ensure that

applications themselves are able to cope with less-than-optimal network
performance.  Applications intended for use in crisis situations cannot

assume that large amounts of bandwidth will be available or that connec-
tivity will be available on a consistent basis.   Strategies for coping would

include adapting the frequency of updates to the available bandwidth or
falling back to activities that consume less bandwidth (e.g., transmitting
text instead of multimedia data).Infrastructure for CitizensWorkshop participants also noted that if the communications infra-structure is to be available widely, especially for use in interacting with
individual citizens, then low-cost, ubiquitous access is required.  A range
of new capabilities might be enabled through the use of the Internet,
particularly high-capacity, always-connected access (as opposed to low-
speed, dial-up connections, which require an action to be taken by the
user every time any Internet connection is desired).  Participants noted

that these always-connected, broadband services, such as those offered by
cable modem and DSL technologies, are only available to a small fraction
of the U.S. population today.  Complex technical, economic, and policy

issues surround the provision of broadband Internet access to residences,6but deployment via a variety of technologies is proceeding, and it is use-
ful to explore how such capabilities might be used for crisis management.In addition to enabling improved ability to interact with citizens,such as the opportunities discussed above for providing enhanced or
focused warnings, deployment of these new high-capacity data services
to the home offers some interesting opportunities for determining the
impact of a disaster.  As communications links to the home are upgraded
to two-way technologies, with the deployment of two-way-capable cable
systems or deployment of fiber to the curb, a large number of small, fully
networkable devices will be deployed throughout populated areas.  Inter-

esting opportunities arise if one considers placing sensors in each of these
boxes.  For example, in a region prone to earthquakes, a cheap accelerom-

eter (e.g., of the sort used to trigger air bags) might be included in each
box.  One possible use of such information is to validate and refine the

predictions of damage models following an earthquake (see below). After
an earthquake, in the areas badly affected, the sensors (or network nodes)6The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board will be initiating a study of theseissues in 1999.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES41would cease to function, while those located outside that central regionwould provide indications of the shake intensity.  Polling these devices

after the quake could yield almost immediately, two sorts of information:
a map of where the communications infrastructure had failed and a rough
map of shake intensities in the surrounding areas.MODELING AND SIMULATIONRole of Modeling and SimulationModels are physical or mathematical representations of a system,entity, phenomenon, or process.  Simulation is a method for implement-

ing a model over time.  Modeling and simulation can be applied to nu-

merous phenomenaÑsuch as hurricane track and intensity, earthquakedamage, and the airborne dispersion of chemicals following an accidental
releaseÑand they play important roles throughout crisis managementactivities.7 Some of these roles are listed below:
¥Planning.  Models are used before disasters to help in planning.
For example, the threat of a Hayward fault quake is troubling because it
could be expected to have effects similar to those of the 1994 Kobe, Japan,
quake, in which some 5,000 people died.  The San Francisco Bay area

traffic problems following a major quake would be very bad, and the area
could be expected to be split and paralyzed. Insights gleaned from mod-
eling and simulation can be used to establish traffic routing contingency
plans for such disasters.¥Mitigation.  Models showing potential flood risk, for example, as-sist mitigation efforts by allowing the identification of economic incen-
tives for implementing changes and by serving as tools for educating
communities about the risks they face.¥Prediction of damage before a disaster. The Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency (FEMA), for example, makes use of predictive models of
the paths of hurricanes, based on information from the National Hurri-
cane Center, and plots outs factors such as potential damage to mobile
homes and numbers of hospitals in the area, in order to make resources
available in advance.  Some models that predict specific amounts of dam-
7Modeling and simulation are important in many other domains as well.  For an explora-tion of areas of common interest to the Department of Defense and the entertainment in-
dustry, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.1997.  Modeling and Simulation:  Linking Entertainment and Defense.  
National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTage have not been as well validatedÑmost are derived from Cold War eranuclear blast damage dataÑand thus are not relied upon much by crisisresponders.¥Initial damage estimates.  After an earthquake, quickly and directlyassessing the extent and distribution of damage is difficult because ac-
quiring and synthesizing damage reports takes considerable time. The
initial damage estimates are essential for directing response efforts, as
well as estimating requests for federal aid following the disaster. The
scale of this problem is illustrated by the Northridge quake, in which
more than 3 million buildings in the Los Angeles area were at risk.  With

disasters of this scope, getting a clear view of the extent of the damage
takes time.  One type of tool used to assess quake damage rapidly is a

model that indicates what a particular ÒshakeÓ means in terms of damage.
The model, which includes building stock (structure type, age, etc.), criti-
cal facilities, and lifelines, as well as geological information and demo-
graphics, predicts the number of casualties and the need for shelter and
hospitals across the various soil types.Research OpportunitiesBetter simulation and modeling capabilities would enhance the capa-bilities of crisis managers throughout the phases of a crisis.  Workshop

participants identified a number of improvements in the design and use
of models that could be helpful during a crisis:¥Better meeting of the needs of crisis responders. The output from mod-els is frequently not presented in a way suited to meeting the real-world
information needs of crisis responders.  Models frequently produce re-

sults in units not of interest to the crisis responder.  For example, plume

models of a chemical spill or release of radioactive material typically
produce maps showing dispersion in parts per million as a function of
time.  What a crisis responder actually needs is something that automati-
cally translates the concentration of materials into more easily interpret-
able categories such as  Òsafe,Ó Òhazardous but not life threatening,Ó or
Òlife threateningÓ so that appropriate action can be taken quickly.  Closely
related is the need to allow nonexperts to use models.  This requires, for

example, that technical parameters of interest to experts tuning a model
are separated from those of interest to decision makers.¥Data collection to support the real-time use and validation of models.Models have limitations in their predictive capabilities.  For example,

even with all the background data used in earthquake models, being
precise about damage estimates is difficult.  In the area affected by the

Northridge earthquake there were more than 100 8-inch water pipes, andSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES43yet a damage model of the quake would not be able to predict whichspecific pipes would be broken in the quake.  Similarly, building damage
models might provide results applicable to a class of buildings in an area
but not to individual structures, and engineers would still need to be sent
into the field after the earthquake to assess damage to individual homes
and buildings.  Incorporation of data in real-time data can significantly

improve the output of models.  Integration of data collected during a

crisis would allow both validation of the results of a model against the
actual situation resulting from the crisis and better prediction of the next
stage of the crisis as it evolves.  For example, as an earthquake mitigation
measure one might deploy sensors in buildings that would provide data
that could be combined with shake models to improve the accuracy of
damage predictions following an earthquake.¥Model interoperability.  Models tend to be developed and used inisolation.  To more fully exploit the results of models, techniques should

be developed that better allow models to be accessed and integrated into
information systems.  In particular, it would be useful to facilitate such

capabilities as the integration of real-time data with the results of models
and the propagation of results and their uncertainty between different
models.  The value of such integration between data and models can be

illustrated using the water-main-break example introduced above.  Im-

proved integration would permit crisis responders to enter data from
field assessments indicating which particular pipes were in fact damaged
and then to recompute a model of the water system to provide an esti-
mate of water availability, something of obvious interest in planning
firefighting activities.  Also, with such capabilities in place, systems that

would permit different crisis models to be plugged in could be built,
allowing comprehensive and realistic characterization of a variety of dif-
ferent crisis situations.One application proposed during the course of workshop discussionswas the use of simulations to enhance the realism of exercises.  One spe-
cific aspect would be the incorporation of realistic levels of stress.  Al-

though, of course, a major research goal is to provide emergency manag-
ers with tools to better manage the large volumes of information (such as
numerous reports from the field) or the coordination of a multitude of
field activities, increased levels of stress are nonetheless an essential ele-
ment of crisis management.  Providing realistic stress levels, such as

through the simulation of very high information traffic levels, would

greatly enhance the realism and training value of exercises.  Audit trail

and similar information captured during crises could be used to enhance
the realism of the pace and nature of simulated communications traffic.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTELECTRONIC COMMERCEElectronic commerce and related technologies can play the role ofboth enabler of and impediment to effective crisis management.  For the

purpose of this discussion, electronic commerce (EC) technologies are
defined broadly to include electronic means for obtaining information on
the availability of physical goods, requesting goods, and paying for those
goods; methods for entering and processing requests for benefits and
paying those benefits; and computer security technologies needed to con-
trol the flow of information or protect information from unauthorized
modification.  In crisis response, the logistics function lends itself to the

use of these electronic commerce techniques (even if the supplies are
already in the possession of agencies responding to the crisis and if no
additional funds will change hands).Problems Caused by the Increased Use of andDependence on Electronic CommerceAlthough certain aspects of electronic commerce can be helpful inresponding to a crisis, the routine dependence on electronic commerce
can also serve to make recovery harder, unless the infrastructure support-
ing such commerce is able to survive the event that triggered the crisis.  In

fact, misplaced reliance on technology could itself trigger the crisis.  For

example, widespread power outages are considered crisis situations to-
day, unlike years ago when there was no dependence on a power grid.  In

fact, it is this dependence combined with a concern about the reliability
and correctness of our computer software that has led to concern for the
year 2000 problem and its consequencesÑa potential crisis that manypeople seem to fear more than many natural disasters (see Appendix B).Some key EC technologies that are widely depended on include creditcard authorization, which is itself often dependent on the telephone; au-
tomated teller machines; and computer networks.  The principal issue

raised in workshop discussions regarding dependence on electronic com-
merce was the need to ensure survivability of the critical infrastructure
supporting EC.8  It is important to assess the reliability and survivability
of different parts of the EC infrastructure in light of different kinds of
crises, and, for those parts not likely to be available, one must not depend
on them for recovery and must be prepared instead to mitigate the effects
of their loss.8See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1999.
Trust in Cyberspace. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., for a discussion of criticalinformation infrastructure issues and associated research topics.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES45Benefits of Electronic Commerce in Crisis ManagementDiscussion pointed to several possible benefits of EC technologies incrisis management:¥Information available from EC systems.  Some of the most compellingideas involved the use of information normally maintained in EC systems
to gauge preparedness, to locate available resources, and to reduce public
anxiety and hoarding.  For example, inventory information from suppli-

ers might be accessed in real time to find the nearest availability for sup-
plies.  In anticipated crises (for example, from a hurricane where there is

plenty of advance warning), point-of-sale data could be processed to de-
termine preparednessÑas indicated by the rate at which individuals arepurchasing plastic sheeting, plywood, and so forth.  Of course, this kind

of access to supplier databases raises privacy, business, and indepen-
dence concerns.¥National emergency purchasing directory.  Although ties to the local
EC infrastructure can identify local availability of supplies, resources will
likely need to be acquired from outside the crisis-affected area.  An online

purchasing directory with information that will enable finding suitable
suppliers who also have available inventory can significantly speed up
the shipment of needed supplies into the affected area.¥Processing input from many sources.  Besides the direct tie to EC
databases, there is an indirect benefit of electronic commerce that can be
exploited.  In particular, many of the technologies developed and used

extensively in electronic commerce can also be applied to other crisis
management needs.  The ability to process data from many sources, either

through Web pages or though call centers located outside the affected
area, can be particularly useful.If such benefits are to be realized during a crisis, relationships sup-porting such data exchange must be established in advance.  Further,

procedures must be put in place to credential emergency responders elec-
tronically so that the authority of the various players to make requests or
to offer services can be determined.Pitfalls of Traditional Electronic Commerce in Crisis ManagementA critical aspect of the infrastructure for EC that will affect crisismanagement is management of the trust relationships between parties,
such as the relationships between insurance companies and those insured,
between citizens and relief agencies (citizens must trust that they are
interacting with legitimate representatives of those agencies), and betweenSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTcontractors and suppliers (who need assurances that they will be paid fortheir services or products).  One of the differences between EC as it is

normally applied and EC during a crisis is that relationships will be more
transient during a crisis.  There will be new players, and it will be neces-

sary to determine whether they are authorized players with whom one
should do business.  In traditional commerce there may be more time to

build a trust relationship.  In a crisis, one must decide quickly whether to
honor a request.Perhaps the most significant pitfall of traditional EC systems withrespect to their application in crisis situations is the rigidity of the rules
regarding authorization of particular operations.  This rigidity has been

the best way to limit fraud in routine use of EC systems.  Typically an

organization has a single entity who is able to authorize purchases.  In

fact, for governmental agencies, this practice is often legislated.  How-

ever, during a crisis, these rigid procedures could lead to delays or worse
consequences.Some jurisdictions provide for delegated authority in particular situ-ations, but todayÕs systems for EC are not able to deal with this Òcondi-tional delegated authority.Ó  Workshop participants felt that one of the
research goals for EC should be to provide for more flexible authorization
policies that will maintain accountability yet support delegated authority
and other exceptions.  Such policies must be supported by the EC infra-

structure as it is applied in the normal case, so that it will be available
when needed.  However, the conditional aspect of the policies will limit

certain discretion from being applied except in the condition of a declared
emergency.Research OpportunitiesWorkshop participants considered the following to be key researchopportunities for electronic commerce in crisis management:¥Development of technologies and standards for escrow sites where citi-zens can store important information that they might need to access in a crisis
but that might not be available if systems within the affected area are inaccessible.
This escrowed data would include medical records, financial data, family
contacts, and other essential records.  The escrow technology must pro-

tect the userÕs privacy, while improving the  survivability of the users
personal information.¥Determination of the range of authorization policies to be applied in emer-gency electronic commerce situations.  One such policy to be considered is
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH OPPORTUNTIES47conditional delegated authority and mechanisms to allow other kinds ofexceptions.¥Development of a dynamic trust structure to support ad hoc or instantaccreditation of participants with limited authority and limited powers of delega-
tion. Such arrangements would greatly facilitate the purchase, for ex-ample, of critically needed supplies.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.484Achieving an Impact in the CrisisManagement CommunityINTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYRESEARCH AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT COMMUNITIESFor research by the information technology community to have animpact on the crisis management community, considerable interaction
between the two is required.  Workshop participants representing differ-

ent parts of these communities discussed a number of different models
for such interaction (Box 4.1) and presented ideas on how research and
technology transfer could be effective for crisis management.  A wide

range of issues were discussed, but there was agreement on some themes
related to the interaction of information technology research and crisis
management:¥The crisis management community is focused primarily on short-term,integrated solutions using existing technology.  Information technology re-
searchers, on the other hand, are interested in developing and testing
longer-term, leading-edge technology.  This difference in outlook and

goals must be addressed in research programs such as the National Sci-
ence FoundationÕs (NSFÕs) Digital Government initiative.¥Technology transfer is a critical and often missing link in the crisis man-agement view of information technology research. Without a guarantee that atechnology will be supported after the initial development and prototype
testing, the crisis responders and the entire crisis management commu-
nity have been wary of trying new ideas that are not off-the-shelf tech-
nologies.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACHIEVING AN IMPACT IN THE CRISIS MANAGEMENT COMMUNITY49BOX 4.1  Types of Interactions Between the Information
Technology and Crisis Management CommunitiesIn his presentation at the workshop, Ronald Larsen described four types ofinteractions that the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has
sponsored between information technology researchers and military units respon-sible for crisis management actions. These approaches support short- to long-termresearch activities and a range of deliverables, from demonstrations to products.The first approach involves working in the field to deploy technology to endusers.  This approach is the most difficult, slowest, and most expensive, yet it is the
most likely to achieve the end result of getting technology into the hands of people
who need it.The second approach, which is perhaps the most familiar to information tech-nology researchers, involves the development of laboratory integration prototypes.
It involves understanding an application, giving researchers the task of developingsystems to address the needs of the application, and demonstrating the solutions.This approach requires good relations with the end users and close collaborations
with early adopters. These are the people in the field who have an interest intechnologies that will improve their performance.Larsen called the third approach the Òscience fairÓÑseveral researchers work-ing on related and perhaps competing technologies are asked to prepare presen-tations based on a given scenario. The user community is then invited to see thesepresentations at a specific site, and people serving as brokers look for the most
promising interactions.The final approach is serendipity, whereby a new application requirement ap-pears that is ideally suited to a new technology that has been or is being devel-oped.   One example of this approach cited by Ronald Larsen was the teaming up
in the early 1990s of U.C. BerkeleyÕs visual library project with the California De-
partment of Water Resources (DWR).  The DWR was interested in making its
legacy documents more useful.  The university decided to scan and enliven the
materials to make them more like typical digital documents.  Then, in the floods of
1997, the DWR discovered that these digitized documents were its most valuableinformation resources.   The universityÕs resources also proved valuable in provid-
ing public information.  The DWR gave pictures of flood damage and road wash-

outs to the Berkeley team, who scanned them, put them up in the library, andmade them available to the public and the press.  It was Òan extraordinarily suc-
cessful experience from the standpoint of learning about how these technologies
can apply to crisis management,Ó Larsen said.¥When a technology is identified as promising, there is the challenge ofcommercializing it.  The federal government typically provides funding
only up to the prototype stage.  When an experimental technology be-

comes interesting to a crisis manager, the need arises for both a process
and a party to take on the task of identifying and interacting with a
commercial vendor who will develop a product for sale.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENT¥Interaction with end users from the crisis management community isessential.  For example, user-centered design begins with an understand-
ing of the user (e.g., crisis responders), and people who design systems
used in crises must have a good understanding of the environment in
which their systems are used.¥Testing in environments that are as realistic as possible is crucial to theacceptance of any new technology.  The crisis management community regu-
larly stages exercises using simulated crises to train people and to learn
about new systems and situations.  These are valuable opportunities for

researchers to be involved in defining testbeds and specific problems that
would form the basis for research programs.  For example, workshop

participant Albert Guber noted the importance of stress in emergency
situationsÑa feature that is difficult to replicate in laboratory settings butthat is one of the most important factors in determining how well a sys-
tem will function in a real emergency. TodayÕs disaster-response exercisesattempt to duplicate many of the real stresses.¥Other research communities have a role to play in information technologyresearch for crisis management.  For example, statistical techniques would
be useful in finding ways to validate crisis models, reduce the informa-
tion overload during the response phase, and give rapid estimates of the
state of the crisis.¥Successful interactions between information technology researchers andthe crisis management community are facilitated by having a third party acting
as a bridge or broker.  Brokers that were mentioned during the workshop
included the funding agencies (e.g., DARPA and NSF) and organizations
like the Pacific Disaster Center (Box 4.2) and the Center for Integration of
Natural Disaster Information (Box 4.3). These brokers see their role as
understanding the problems of the crisis management community andBOX 4.2 The Pacific Disaster CenterThe Pacific Disaster Center (PDC) supports emergency managers in the Pacif-ic region by providing them information that they can use to make better decisions.The PDC develops capabilities and information products based on user needs.The experience, according to the PDCÕs Ernest Paylor, has been that the crisismanagement community is not interested in technology per se.  Instead, it is seek-
ing integrated information solutions using off-the-shelf technology as much as pos-sible.  The PDC has also found demonstrations to be an important part of the

development path, particularly in helping potential users to develop trust in theinformation that the new products will be delivering.  The PDC has served as a
broker by identifying gaps between technology capabilities and user needs and
encouraging research in those areas. One example is a new NASA research pro-gram built around providing modeling and simulation capabilities for the PDC.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACHIEVING AN IMPACT IN THE CRISIS MANAGEMENT COMMUNITY51BOX 4.3  Center for Integration of Natural Disaster Information
The U.S. Geological SurveyÕs (USGSÕs) Center for Integration of Natural Disas-ter Information (CINDI) is a research facility that develops and evaluates technol-
ogy for information integration and dissemination; performs research in data inte-gration, analysis, modeling, and decision support; and supports the ongoingevolution of the USGSÕs processing and delivery of hazards data.  As part of the
humanitarian response to Hurricane Mitch, CINDI has provided integrated informa-
tion to support emergency managers and international relief organizations in un-derstanding how to respond effectively to the devastation caused by Mitch.One of the products developed by CINDI is a digital atlas that provides morethan 60 different types of geospatial information in a form that can be manipulatedfor analysis.  These maps, based on information extracted from satellite images,

existing geologic maps, air photos, and other digital and paper sources, show thelocations of landslides and floods, damage to roads, bridges, and other infrastruc-ture, precipitation information, and impacts on agricultural lands.SOURCE:  Adapted from Center for Integration of Natural Disaster Information.  1998.  
CINDI:Center for Integration of Natural Disaster Information.  U.S. Geological Survey, Washington,
D.C.  Available online at < http://cindi.usgs.gov/>.
the capabilities of information technology research, identifying criticalgaps, and finding matches.MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES TO USING INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY IN CRISIS MANAGEMENTWorkshop participants noted that advances in information technol-ogy must be accompanied by changes addressing organizational, man-
agement, capacity, and resource issues.  Some of these issues are listed

below:¥Resistance to change.  Avagene Moore observed during the work-
shop that people initially resist change and do not always appreciate the
value of learning to use new technologies.  Information technology can be

perceived in the crisis management community as imposing new tasks
rather than providing useful tools for doing oneÕs job.¥Insufficient attention paid to education and training.  One example of
an initiative in this area, described by Avagene Moore, is the Emergency
Information Infrastructure Partnership (EIIP).  The EIIP has a virtual fo-

rum on the Internet to involve local, state, and federal emergency manag-
ers, along with private-sector emergency management people who haveSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTan interest in using Internet technologies.  A goal of EIIP
Õs activities is toprovide education and hands-on experiences to demonstrate how emer-
gency managers can benefit from use of information technology such as
the Internet.  The forum is intended to enable dynamic exchange of emer-

gency management information and provide innovative solutions to
emergency management challenges.  To that end, EIIP conducted an

online exercise, WEBEX, that drew participants from many different lev-
els of emergency management.¥Insufficient awareness.  Though emergency managers may appreci-
ate the potential of information technology to improve their professional
capabilities, new tools must be demonstrably more effective and accurate
and must be affordable for them to be embraced widely.¥Limited resources.  Resource constraints were pointed to as a funda-
mental issue, particularly at the local level.  Although costs have been

steadily decreasing, laptop computers, Global Positioning System units,
and the like are frequently unaffordable.  Also, costs include not only the
purchase of systems but also other contributions to total cost of owner-
ship, such as operational, training, and maintenance costs.  Available

emergency management resources may cover only basic elements of the
emergency operationsÑsalaries, utilities, and insurance.  Given a fixed
level of spending, local governments considering investment in new tech-
nology must make trade-offs, both with other elements of emergency
operations and with spending on day-to-day operations.  Before they will

allocate additional resources for information technology, its advantages
must be clearly demonstrated to them.¥Obsolete technology base.  Many local governments have little infor-
mation technology in place.  Offices may lack basic computer equipment

and lack access to tools such as e-mail.  Even where local governments

have made some investment in information technology, it may be old and
obsolete.¥Information technology investments that are focused on normal opera-tions, not crises.  Workshop participant James Morentz characterized this
issue as one of the most critical ones confronting crisis management infor-
mation managers.  Organizations focus their investments on the transac-

tional information systems that support day-to-day operations rather than
investing in the systems required to manage the unusual situation and
thus underinvest in crisis management capabilities.  One suggestion made

in response to this challenge by workshop participants was that one might

initially focus investment in innovative systems for crises that are likely to
recur with relatively predictable frequency, such as hurricanes in the Gulf
States or California wildfires.  Information systems developed for these

predictable events could then be transferred to the unpredictable.¥Investment that focuses on distribution and tracking of emergency fundsSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACHIEVING AN IMPACT IN THE CRISIS MANAGEMENT COMMUNITY53to victims.  Jack Harrald, describing the allocation of emergency dollars to
information technology, noted that crisis management places a premium
on providing relief funds directly to victimsÑfunctioning much like aninsurance company.  Thus there is a reluctance to tap into the disaster

response funding stream, which is much larger than day-to-day operat-
ing funds, for investment in information technology to improve crisis
management capabilities.¥Inadequate systemwide planning.  James Morentz observed that theemergency management community does not always factor information
technology considerations into overall planning.  Although virtually all

of the federal response agency organizations use software developed by
MorentzÕs company, Essential Technologies, their decisions to purchasethe software were made independently.  No overall system plan existed

that would facilitate integration of these individual software systems into
a single system.   Another problem was raised by Thomas O
ÕKeefe, whoobserved that when emergency management structures are designed, they
do not always incorporate technology that is close at hand or already in
place.  Nor are interfaces that are already familiar to crisis responders,

such as the Web, always used.¥Tendencies to ÒreinventÓ the same solutions in each organization.  
HenryKelly observed that sharing information technology experience can be
difficult for agencies so they tend to reinvent their own solutions using
their own contractors.  Thus, the government may reinvent a technology

multiple times in different application contexts.  Although this practice

may have benefits in allowing an organization to select the technological
best of breed, the resulting multiplicity of systems may not effectively
interoperate or support upgrades.  In addition, when underlying infra-

structure such as the operating system changes, many parts of the whole
system may have to be replaced or upgraded. This issue is a common one
in many areas of systems integration and may be addressed through
active reconsideration of architectural and design approaches.1¥Coping with multiple standards.  Information systems depend onstandards.  Thomas O
ÕKeefe pointed out, for example, that there are mul-tiple standards for damage assessment after an incident such as a fire.  To

integrate and compare this information across different organizations,
standardsÑor ways of reconciling multiple standardsÑmust be estab-lished for every aspect of the information life cycle.  In addition, identify-

ing which standards to adopt poses a very real challenge for emergency
managers purchasing hardware and software.1One approach is to emphasize commercial standards and components that may be as-sembled into composable systems rather than relying on tight integration to provide par-
ticular solutions.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.545The Broader Context:
Information Technology in Government
The federal government depends on information technology (IT) tocarry out the various missions of the federal agencies and to provide
services to the public.  Programs have been launched to Òreinvent govern-

ment,Ó with a particular focus in the 1990s on leveraging information
technology.1  IT can enhance productivity for existing missions and ser-
vices, and it can also enable entirely new approaches to services.  Effective

deployment of new technology holds the potential for vastly enhancing
citizen access to government information and for significantly streamlin-
ing current government operations.  The rapid spread of the Internet and
the ease of use offered by the World Wide Web have afforded particular
opportunities for extending electronic access to government resources.
As a result, the number of computers and communications networks in
government has grown steadily in recent years.Executive Order 13011 (July 16, 1996) established agency responsibili-ties and government-wide mechanisms to improve the acquisition and
management of information technology.  The executive order created the
Chief Information Officers Council as the principal interagency forum for
more effective management of IT investments, a Government Informa-
tion Technology Services Board to ensure implementation of the informa-
tion technology recommendations of the National Performance Review1For example, Vice President Gore launched the National Performance Review, later re-named the National Partnership for Reinventing Government, with the intent of makinggovernment work better and cost less.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BROADER CONTEXT55(now the National Partnership for Reinventing Government) and to de-velop shared approaches and services across agencies, and the Informa-
tion Technology Resources Board to provide independent assessment to
assist in development of selected major information systems.Despite substantial investments, agencies still face many problemswhere todayÕs information technology does not meet their needs, includ-ing in such areas as information integration, management, and retrieval;
human-computer interfaces; collaboration and computer-mediated inter-
action; authentication, privacy, security, and reliability; network infra-
structure, survivability, and adaptability; software assurance; wearable
and portable computing; and modeling and simulation.IT researchers  are actively working on questions that fall into these
areas.  However, historically there has been relatively little interaction

between the IT research community and those who operate and develop
government information systems or who run agency programs.  Agencies

tend to rely on what is available from vendors in the marketplace or to
use internal staff to build customized systems to meet their needs.  By

promoting dialog between end users in government and those perform-
ing computing and communications research, it may be possible both to
accelerate innovation in pertinent technical areas and to hasten the adop-
tion of those innovations into agency infrastructure.The recent PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee(PITAC) report2 found that the federal government has underemphasized
fundamental research in IT and has allowed research priorities to shift to
near-term applications and problem solving motivated by immediate
needs faced in mission agencies.  A number of government application

areas, including crisis management, were cited as significant areas for
longer-term information technology research (Box 5.1).A key to addressing the needs and interests of both communities isthe establishment of appropriate mechanisms for collaboration between
the research community and government information technology manag-
ers.  Such mutual gain is an objective, for example, of the Federal Informa-

tion Services and Applications Council (FISAC) of the National Science
and Technology CouncilÕs National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and Communications R&D.  One major challenge is the defi-

nition of mechanisms for transition, such as testbed systems, that respect
agency concerns over investment in legacy systems and risk.  Federal IT
2PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  February 1999.
Information Technology Research: Investing in Our Future.  PITAC Report to the Presi-
dent, National Coordination Office for Computing, Information, and Communications,Arlington, Va.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTBOX 5.1  Crisis Management and the PresidentÕs Information
Technology Advisory CommitteeIn a February 1999 report, the PresidentÕs Information Technology AdvisoryCommittee (PITAC) expressed concern that no agency claimed the strategic ad-vancement of IT as a core mission, and that, in a budget squeeze, longer-term ITresearch might be cut if it seems generic or ancillary to an agencyÕs core mission.
More specifically, there was concern that the Defense Advanced ResearchProjects Agency (DARPA) had been squeezed by budgetary pressure to respondto specific near-term goals in a readily demonstrable way, and that fundamental
and basic research, traditionally carried out mostly by DARPA and the NationalScience Foundation (NSF), had been reduced in recent years.In the area of crisis management, this underinvestment in fundamental andbasic research has meant, for example, that the fundamental understanding re-quired to build tools of interest to the crisis management community, such as thosethat would enhance, measure, or characterize the utility of software components in
disasters, have not been developed.  In his keynote address at the workshop,
Henry Kelly related crisis management to the broader challenges of IT, as articu-lated in the PITAC report.  Kelly pointed out that Òthis is a problem that absolutely

goes to the core of societyÕs ability to use IT.  It certainly goes to the core of the
problem of whether you can use it effectively in a crisis.  This is not something that
will be solved in someoneÕs spare time. . . .  It needs to be a core mission of

somebodyÕs, and it is a 20-year challenge.Ó As an example, Kelly expressed theneed to develop software that is self-healing, fails gracefully, models its own de-fects, and can update itself.A second PITAC concern that is related to crisis management is the design ofeffective human-machine interfaces.  How do human beings get the information

they need, when they need it, and in the form they need it?  In a crisis, users are
stressed.  They have less time and patience to express precisely what information
is needed; they will not be able to read manuals to learn new features, and they will
have difficulty understanding data that are displayed in a manner that is not abso-lutely clear.  Although, ideally, they will have had day-to-day experience with many
of the systems they will be using in a crisis, in some instances they will be using a
system for the first time and will need to be trained to use it on the spot.A third major concern outlined by PITAC relates to the scalable infrastructure ofcomputing and communications. The fundamental nature and role of computing in
the working environment has been changing.  Kelly noted that computer proces-
sors will be embedded everywhereÑthere are already 25 microprocessors in aCadillac, 10,000 microprocessors in an offshore drilling rig, and a million micropro-acquisition managers need mechanisms by which they can interact withthe research community without exposing operational users to unneces-
sary risk.  Whatever the specific mechanism, the process of incorporating
new research ideas and technology requires spanning the cultural gulf
between the practices of commercial systems integration and the work
styles of the research community.   Recognizing these needs and opportu-
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BROADER CONTEXT57nities, the National Science Foundation (NSF) launched a new DigitalGovernment program in June 1998.To complement the workshop panels and breakout sessions that ex-plored specific requirements of crisis management, several speakers were
asked to describe what they saw as more generic challengesÑwhat arethe critical IT research challenges and by what process can IT innovation
be better directed to fulfill long-term government application needs?cessors in an aircraft carrier.  These processors are linked together in complex
networks and interact with other processors on a potentially global scale.  Few

engineers understand their failure modes and how they relate to the systems inwhich they are contained.  How can this type of network be managed, and how do
these networks perform in a crisis when they are subject to extreme or unusual
loads?  Do they adapt gracefully, or do they manifest catastrophic emergent be-
haviors?These infrastructures and the software that runs on top of them will drive manysystems that are important during a crisisÑthe financial system; police, fire, andsafety teams; air traffic control; and emergency communications systems.  These
systems are also responsible for the physical operation of equipment such as fork-
lifts or helicopters that may be used in an emergency.  Explicit attention to critical
infrastructure is an emerging national concernÑwhat technology developmentscan help make this infrastructure predictable, robust, and reliable, as well as scal-
able and affordable?A fourth issue raised in the PITAC report is how to make the transition from aCold War management paradigm, in which IT was supported as an adjunct to
space technology or weapons production and development, to a new paradigm inwhich IT research encompasses a wide range of socioeconomic goals, and isexplicitly managed for risk, sustainment of funding, and balance of fundamental
work and applications.  For example, it has been a challenge for NSF to be able to
invest in larger and riskier projects that require sustained funding for 3 or 4 years,involve substantial experimentation and engineering, and entail extensive collabo-
ration and teaming.  PITAC was also apprehensive about how to manage the
interface between basic and applied research, given the difficulty of managinglong-term research and measuring its impact.1PITAC recommended, among other things, a series of Òexploration centersÓthat focus on particular applications, with a long-term emphasis.  The Administra-

tion has been considering how to link interesting technology-related applicationsinto the IT research community without diverting resources from fundamental re-search.  In this context, Henry Kelly suggested that exploration of IT applications to

crisis management could offer valuable learning experiences to the IT researchcommunity.1This issue was discussed in the Brooks-Sutherland report.  Computer Science
and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.  
Evolving theHigh Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕsInformation Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGESACROSS GOVERNMENTCrisis management is characterized as posing some of the toughestinformation technology challenges in the area of digital government.  Be-
cause of the many analogies between the needs of crisis management and
the sorts of capabilities that might be needed for other government ef-
forts, a perception exists that if the research community can help in effec-
tively addressing challenges of crisis management, these results will also
contribute toward solutions to many other major, generic challenges faced
by government agencies.  Some of these challenges are listed below:
¥Many diverse players throughout government and the private sector.  Amajor challenge in crisis management that is mirrored in many other
government applications is the multitude of different entitiesÑstate, lo-cal, and federal agencies, as well as lots of private players.  Each has its

own information systems, data standards, operating procedures, and the
like, so bringing these different organizations together to provide an inte-
grated response to a crisis, or other government function, becomes diffi-
cult.¥Wide range of capabilities of players.  Crisis management activities in
California, for example, must take into account differences in IT capabili-
ties between urban Los Angeles County and rural Lake County.  In some
locations, a 5-year-old computer is deemed acceptable; however, in some
counties, states, and federal agencies, the technology is at the leading
edge.  How can systems be built and procedures established that permit

all these organizations and systems to work together effectively?¥Validation, integration, search, and retrieval of large and diverse datasets.  In the government arena, large amounts of data are collected, and
these data are often of varying quality.  Challenges include how to vali-

date data sets; combine data, sometimes of different quality; and get a
handle on the flood of information that is now available on the Internet,
on CD, and in many other forms.¥Heterogeneity of systems used by different organizations.  Existing notonly in crisis management but also across government, this challenge
arises at all levels, from computing platforms to database systems to

higher-level semantic issues that make integrating information that spans
multiple agencies or organizations difficult.¥Resource constraints.  In crisis management, as well as in IT efforts
throughout government, resources for investment in new technologies
are limited.  This constraint makes investing in new capabilities more

difficult, even where the long-term payback may be significant.  How can

payback be better measured to justify commitment of resources?¥Inflexible rules that interfere with exploitation of opportunities offered bySummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BROADER CONTEXT59advances in IT.   
Many outdated, inflexible processes and rules are in placethat were written in an era when systems were solely paper based.  How

can government take advantage of the new electronic media and revise
obsolete rules?¥Organizational structures that do not reflect changes in IT.  For ex-
ample, how can a response team be organized in an IT-rich response
environment?  Understanding such questions can require the involve-

ment of people with other kinds of expertise, such as sociologists, anthro-
pologists, and organization and management specialists.¥Increasing public demands for information and responses.  CitizensÕ ex-pectations for responsive government greatly increase when they have
new, more interactive channels for communicating with government.
Michael Nelson noted, for example, that after the White House Web site
was established, 1,000 e-mails a day were sent to President Clinton and
Vice President GoreÑnot just Òglad youÕre onlineÓ messages, but also
substantive queries.  Once easy-to-use, instantaneous communication

channels have been established, responding accordingly becomes a major
challenge.¥Authentication.  The lack of an authentication infrastructure poses
challenges in government.  For example, in the e-mail example above,

replies to the e-mails were not sent electronically because authenticating
that they in fact came from the President was impossible.  Similarly, when

the Social Security Administration launched a program to permit people
to request their social security record via the Internet, there were concerns
that requests could not be properly authenticated.3¥Unreliability of new technologies.  Crisis managers will be reluctant to
rely on a technology, such as a network, for mission-critical applications if
they know that there is a significant chance that it might fail during a
major disaster.  Likewise, citizens will be reluctant to depend on a system

that is perceived as unreliable.  Similar challenges hold true throughout

government.ACHIEVING INNOVATIONHow to support IT research related to government missions and suc-cessfully transition the fruits of this research into government operations3In 1997, the Social Security Administration launched a program to permit people toretrieve their Personal Earnings and Benefit Statement (PEBES) through an online, interac-tive system.  Following expressions of concern that people
Õs privacy could be violatedusing this system, the Social Security Administration suspended the interactive PEBES sys-tem.  The PEBES system currently allows people to make online requests through a Web
browser (using encryption) but the statements are delivered by U.S. mail.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTwas a prominent theme throughout the workshop.  Some ideas consid-
ered by workshop participants follow:¥Making support of R&D by mission agencies a priority.  Successfulcollaboration between government agencies and the IT research commu-
nity will require not only the support of NSF and other research agencies,
but also the engagement of mission agencies.¥Providing incentives for excellence and innovation in IT.  In the crisismanagement context, a major challenge to innovation is that if an organi-
zation is successful in improving its systems and thus its ability to re-
spond to a crisis, no one will notice.  On the other hand, when a major

crisis inevitably causes significant harm, blame may be placed on an inad-
equate response.  The IT sector throughout government faces a similar

challenge:  When IT and other infrastructure systems are working prop-

erly, the people responsible tend not to receive much credit, but, when
they fail, there may be serious repercussions.¥Ensuring sufficient investment in IT to support innovation.  Uppermanagement does not necessarily know much about IT, and may not
provide sufficient resources or other support to succeed.  Another dimen-

sion of underinvestment is in compensation and career paths for people
who run government IT systems, affecting governmentÕs ability to attractthe best peopleÑwhich often means shifting responsibility for innovationto contractors.¥Establishing incentives and motivation for activity and collaboration.  Inorder to introduce new technologies, one must be willing to take some
risks and be in a position to understand the level of risk assumed.  When

a manager has a reasonable assessment of those risks, undertaking more
experimental activities becomes easier.  This issue applies particularly in

contractual relationships with IT contractors.¥Building communities committed to innovation.  Although many indi-
viduals find ways to overcome organizational barriers to change, finding
ways to build communities is particularly valuableÑin effect creating aninfrastructure of people and institutions committed to new ideas.  An

example of a group working to build a community is the National Coordi-
nation Office for Computing, Information, and Communications, which
was formed to facilitate agencies working collaboratively.¥Identifying the appropriate testbeds or skunkwork mechanisms.  Thesemechanisms offer managers a way to deal with risks.  Managers may not
want to spend money on what is perceived as a risky endeavor; however,
testbeds can be valuable as a means of obtaining insight into the future,
which can help with decisions on whether to make investments in new
technology.  In addition to having a good technology or even a good

testbed in which the technology has been tried, it is important to establishSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BROADER CONTEXT61long-term relationships between those developing the new technologyand the people who ultimately have to evaluate and adopt it for opera-
tional use.  In particular, it is important to set the scale of such activities

appropriately.  The scale of a testbed activity can be difficult to get right.On the one hand testbeds must to be of sufficient scale to fully test the
technology and stress its capabilities.  On the other hand, there is a danger

that testbeds will become self-perpetuating.  However, it can be argued

that this is how the Internet evolved:  A testbed was experimentally put

into operational context and people would not let go of it.  In the crisis

management community, the goals should be to establish a dynamic ap-
proach that permits people to move in and out of testbed activities, and to
set flexible goals for what people are to accomplish.¥Finding ways of measuring success.  An understanding of how suc-
cess is measured, how these decisions are made at the various levels of
government, and how those values can be fed back into the research
community is critical.  A related and ongoing question is how the effect of

new technology or improved system design can be evaluated in the ab-
sence of a full baseline of information about how things work today.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65ADetailed Workshop Agenda and
ParticipantsWORKSHOP AGENDATuesday, December 1, 19987:30 Ð 8:30 amRegistration and Continental Breakfast8:30 Ð 8:45Welcome and OverviewWilliam Scherlis8:45 Ð 9:15Keynote 1G. Clay Hollister, Chief Information Officer, FederalEmergency Management Agency9:15 Ð 9:45Break9:45 Ð 12:00Panel 1: Case Studies on Crisis ManagementPanelists:Nuclear/Industrial Scenario:
 Albert GuberEarthquake: David KehrleinFlash Flood: Eve GruntfestHurricane: William Miller
Moderator: Eve GruntfestSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66APPENDIX A12:00 Ð 12:30 pm
Lunch12:30 Ð 1:30
Panel 2:  Analysis of Information Technology
Issues in the Case StudiesPanelists: Avagene Moore, Thomas OÕKeefe, Jack Harrald,James Morentz
Moderator: David Kehrlein
1:30 Ð 3:00
Panel 3:  Information Technology Context
Panelists:Information Management: Barry LeinerDatabases: David MaierComputing/Storage: Paul H. Smith
Communications/Wireless: Philip Karn
Form Factors and Wearables: Daniel Siewiorek
Moderator: David DeWitt
3:00-3:15Task for Discussion SessionsWilliam Scherlis3:15 Ð 3:45
Break3:45 Ð 6:00
Focused Breakout SessionsInformation as Needed (information integration,
information management/retrieval, digital libraries,
geographical and spatial information, . . .)
Session leaders:  Bruce Croft and David DeWittParticipants: Paul Bryant, Elliot Christian, GerraldGalloway, Valerie Gregg, David Gunning, Sally Howe,
David Jensen, David Kehrlein, David Maier, Robert
Neches, Edie Rasmusen, Tom Usselman, Lou Walter,
Robert WinokurInformation for People (information services at the
user level, human-computer interaction, visualiza-
tion, collaboration, wearable computing, sensors and
robots, . . .)
Session leaders: Susan Dumais and William EddySummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A67Participants: Eileen Collins, Mark Deputy, Wayne Gray,Eve Gruntfest, Ronald Larsen, Avagene Moore, Thomas
OÕKeefe, Jean Scholtz, Daniel SiewiorekCommerce and Transactions (electronic commerce,
transactions, security, privacy, . . .)
Session leaders: Cliff Neuman and Michael NelsonParticipants: Peter Bloniarz, Larry Brandt, MelvynCiment, Stephen Crocker, Cathryn Dippo, Clay Hollister,
Frank Jaffe, Angienetta Johnson, Michael Swetnam,
Douglas TygarSystems and Network Infrastructure; Modeling andSimulation (software composition and assurance,
middleware and infrastructure services, system
integration and architectural issues, . . .)
Session leaders: Karen Sollins and Sallie Keller-McNultyParticipants: Richard Beckman, Albert Guber, Philip
Karn, Barry Leiner, Joe Lombardo, Cathy McDonald,
Avagene Moore, James Morentz, Paul Smith, Carl Staton,
John Toole6:00 Ð 7:30
Reception7:00 Ð 9:00 pm
DemonstrationsEmergency Information Infrastructure PartnershipVirtual Forum, Avagene MooreTransportation Simulation, 
Richard BeckmanWednesday, December 2, 19987:30 Ð 8:30 am
Continental Breakfast8:30 Ð 10:15
Focused Breakout Sessions (continued)10:15 Ð 10:30
Break10:30 Ð 11:00
Keynote 2Henry Kelly, White House Office of Science andTechnology PolicySummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68APPENDIX A11:00 Ð 12:30 pm
Panel 4:  Principal Information Technology
Research OpportunitiesPanelists: Bruce Croft, Sally Keller-McNulty, CliffNeuman, Susan Dumais
Moderator: William Scherlis12:30 Ð 1:30
Lunch1:30 Ð 2:30
Panel 5:  Achieving an Impact in the Crisis
Management CommunityPanelists: Ronald Larsen, Earnest Paylor, Albert GuberModerator: Bruce Croft2:30 Ð 3:30
Panel 6:  Lessons for Digital Government
Panelists: John Toole, Bruce McConnell, Michael NelsonModerator: Michael Nelson3:30 Ð 4:00
Concluding RemarksWilliam Scherlis4:00 pmAdjournSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A69WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTSRichard Beckman, Los Alamos National LaboratoryPeter Bloniarz, Center for Technology and Government, StateUniversity of New YorkLawrence Brandt, National Science Foundation
Paul Bryant, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Elliot Christian, U.S. Geological Survey
Melvyn Ciment, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies
Eileen Collins, National Science Foundation
Stephen Crocker, Steve Crocker Associates
W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Mark Deputy, Montgomery County Urban Search and Rescue
David DeWitt, University of Wisconsin at Madison
Cathryn S. Dippo, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Susan Dumais, Microsoft Research
William Eddy, Carnegie Mellon University
Gerrald Galloway, International Joint Commission
Wayne Gray, George Mason University
Valerie Gregg, National Science Foundation
Eve Gruntfest, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
Albert Guber, Department of Energy/Bechtel Nevada
David Gunning, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
John R. Harrald, George Washington University
G. Clay Hollister, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Sally E. Howe, National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and CommunicationsKay Howell, National Coordination Office for Computing, Information,and CommunicationsFrank Jaffe, Bank of Boston
David Jensen, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Angienetta Johnson, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Philip Karn, Qualcomm Inc.
David Kehrlein, State of California, GovernorÕs Office of EmergencyServicesSallie Keller-McNulty, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Henry Kelly, Office of Science and Technology Policy
Ronald Larsen, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Barry Leiner, Corporation for National Research Initiatives
Joe Lombardo, Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
David Maier, Oregon Graduate Institute
Bruce McConnell, Office of Management and BudgetSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70APPENDIX ACathy McDonald, National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and CommunicationsWilliam Miller, U.S. Geological Survey
Avagene Moore, AV/PM Inc., Lawrenceburg, Tennessee
James Morentz, Essential Technologies Inc.
Robert Neches, University of Southern California
Michael R. Nelson, IBM
Clifford Neuman, University of Southern California
Thomas OÕKeefe, California Department of Forestry and Fire ProtectionEarnest Paylor, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Edie Rasmusen, University of Pittsburgh
William Scherlis, Carnegie Mellon University
Jean Scholtz, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Daniel Siewiorek, Carnegie Mellon University
Paul Smith, Department of Energy
Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Carl P. Staton, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Michael Sullivan, BBN Corporation
Michael Swetnam, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies
John C. Toole, National Center for Supercomputing Applications,University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignWilliam Turnbull, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Douglas Tygar, University of California at Berkeley
Tom Usselman, National Research Council
Louis Walter, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Robert S. Winokur, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Rich Wojcik, Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins UniversitySummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71BBrief Case Studies of CrisesHURRICANESHurricanes are second only to earthquakes as the most destructivenatural force on Earth. They are capable of causing massive wind dam-
age, catastrophic flooding, and landslides or mud slides, often covering
large geographical areas.  Improvements in advance warnings and conse-

quent evacuations have led to a dramatic drop in U.S. casualties due to
hurricanes.  However, the economic losses continue to climb.  In the

United States, infrastructure damage from hurricanes, although serious,
is relatively less costly than damage to private property and structures.  In

less developed regions, loss of both life and infrastructure remains at
catastrophic levels.  A recent illustration of the destructive power of hur-

ricanes was Hurricane Mitch, which  hit Central America in November

1998.  The most destructive storm in the region since 1780, Mitch left up to

6 feet of rain in some places.  More than 11,000 people died in this storm,

which also destroyed a substantial portion of the infrastructure in Nicara-
gua and Honduras.  Box B.1 describes efforts to assemble an integrated

picture of the hurricaneÕs aftermath.Improved responses to hurricanes have been enabled by such infor-mation technology capabilities as advance warnings and modeling that
indicates which populations require evacuation.  Among the principal

problems in responding to hurricanes are communicating warnings, man-
aging evacuations, and coordinating local response and recovery opera-
tions.  Warnings must be more precise and detailed to help people in

particularly vulnerable locations prepare for the effects of extreme windsSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72APPENDIX Band torrential rains.  Warnings must reach people in remote locations and
be specific enough to support evacuation of people to safe havens.  Opti-

mized evacuation routes would help reduce gridlock.  Supplies and shel-
ters must be identified and targeted for specific evacuee groups or indi-
viduals.  Mutual aid resources must be effectively utilized as they

converge from outside the affected area.  Appropriate maps and position
location aids must be provided to crisis responders so they can operate
effectively.  Damaged infrastructure must be identified, and repairs must
BOX B.1  Creating an Integrated View of the Damage
Caused by Hurricane MitchDecision makers must know the scope of a disaster, its location, the size of thearea it covers, casualty levels, estimates of damage to infrastructure and property,and the ways in which all these factors relate to centers of population concentra-tions and to jurisdictional boundaries.  To inform response actions, information is

needed on possible further damage, options for immediate action, legal responsi-bilities, and possible long-term effects and related follow-ups.At the workshop, William Miller described work done in 1998 by the Center forIntegration of Natural Disaster Information (CINDI) to prepare a synoptic view ofthe devastation caused in Central America by Hurricane Mitch.  The work was
requested by the Department of the Interior as background information in prepara-
tion for a visit to the disaster area by Mrs. Tipper Gore.1A number of products were developed in response to this tasking.  CINDI de-
veloped overview maps that indicated MitchÕs storm track, including the areas
struck by l50- to 180-mph winds.  Satellite images were used to produce thematicmaps with a 30-meter resolution mosaic of Central America and also helped tomake clear the magnitude of the damage, revealing, for example, forest cover
damage extending far into Mexico.  Geographical information system databases
that included a variety of remote sensing data were used to determine where roadscrossed flooded rivers and thus the extent of damage to the road infrastructure.Integrating information from a variety of external sources presented a numberof challenges.  For example, during the course of assembling its briefing materials,
the team found that data that had been on the World Wide Web and elsewherewas no longer available.  Data sources had been moved or changed as the situa-
tion changed, and the team found that establishing an archive to capture data is
essential.  Another data source the team employed was the Earth Resources Ob-servation Systems data center of the U.S. Geological Survey.  However, during the
course of the work on Hurricane Mitch, a blizzard delayed staff attempts to reach
the center, located in Sioux City, South Dakota, to load and process images.1These models and data were compiled after the fact and were not used to support firstresponders.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B73be prioritized and adequately funded as rapidly as possible to lay thefoundation for broad-based disaster recovery.FLASH FLOODSDespite developments in hydrology and meteorology, prediction offlash floods is still difficult.  Flash floods result in deaths in both rural and

urban areas.  In 1972, 238 people were killed by a torrential rain storm in

Rapid City, South Dakota.  In 1976, a flash flood in the Big Thompson

Canyon in Colorado led to the death of 140 people.  More recently, during

the fall of l998, more than 50 people were killed by flash floods in Kansas
City and in Texas.Most flash floods are not merely meteorological events.  Vulnerability
to flash floods is a function of a number of human activities.  More people

have moved to parts of the country that are vulnerable to flash floods, and
urban development can intensify the impacts of small storms.  Although

the rainfall in a storm might indicate only a 10-year event, land use pat-
terns may result in the storm causing damage that exceeds the expected
magnitude of a 100-year storm.  In Fort Collins, Colorado, in July 1997, the

loss of life was caused by a combination of heavy prolonged rainfall and
a topography that had been altered by the construction of a railroad trestle.
Aging infrastructure, a consequence of reduced public investment in the
repair of bridges and dams, also presents a growing problem.Comprehensive emergency preparedness and response are essentialcomponents of reducing losses and include coordination between city
agencies and increased recognition of the importance of emergency plan-
ning in everyday city business.Important factors in reducing deaths from flash floods include pro-viding adequate warnings and helping people respond appropriately to
these threats.  For instance, if the number of deaths from flash floods is to

drop, people must be willing to abandon their cars and climb to safety.  In

anticipation of El NiŒo events in l998, Riverside, California, adopted apublic education program that has reduced the number of people trying
to drive through high water.  The number of deaths was reduced from an

average of seven per year to zero.  In the Big Thompson flood, seven

people initially responded appropriately and evacuated to high ground.
They then decided to return to their homesÑfor reasons such as retriev-ing household possessions or checking if the stove had been left on.  They

lost their lives because they did not know how little time they had.Another challenge to reducing the impacts of flooding, including flashfloods, is the inadequacy of many floodplain maps.  For example, the

maps show natural features but do not show areas protected by levees to
be potential floodplains.  Yet these areas are where serious floods have
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74APPENDIX Boccurred recently. In addition, even the improved maps are more reliablefor wide floodplains than for narrower or urban areas subject to severe
flash floods. Efforts are now under way in California to use new global
positioning system-based data collection to improve the precision of these
maps.Response to flash flooding can be improved by information technol-ogy capabilities such as weather forecasting and hydrological modeling
to predict flood levels for evacuations, sensor networks that provide in-
put to the forecasting and modeling, and systems that provide affected
populations with advance warnings.  The recent deployment of flood

sensor networks that make real-time data available has wide-reaching
applications for not only flash flood warning but also other applications
such as water resource planning and recreation.1  Principal challenges in
responding to these disasters include the lack of sufficiently accurate
floodplain maps, which decreases the accuracy of impact prediction as
well as the ability to disseminate to affected populations warning infor-
mation that clearly conveys the nature and timing of the threat along with
the appropriate responses.NUCLEAR EMERGENCIESBecause of the potential for insidious, long-term effects, U.S. citizensare particularly conscious  of the threat posed by nuclear accidents.  In

contrast to other types of disasters, the perception is that one could be the
victim of a nuclear disaster and not even be aware of it.  In response to the

potential threat and the public concern about it, federal agencies have
spent a great deal of effort to develop warning systems, evacuations plans,
public awareness, and response capability.  Integrated exercises that in-

clude federal, state, and local participants are held on a frequent basis to
ensure a high level of readiness and maintain the confidence of the public.Albert Guber, with the Department of EnergyÕs Nevada OperationsOffice, provided an overview of the federal response to nuclear accident
with a focus on data needs, available data sources, and the available
equipment to use those data.  The federal response to a nuclear accident

would start with establishment of a federal radiological monitoring and1Workshop participants noted that the economic benefits of such alternative uses mightwell exceed the costs of the actual detection system.  For a discussion of alternative applica-
tions of flood sensor networks, see Eve Gruntfest and Philippe Waterincks.  September
1998.  Beyond Flood Detection:  Alternative Applications of Real-time Data.
  Technical Report,
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior, Denver, Colo.  Available online at
<http://web.uccs.edu/geogenvs/work/Eve/Beyond%20Flood%20Detection%20Final.html>.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B75assessment center, based on plans developed from the lessons of the ThreeMile Island accident.  Guber emphasized how important it is that all

people responding to an emergency have access to the best information as
quickly as possible.  The centers can be set up in offices or field tents and

have their own backup power.  Computing is pervasive, and there are

large video monitors to provide situational awareness.  Drills are con-

ducted to test equipment and, particularly, inter- and intra-agency com-
munication.  Drills strengthen links between participating agencies,

data sets, and individuals and are essential if emergency management is
to be effective.Major challenges in responding to nuclear emergencies include thedifficulty of tracing the threat (using sophisticated sensors); the labor-
intensive, slow nature of field assessment; and the difficulty of interpret-
ing measured radiation values for both the general public and decision
makers.  Information technology capabilities
Ñincluding support for ad-vance warnings; modeling for evacuations; real-time GPS; field database
entry and a tracking system to integrate field, laboratory, and analysis
units; and advanced graphics for decision supportÑcan help to improvethe response to nuclear emergencies.FIRESLarge-scale fires capable of inflicting significant loss of life, property,and environmental resources are a serious disaster force worldwide.
Population pressures increase the risk of catastrophic fires.  People are

moving into areas of known high fire hazard.  In addition, fires are pre-

vented from spreading through their normal course, creating a more seri-
ous threat in the future.  A critical feature of fires is the need for total

extinction of the threat (Òput the fire out, dead outÓ).  Many large fires,
such as the 1991 fire in the hills of Oakland, California, that burned more
than 2,000 structures worth $1.6 billion and killed 25 people, are flare-ups
of small fires thought to have been put out.  This factor greatly increases

the cost of eliminating the threat.  Once a fire starts, all possible hot spots
must be put out completely.  For this reason, 2,000 to 3,000 firefighters, at

a cost of up to $2 million a day, may be needed to fight a large fire.Fires have caused billions of dollars in damage to property and seri-ous loss of life.  They consume millions of acres every year, many of them

in critical watershed areas throughout the world. Ecosystems in many
areas of the world are dependent on fire to maintain a natural balance.  In

most of these areas, human intervention, through eliminating much of the
burning cycle, has caused serious imbalances, resulting in an even more
serious threat.  When fires do occur in these areas, they often burn much

hotter than they would in a natural regime, burning much deeper into theSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76APPENDIX Broot structures of plants. This situation leaves the hillsides much moresusceptible to landslides and debris flow in subsequent winters.  Addi-

tionally, these areas typically have little margin for error in their water
sources.  If  local watersheds are destroyed, long-term economic and agri-

cultural disruption may be the result.Human-made causes of fires include sparks from lawn mowers andother yard tools, cigarettes carelessly tossed from a car, and electrical
wires blown into trees.  The ease and numerous ways of starting a cata-

strophic fire also create a strong temptation for arsonists.  Consequently,

firefighting agencies have to maintain an extremely high level of vigilance
for fire starts, thus reducing the threat posed by natural causes (such as
lightning strikes), human-made causes, and criminal acts.Although the state of the art in physical remedies for fire suppressionis mature, the command and control of these resources can be dramati-
cally improved with better technology.  Verbal command systems break

down in complex environments and must be enhanced with digital sys-
tems.  Information about fire perimeters and intensities, derived in part

from remote sensing and delivered to field personnel, is necessary to
optimize use of resources and increase safety.  Wearable computers could

play a significant role in fire suppression activities by assisting firefighters
with such information-intensive tasks as hazardous material identifica-
tion and by delivering information about building layouts or other envi-
ronmental information to firefighters in the field.EARTHQUAKESEarthquakes are the most devastating of all natural disasters.  The
cost can be prodigiousÑthe 1995 Kobe, Japan, disaster caused as much as$100 billion in damage.  Hundreds of thousands of people could die in a

catastrophic earthquake.  Modern building techniques have greatly re-

duced the death toll in developed countries, but the costs of earthquake-
induced damage have increased dramatically because of the enormous
increase in the built environment within high-risk areas. When major
earthquakes do strike, the damage can penetrate deep into physical infra-
structure.  Roads and bridges are heavily damaged, as are pipelines carry-

ing natural gas, water, and petroleum; communications lines and equip-
ment are compromised; and satellite and microwave dishes are knocked
out of alignment. Earthquake damage can remain undetected for years
inside walls, underground, and deep in foundations. The complexity of
this kind of damage increases the amount of time required to determine
the extent of damage, so that reconstruction can be done.Earthquakes can be very destructive, and they occur nearly instanta-neously.  In a minute or two perhaps a million or more people are faced
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B77with constructing a new reality for themselves.  There is no warning time
for evacuation, staging of resources, or seeking of appropriate shelter.
Emergency operation centers are not staffed up in anticipation of in-
creased activity.Indeed, emergency staffing patterns are as much a victim of earth-quakes as the rest of the community.  When the quake occurs, nobody

knows yet where it was centered or how strong it was, so there is no way
for people to grasp the overall context of their immediate personal expe-
riences.  Was it the big one?  Is it better to leave home and go to a shelter?

Are the phones working?  People are in a state of shock and need help to

make decisions on how to respond.  Information is essential to address

this dimension of the earthquake problem.In the first few minutes after a quake, massive amounts of incident-generated information must be gathered from many sources.  It must then

be synthesized, interpreted, and distributed to everyone who needs it.
Different kinds of information packages must be created for different
sectors of the response effort.  Some information can be mass distributed

via television, radio, or the Internet, whereas other information must be
targeted to specific incident responders, perhaps located at remote sites.
The critical time lines will vary from minutes to hours for mass-distrib-
uted information, whereas the first responder may require a turn-around
time on the order of seconds to minutes.  Analysis of the information,

such as for probable sheltering sites and medical and rescue resources
required to meet the disaster, must be completed accurately and quickly
and presented to critical decision makers in an easily understood format.Aftershocks are almost certain to occur but may be erratic in theirtiming.  As a result, extra care is required during many rescue operations.

Aftershocks also have implications with regard to immediate sheltering
needs.  Following the Loma Prieta, Northridge, and Kobe earthquakes,

for example, hundreds of thousands of people camped out on the streets
for the first few days until emergency shelters were set up or until they
became confident enough to go back into their homes.  Early warning

systems for aftershocks could provide precious seconds to get rescue
workers out of harmÕs way, and better understanding and modeling ofthe distribution and severity of aftershocks could provide the necessary
confidence for many people to reenter their homes.CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FAILURE OR ATTACKThe Administration has identified critical U.S. infrastructuresÑsuchas water, communications, power, food, and transportationÑthat mustcontinue to function during and after natural disasters or physical attacks.
These infrastructures are all extensively supported by information tech-Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78APPENDIX Bnology systems and therefore are vulnerable when the information tech-nology systems are attacked or fail abruptlyÑas is expected from elec-tronic clock mechanisms at midnight on December 31, 1999.  To deal with

these threats, Presidential Decision Directive 63, issued in May 1998, called
for a national effort to assure the security of critical U.S. infrastructures.
Because the government does not operate most of these infrastructures,
these efforts must be conducted in collaboration with the private-sector
owners and operators.The federal approach to dealing with critical infrastructure issues,especially the looming year 2000 (Y2K) problem, was described by Bruce
McConnell, then chief of the information policy and technology branch of
the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs at the Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.McConnell said that the federal government can use help in develop-ing a coordinated detection system for dealing with a series of questions
such as the following:  How does one know that a system is actually going

down?  And then how does one diagnose what is happening?  Is the

problem a symptom of a coordinated attack or a series of coincidences?  Is

there a law enforcement or national security problem?McConnell spoke about the expected Y2K scenarios and some of thetechnical problems that are being addressed.  The experience will be used

as a laboratory for studying and improving the response to critical infra-
structure incidents, particularly in cyberspace, he said.  Indeed, he ob-

served that if one had set out to create a disaster scenario to test IT vulner-
abilities and response capabilities, it would be difficult to come up with
one better than the Y2K problem.Officials expect that multiple problems will occur in different placesat the same time.  In the United States, it is anticipated that the major

organizations and pieces of the infrastructure will function adequately
but that problems may arise in rural areas and in small and medium-sized
enterprises.  Thus, local power and telephone companies, and some less

technologically sophisticated systems such as water treatment plants
could, experience outages.  Many of these have microprocessors embed-

ded in device controllers.More generally, three basic issues must be addressed in critical infra-structure failure.  First, how will officials get information?   When the

workload in a crisis center increases 100-fold, will the IT system have the
capacity to feed that information to the necessary recipients?  The Admin-

istration has been exploring, for example, how to handle multiple events
at once.  As local response capabilities become saturated, the workload

will spill over to the state and federal levels.  At that point, the higher

echelons may have a limited capability to respond, so there will be heavy
reliance on local capacity, at least at the beginning.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B79Second, citizens will want to know early on if there is a crisis and howthe nation is holding up.  Specific information can reduce panic.  For

example, in the case of Y2K, plans are being made for a White House
representative, such as the PresidentÕs assistant on Y2K matters, to pro-vide a status report early in the afternoon of Saturday, January 1, 2000.  Of

course, many will learn from news reports starting with the events that
take place at midnight in New Zealand, where the new year arrives 17
hours before it does in Washington, D.C.Third, the government will try to make decisions in real time aboutwhere help should be sent.  This approach has been taken before in major

disasters such as the explosion in the federal building in Oklahoma City,
so critical disaster response groups already have been organized for Y2K.
Some exercises performed during 1999 will help with evaluation of the
information flow and capacities.Federal agencies are expending substantial resources to address theY2K problem.  Some agencies are deferring capital improvements in their

information infrastructures so they can deal with Y2K issues first, whereas
others are using the opportunity to recapitalize in critical areas of their
infrastructure to build next-generation, Y2K-compliant systems.  At lower

levels of government, emergency managers from metropolitan areas are
collaborating to monitor the status of Y2K planning, and they are also
working with private corporations.URBAN SEARCH AND RESCUE AT THEMURRAH FEDERAL BUILDING BOMBINGGeographical information systems (GISs) (Box B.2) played an impor-tant role in the response to the April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P.
Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.  Following the explosion,

rescuers did not know if they were looking for 100 or 300 people in the
building, and they needed a precise map to target locations to look for
people.  To help build this map, they relied on a variety of sources, includ-

ing interviews with the building maintenance manager.  In recognition of

the utility of GISs in Oklahoma City, especially the value of having people
dedicated to sorting out information, the urban search and rescue organi-
zation permanently added two GIS positions to the incident support team.
Several lessons about the use of information systems emerged fromthe experience of the GIS unit at Oklahoma City:¥Once an initial set of data is made available to responders, updatesand changes must be made.  As soon as responders enter a damaged

building, they will undoubtedly discover discrepancies between the pre-
existing data and the actual situations they encounter (many a result ofSummary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80APPENDIX Bthe disaster itself).  This information is of great value to the entire re-
sponse team.  The ability to easily modify existing spatial data is one of

the strengths of using digital data rather than, for example, printed maps.¥The level of preparedness and the element of surprise in a disastersuch as the bombing in Oklahoma City affect what will be required in
responding to an emergency.  Indeed, a critical factor in the success of the

Oklahoma City GIS support was that digital floor plans were available.
These plans, which had been developed by a local architectural firm for a
remodeling project involving the whole building, enabled the GIS team to
ramp up quickly and to provide operations maps within hours.  The more

complex the structure, the more important it is to have preexisting infor-
mation in a readily usable format available for emergency personnel.¥The reliability of the information provided to rescuers is a signifi-BOX B.2  Geographical Information Systems
Geographical information systems (GISs)Ñcomputer systems that manage,display, and support analysis of geographical reference dataÑare increasinglybeing used to fill many crisis management needs.  All phases of crisis manage-
ment deal with many location-specific details, drawn from sources including re-
mote sensing and Global Positioning System (GPS) data on the region of an eventand its effects.  A GIS assists in managing such information by associating related
geographic information and integrating multiple geographic information elements
during a crisis.  GIS offers a number of capabilities of interest for crisis manage-
ment:¥Dynamic capabilities.  Unlike a static map, a GIS database can be updatedduring the course of a disaster to reflect what is known about the environment andsituation during the response efforts.  For example, following some disasters such

as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, or floods, the topography itself will havechanged.  In others, the topography itself may not have changed but the built
environment, including, roads, buildings, and utility services, will have been affect-
ed.  Crisis response is greatly assisted when changes such as damaged roads can
be reflected quickly in maps used to coordinate response efforts.¥Ease of distribution.  When put into a GIS, spatial data can be reproduced
electronically for distribution and access (e.g., through a network, Web access, ordial-up modem), and updates can be distributed as required to reflect changes inthe situation.¥Tool for analysis of data.  In contrast to maps, a GIS provides an effective
way to combine many types of data of value for crisis management.  For example,
linguistic demographic data might be imported into a GIS to determine the need fortranslators in the aftermath of a crisis.  Data from a variety of sources, such as
laser rangefinders or remote sensing, can also be imported directly into a GIS and
further analyzed and modeled.  Results of spatial models can be integrated togeth-
er with incident data, existing map bases, and remotely sensed information.1Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B81To give another example, following the Northridge earthquake, the results of anearthquake shake model were overlaid with zip code information to speed up pro-cessing of damage claims.  A list of zip codes for areas that had shaking intensities

of VIII or greater was produced.  Based on this information all claims in these zip
codes could be given emergency checks immediately without waiting for case-by-case field verification.The geographical data used in a crisis varies according to location.  Some
states have extensive GISs of their own with up-to-date details.  These systems

include information on evacuation routes and location of emergency shelters andestimates of populations-at-risk at various times of the day.  Other sources used
include background GIS maps, including roads and locations of industry; census
data and some commercially available data sets; and aerial photographs for thearea.  When these preexisting data sets are available, they are used.  When not
available, special sets will be created using aircraft photography or imaging from
remote sensing facilities.Some types of crises place special requirements for accurate and precise geo-graphical data sets. For example, workshop participants noted that in many cases
there are inaccuracies in the definitions of floodplains because topography is insuf-ficiently understood.  When dealing with a flood, 1 foot in elevation can make a
major difference, yet topographical maps are typically accurate to plus or minus 5
or 10 feet.  During the 1997 and l998 floods in California, problems with levee
breaks were difficult to handle because nobody knew where the breaks were (sincethen, California levee maps have been improved).1A recent NSF-sponsored workshop explored research issues related to the integration ofmultiple data types and sources.  See David M. Mark, ed.  February 1999.
  Geographic
Information Science: Critical Issues in an Emerging Cross-Disciplinary Research Domain.National Center for Geographical Information and Analysis, State University of New York at
Buffalo.  Available online at <http://www.geog.buffalo.edu/ncgia/workshopreport.html>.
cant concern.  The information developed by the GIS team in the Murrah
building was developed by experienced personnel working directly with
the people in the best position to have the correct informationÑthus theinformation had a high degree of accuracy.  Preidentified data sources,

reliable data paths, and reliable remote sensing technologies, crossed-
checked with other sources for validation, are what contribute to devel-
oping data that will be believed.   In contrast, information gleaned from

other sources, such as the results of Web searches of various public sites,
is not likely to be held in high esteem.  Given the rule of thumb adopted

by many crisis respondersÑthat one-third of the information is accurate,one-third is wrong, and one-third might be either right or wrongÑtheyare likely to be reluctant to rely too much on the outside information they
are provided.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82CSynopsis of the CSTB Report Computingand Communications in the Extreme
The Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardÕs (CSTBÕs) re-port Computing and Communications in the Extreme: Research for Crisis Man-agement and Other Applications1 took some initial steps in exploring the
role of information technology in crisis management.  Discussions at the

workshops convened by the steering committee for the project spanned
many aspects of computing and communications technology research,
development, deployment, and use, focusing on crisis management as the
primary application area.  The workshops generated ideas about where

high-performance technology may be helpful, where advances in perfor-
mance at the leading edge would yield benefits in more mainstream sys-
tems, and how the interaction of applications in different areas (e.g., the
use of telemedicine and digital libraries in crisis response) influences the
development and use of advanced computing and communications.Promising computer science and engineering research topics wereidentified in discussions between crisis management experts and infor-
mation technologists at the workshops and were developed further in
subsequent deliberations by the authoring steering committee.  Research

in these areas has Òthe potential to increase the ability of individuals and
organizations to make the most of important applications, to present in-1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1997.
Computing and Communications in the Extreme: Research for Crisis Management and Other Ap-plications.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C83tellectually stimulating challenges for researchers, and to promote signifi-cant advances in the state of technology,Ó according to the report (p. 7).
Research topics suggested in the report include communications re-sources such as rapidly deployable, self-configuring wireless networks
for coordinating response teams; Òjudgment supportÓ tools to assist crisis
managers in making decisions in the absence of complete, reliable infor-
mation; simulations of phenomena such as hurricanes and fires that could
deliver useful results to crisis managers rapidly; and virtual ÒanchordesksÓ that would place network-based resources such as simulations
and information systems at the disposal of crisis managers.The steering committee developed 11 findings based on input fromthe workshops and  additional, related information.  The findings have a

number of common themes.  One is that some of the greatest technical

challenges stem from the sheer scale (i.e., numbers of people and devices,
diversity of resources, amount of computing power, complexity of inter-
actions) of the requirements that must be met.  Another theme is that the

technologies must be easy enough to use to complement the users rather
than distract them from their missions.The report observes that the widespread interconnection of comput-ing and information resources has made it feasible, and increasingly com-
mon, for resources to be called on in unforeseen ways.  ÒCrisis manage-ment, in particular, illustrates the value of being able to integrate highly
diverse resources whose usefulness in an unusual situation could not
have been anticipated in advance.  Unfortunately, technologies devel-

oped to meet a specific application requirement often do not function well
in unforeseen circumstances because of complex, difficult problems of
interoperation, performance, and scaling up,Ó the report notes (p. 6).
Consequently, the steering committeeÕs findings suggest R&D and de-ployment efforts that can lead to both architectural approaches for sys-
tems that function on a national scale and general-purpose tools and ser-
vices that facilitate rapid, ad hoc integration of systems and resources.In developing the findings, the steering committee identified severalcharacteristics of crisis management that place particular stress on adop-
tion and exploitation of advanced information technologies:¥Magnitude.  Crises can overwhelm available resources.  For ex-
ample, communications systems, power plants, hospital systems, and
weather centers can all be saturated in a crisis.  How can systems be

developed that have Òsurge capacityÓ or that can respond usefully while
in a saturated state?¥Urgency.  Rapid response in communication and information ser-
vices to the special loads of crises is essential.  It can lead, for example, to
communication architectures that provide priority service for crisis man-Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84APPENDIX Cagers.  There can also be a kind of 
Òengineering urgency,Ó in which
interoperation must be established between systems in a matter of hours
to satisfy the information needs of responders.¥Infrequency and uncertainty.  Some high-magnitude events, such as
earthquakes, occur infrequently and in unpredictable locations.  How can

agencies manage resources to be able to respond effectively, given the
reality of constrained budgets? Can information systems be architected to
be usable despite the unpredictability of demand?¥Special information needs.  A crisis can cause unusual demands both
for information flows to and from the crisis area and for consolidation or
fusion of information to meet responder needs.  For example, in the Okla-

homa City bombing of April 1995, information about the Murrah building
and nearby buildings was collected from many sources and then ÒfusedÓto form a composite model that helped identify high-probability locations
to find missing people.The CSTB report identifies and elaborates on research needs moti-vated by crisis management.  In addition, the report developed a set of

findings regarding the role of research in crisis management and other
national-scale applications of high-performance computing and commu-
nications technology:¥Crisis management testbeds.  Finding 1 emphasizes the value of es-
tablishing experimental testbeds for crisis management-related R&D.
Such testbeds provide a venue for government, academic, and industrial
researchers to work with application users, such as federal, state, and
local crisis managers, to test and validate technologies by subjecting them
to realistic applications.  This was the principal finding relating to the

process of collaboration between the two communities.¥Infrastructure baselining.  Finding 2 highlights the importance of
investigating the design and operation of existing national-scale infra-
structures to identify which features enable these systems to be scalable,
to accommodate diverse components, and to evolve over time.¥Usability and collaboration.  Findings 3 and 4 suggest ways to im-
prove support for the human-computer interface and for human activities
mediated by computing.  The findings call for research to gain a better

understanding of usersÕ needs, capabilities, and limitations, as well as
research to develop concepts for new, open, network-based collaboration
tools, such as virtual situation rooms.¥Standards, interoperability, integration, and legacy.  Four findings (5,
6, 7, and 8) are devoted to addressing the critical issues that affect system
composability and interoperability.  The findings call for research to iden-

tify design principles that can yield open standards such as communica-Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C85tions protocols, and research to develop generic technology that can fa-cilitate interconnection and semantic interoperation of diverse informa-
tion resources.  Additional research is suggested to develop ways to pre-

dict the performance and reliability of the components used to construct
software systems and to develop technological and architectural methods
to maintain access to long-standing information and software assets while
also enabling users to exploit new technologies as they become available.¥Adaptivity and reliability.  Findings 9 and 10 deal with adaptation touncertainty and change, including on-the-fly adaptation to changes in
topology, load, or environment.  These findings call for research to in-

crease the adaptivity of networks and applications so they can function
during or after crises and research to enable accurate assessments of the
reliability of systems composed of potentially unreliable hardware, soft-
ware, and people.¥Distributed systems performance.  Finding 11 calls for research to
improve understanding of how to reason about, measure, predict, and
improve the performance of distributed systems, given that most crisis-
support systems involve highly distributed configurations operating in
unanticipated ways.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82CSynopsis of the CSTB Report Computingand Communications in the Extreme
The Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardÕs (CSTBÕs) re-port Computing and Communications in the Extreme: Research for Crisis Man-agement and Other Applications1 took some initial steps in exploring the
role of information technology in crisis management.  Discussions at the

workshops convened by the steering committee for the project spanned
many aspects of computing and communications technology research,
development, deployment, and use, focusing on crisis management as the
primary application area.  The workshops generated ideas about where

high-performance technology may be helpful, where advances in perfor-
mance at the leading edge would yield benefits in more mainstream sys-
tems, and how the interaction of applications in different areas (e.g., the
use of telemedicine and digital libraries in crisis response) influences the
development and use of advanced computing and communications.Promising computer science and engineering research topics wereidentified in discussions between crisis management experts and infor-
mation technologists at the workshops and were developed further in
subsequent deliberations by the authoring steering committee.  Research

in these areas has Òthe potential to increase the ability of individuals and
organizations to make the most of important applications, to present in-1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1997.
Computing and Communications in the Extreme: Research for Crisis Management and Other Ap-plications.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C83tellectually stimulating challenges for researchers, and to promote signifi-cant advances in the state of technology,Ó according to the report (p. 7).
Research topics suggested in the report include communications re-sources such as rapidly deployable, self-configuring wireless networks
for coordinating response teams; Òjudgment supportÓ tools to assist crisis
managers in making decisions in the absence of complete, reliable infor-
mation; simulations of phenomena such as hurricanes and fires that could
deliver useful results to crisis managers rapidly; and virtual ÒanchordesksÓ that would place network-based resources such as simulations
and information systems at the disposal of crisis managers.The steering committee developed 11 findings based on input fromthe workshops and  additional, related information.  The findings have a

number of common themes.  One is that some of the greatest technical

challenges stem from the sheer scale (i.e., numbers of people and devices,
diversity of resources, amount of computing power, complexity of inter-
actions) of the requirements that must be met.  Another theme is that the

technologies must be easy enough to use to complement the users rather
than distract them from their missions.The report observes that the widespread interconnection of comput-ing and information resources has made it feasible, and increasingly com-
mon, for resources to be called on in unforeseen ways.  ÒCrisis manage-ment, in particular, illustrates the value of being able to integrate highly
diverse resources whose usefulness in an unusual situation could not
have been anticipated in advance.  Unfortunately, technologies devel-

oped to meet a specific application requirement often do not function well
in unforeseen circumstances because of complex, difficult problems of
interoperation, performance, and scaling up,Ó the report notes (p. 6).
Consequently, the steering committeeÕs findings suggest R&D and de-ployment efforts that can lead to both architectural approaches for sys-
tems that function on a national scale and general-purpose tools and ser-
vices that facilitate rapid, ad hoc integration of systems and resources.In developing the findings, the steering committee identified severalcharacteristics of crisis management that place particular stress on adop-
tion and exploitation of advanced information technologies:¥Magnitude.  Crises can overwhelm available resources.  For ex-
ample, communications systems, power plants, hospital systems, and
weather centers can all be saturated in a crisis.  How can systems be

developed that have Òsurge capacityÓ or that can respond usefully while
in a saturated state?¥Urgency.  Rapid response in communication and information ser-
vices to the special loads of crises is essential.  It can lead, for example, to
communication architectures that provide priority service for crisis man-Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84APPENDIX Cagers.  There can also be a kind of 
Òengineering urgency,Ó in which
interoperation must be established between systems in a matter of hours
to satisfy the information needs of responders.¥Infrequency and uncertainty.  Some high-magnitude events, such as
earthquakes, occur infrequently and in unpredictable locations.  How can

agencies manage resources to be able to respond effectively, given the
reality of constrained budgets? Can information systems be architected to
be usable despite the unpredictability of demand?¥Special information needs.  A crisis can cause unusual demands both
for information flows to and from the crisis area and for consolidation or
fusion of information to meet responder needs.  For example, in the Okla-

homa City bombing of April 1995, information about the Murrah building
and nearby buildings was collected from many sources and then ÒfusedÓto form a composite model that helped identify high-probability locations
to find missing people.The CSTB report identifies and elaborates on research needs moti-vated by crisis management.  In addition, the report developed a set of

findings regarding the role of research in crisis management and other
national-scale applications of high-performance computing and commu-
nications technology:¥Crisis management testbeds.  Finding 1 emphasizes the value of es-
tablishing experimental testbeds for crisis management-related R&D.
Such testbeds provide a venue for government, academic, and industrial
researchers to work with application users, such as federal, state, and
local crisis managers, to test and validate technologies by subjecting them
to realistic applications.  This was the principal finding relating to the

process of collaboration between the two communities.¥Infrastructure baselining.  Finding 2 highlights the importance of
investigating the design and operation of existing national-scale infra-
structures to identify which features enable these systems to be scalable,
to accommodate diverse components, and to evolve over time.¥Usability and collaboration.  Findings 3 and 4 suggest ways to im-
prove support for the human-computer interface and for human activities
mediated by computing.  The findings call for research to gain a better

understanding of usersÕ needs, capabilities, and limitations, as well as
research to develop concepts for new, open, network-based collaboration
tools, such as virtual situation rooms.¥Standards, interoperability, integration, and legacy.  Four findings (5,
6, 7, and 8) are devoted to addressing the critical issues that affect system
composability and interoperability.  The findings call for research to iden-

tify design principles that can yield open standards such as communica-Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C85tions protocols, and research to develop generic technology that can fa-cilitate interconnection and semantic interoperation of diverse informa-
tion resources.  Additional research is suggested to develop ways to pre-

dict the performance and reliability of the components used to construct
software systems and to develop technological and architectural methods
to maintain access to long-standing information and software assets while
also enabling users to exploit new technologies as they become available.¥Adaptivity and reliability.  Findings 9 and 10 deal with adaptation touncertainty and change, including on-the-fly adaptation to changes in
topology, load, or environment.  These findings call for research to in-

crease the adaptivity of networks and applications so they can function
during or after crises and research to enable accurate assessments of the
reliability of systems composed of potentially unreliable hardware, soft-
ware, and people.¥Distributed systems performance.  Finding 11 calls for research to
improve understanding of how to reason about, measure, predict, and
improve the performance of distributed systems, given that most crisis-
support systems involve highly distributed configurations operating in
unanticipated ways.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.