DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9750Networking Health: Prescriptions for the Internet388 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-06843-7 | DOI 10.17226/9750Committee on Enhancing the Internet for Health Applications: TechnicalRequirements and Implementation Strategies, Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, National Research CouncilNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Enhancing the Internet for Health Applications:
Technical Requirements and Implementation StrategiesComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETNETWORKING HEALTH
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW ¥ Washington, DC 20418NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Boardof the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of theNational Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute ofMedicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their

special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Library of Medicine under Task OrderNo. 42, Sponsor Award No. N01-OD-4-2139.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the sponsor.Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataNetworking health : prescriptions for the Internet / Committee on Enhancing the Internet    for Health Applications: Technical Requirements and Implementation
    Strategies, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Commission on

    Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications, National Research Council.
           p. cm.
    Includes bibliographical references and index.

    ISBN 0-309-06843-6 (casebound)
    1.  Internet (Computer network) in medicine.  I. National Research Council (U.S.).
Committee on Enhancing the Internet for Health Applications: Technical
Requirements and Implementation Strategies.    R859.7.I58N48 2000
    362.1'0285'4678Ñdc21
                                                             00-008698
Additional copies of this report are available from:National Academy Press2101 Constitution Avenue, NWBox 285
Washington, DC  20055
(800) 624-6242(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2000 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of AmericaNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in
1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-ment on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the

National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility foradvising the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also

sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.Dr.Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both theNational Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-
viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON ENHANCING THE INTERNET FOR HEALTHAPPLICATIONS:  TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIESEDWARD H. SHORTLIFFE, Columbia University, ChairRUSS BIAGIO ALTMAN, Stanford University
PATRICIA FLATLEY BRENNAN, University of Wisconsin at Madison
BRUCE DAVIE, Cisco Systems, Inc.
WILLIAM M. DETMER, University of Virginia
VALERIE FLORANCE, Association of American Medical Colleges
ANDREW FRIEDE, Cerner Corp.
MARK FRISSE, Express Scripts, Inc.
JOHN GLASER, Partners Healthcare System, Inc.
JOHN HUFFMAN, Stentor, Inc.
ISAAC KOHANE, ChildrenÕs Hospital, BostonCARL E. LANDWEHR, Mitretek Systems
DANIEL R. MASYS, University of California at San Diego
JANE E. SISK, Mount Sinai School of Medicine
THORSTEN VON EICKEN, Cornell UniversityStaffJERRY R. SHEEHAN, Study DirectorRITA GASKINS, Project Assistant
MICKELLE RODGERS RODRIGUEZ, Senior Project AssistantNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairJAMES CHIDDIX, Time Warner Cable
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco
JEFFREY M. JAFFE, Lucent Technologies, Inc.
ANNA KARLIN, University of Washington
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, WhizBang! Labs, Inc.
DONALD NORMAN, UNext.com
RAYMOND OZZIE, Groove Networks
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
CHARLES SIMONYI, Microsoft Corporation
BURTON SMITH, Tera Computer Company
TERRY SMITH, University of California at Santa Barbara
LEE SPROULL, New York UniversityStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Senior Program Officer
ALAN S. INOUYE, Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Program Officer
GAIL PRITCHARD, Program Officer
JANET D. BRISCOE, Office Manager
DANIEL LLATA, Senior Project Assistant
SUZANNE OSSA, Senior Project Assistant
MICKELLE RODGERS RODRIGUEZ, Senior Project Assistant
DAVID DRAKE, Project Assistant
MARGARET MARSH, Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Office AssistantNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONSPETER M. BANKS, Veridian ERIM International, Inc., Co-chairW. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, Co-chairWILLIAM F. BALLHAUS, JR., Lockheed Martin Corporation
SHIRLEY CHIANG, University of California at Davis
MARSHALL H. COHEN, California Institute of Technology
RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University
SAMUEL H. FULLER, Analog Devices, Inc.
JERRY P. GOLLUB, Haverford College
MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD, University of California at Santa Barbara
MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University
WESLEY T. HUNTRESS, JR., Carnegie Institution
CAROL M. JANTZEN, Westinghouse Savannah River Company
PAUL G. KAMINSKI, Technovation, Inc.
KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota
JOHN R. KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company (retired)
MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania
DUSA M. McDUFF, State University of New York at Stony Brook
JANET NORWOOD, Former Commissioner, U.S. Bureau of LaborStatisticsM. ELISABETH PAT…-CORNELL, Stanford UniversityNICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory
ROBERT J. SPINRAD, Xerox PARC (retired)MYRON F. UMAN, Acting Executive DirectorNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixConsiderable attention centers on the Internet and health care.  The
popular press tends to focus on the growing use of the Internet to support
consumer health via health-related Web sites that provide information on
specific diseases, contain guidance on healthy lifestyles, host chat and
support groups, and sell a range of health-related products.  Federal pro-
grams tend to focus on using networking of various kinds to support
telemedicine, especially for rural and underserved areas.  These applica-

tions represent just a small sampling of the ways the Internet can be used
to support health and health care.  Many other applications exist in public

health, biomedical research, health care finance and administration, and
the maintenance of electronic health records.Each of these applications demands different capabilities of its under-lying networks, whether high-bandwidth connections, rapid delivery of
data, tight security, reliability, or widespread access.  As a result, the

existing Internet cannot support them all.  Nevertheless, a number of

programs, such as the federal governmentÕs Next Generation Internet andthe private-sector Internet 2 initiatives, are under way to enhance the
capabilities of the Internet and to develop technologies that support high-
performance networking.  These programs could help the Internet meet

the needs of the health and health care communities.  But what capabili-

ties must the Internet provide in order to support health and health care?
How do they differ from those that might be developed anyway to sup-
port other applications of the Internet in sectors as diverse as commerce,
entertainment, and defense?Preface
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACETHE COMMITTEE AND ITS CHARGETo obtain preliminary answers to these questions, the National Libraryof Medicine (NLM) asked the Computer Science and Telecommunica-
tions Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council (NRC) to conduct a
study on the technical capabilities the Internet needs to support health
applications and on ways of ensuring that these capabilities are imple-
mented.  The objectives were to (1) identify a range of health applications

that could reasonably gain widespread, routine use over the Internet in
the foreseeable future, (2) examine the technical capabilities these applica-
tions would demand, (3) define the characteristics of the Next Generation
Internet and an associated infrastructure that would meet these require-
ments, and (4) recommend an appropriate strategy for achieving this
infrastructure in light of other activities under way to enhance current
Internet capabilities.  The project was intended to address questions such
as the following:¥What characteristics of the current Internet limit its utility for vari-ous types of routine health and biomedical research uses?  For different

types of telemedicine?  For plausible future health-related uses that will

require high bandwidth?  What would be the likely future levels of various

types of health traffic on the network if these limitations were overcome?¥What quality of service and security characteristics or tools will theNext Generation Internet require to be suitable for various types of health-
related applications, given technical requirements and estimated traffic
levels?  Are the requirements of different health applications compatible

with one another and with the requirements for other projected uses of
the Internet?  To what extent are they supported by technology available

now or already in development?¥What specific strategies are likely to ensure that the United Statesattains a communications infrastructure to support the full potential range
of routine health and biomedical research uses?To conduct the study, CSTB assembled an expert committee consist-ing of 15 members drawn from the networking and health communities.
The committee met five times between September 1998 and June 1999 to
solicit testimony from outside experts, deliberate on its findings and rec-
ommendations, and draft its final report.  It met again in September 1999

to discuss its plans for modifying the draft report in response to com-
ments from many outside reviewers.  The committee also conducted a

series of site visits to gather information firsthand on the ways the Internet
could beÑand is beingÑused to support health and health care.  Mem-
bers of the committee visited with researchers and health practitioners atNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiStanford University, NASA Ames Research Center, the University of Cali-fornia at San Francisco, Kaiser-Permanente of Northern California, East
Carolina University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the
University of Washington, Regence BlueShield, and the Washington State
Department of Health.  These visits provided an opportunity to directly

observe Internet-based systems that had been developed for health care,
biomedicine, and other health-related activities.  It also provided an oppor-

tunity to 
learn more about the kinds of applications that cannot yet beimplemented in an Internet-based system.The committee used the information gathered during site visits andpresentations by other briefers to synthesize a comprehensive view of the
ways the Internet could transform health-related activities.  It attempted

to identify the technical and nontechnical challenges that need to be over-
come in order to expand the use of the Internet in health and biomedicine
and to devise a set of recommendations that will help make the Internet a
more useful communications medium within the health sector.  The site

visits are summarized in Appendix A.  Specific material from the visits

has been incorporated into Chapter 2 of this report.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis report benefited from the combined talents of many people,including those who were directly associated with the project and many
who were not.  First, thanks are due to members of the committee itself,

all of whom maintained a high level of enthusiasm, energy, and dedica-
tion over the course of the project.  Committee members found time for

project meetings, site visits, and drafting portions of the text despite their
many other responsibilities and commitments.  Approximately half of the

committee members changed jobs and/or affiliations as the project un-
foldedÑa living testament to the dynamic nature of the Internet in healthapplicationsÑyet they remained committed to this project throughout.Many other people volunteered their time and expertise to help thecommittee to better understand the ways in which the Internet might be
used to support health objectives and the technical capabilities that health
applications demand of the Internet.  Special thanks are due to those who

hosted, coordinated, and participated in its site visits and to those who
met with the committee at its three open meetings (see Appendix D for a
list of participants).  The information gathered during these interactions

proved invaluable to the committeeÕs deliberations and forms the back-bone of this report.  Other people also provided useful information and

advice to the committee.  Mark Ellisman at the University of California at

San Diego and Martin Hadida-Hassan at the San Diego Supercomputer
Center helped to clarify the discussion of telemicroscopy in Chapter 2 ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiPREFACEthis report; Stewart Streimer, John Parmigiani, and Sandy Haydock fromthe Health Care Financing Administration provided updates on the
agencyÕs security policy, pilot programs for electronic submission of data,and information technology strategy, respectively.  Grant Miller and

Yolanda Comedy, from the National Coordination Office for Computing,
Information, and Communications, supplied information and funding
data on the federal governmentÕs NGI initiative.  Kenneth Birman at
Cornell University contributed valuable insight into security and reliabil-
ity concerns associated with use of the Internet in health applications.
Donald Simborg described early efforts to network computers in health
care organizations.The committee stands in awe of the remarkable, patient work of theCSTB and NRC staff in supporting its deliberations over the course of this
study.  Staff members kept the committee on track and helped its mem-

bers to put their ideas and analyses into coherent prose.  The committee is

further indebted to the reviewers of an early draft of this report, whose
thoughtful comments and criticisms challenged committee members to
strengthen and refine their argumentsÑand to articulate them moreclearly.  This final report is considerably improved thanks to their input.

It is a much more readable document thanks to Laura Ost, a free-lance
editor who assisted the NRCÕs internal staff in editing the manuscript,and to James Igoe, from the National Research Council Library, who
tracked down numerous references and helped to complete the citations
in the reference lists.Finally, thanks are due to Donald A.B. Lindberg, director of the NLM,Michael Ackerman, assistant director for High Performance Computing
at the NLM, and Betsy Humphreys, associate director for Library Opera-
tions at the NLM.  Their dedication to improving health, health care, and
biomedical research through Internet technologies and their financial sup-
port made this project possible.  The committee hopes that its findings

and recommendations will assist them in leading the health and the net-
working communities to achieve their vision of a ÒhealthierÓ Internet.
Edward H. Shortliffe, ChairCommittee on Enhancing the
Internet for Health Applications:
Technical Requirements and
Implementation StrategiesNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the NRCÕs Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will
assist the authors and the NRC in making the published report as sound
as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.  The con-

tents of the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to
protect the integrity of the deliberative process.  The committee wishes to

thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of
this report:Dixie Baker, Science Applications International Corporation,William Boebert, Sandia National Laboratories,
James Bradley, Abaton.com, Inc.,
Scott Bradner, Harvard University,
Charles Brownstein, Cross-Industry Working Team,
Paul Clayton, Intermountain Health Care,
Don Detmer, Cambridge University,
Mary Fennell, Brown University,
Thomas Ferrin, University of California at San Francisco,
Alan Garber, Stanford University,
John Halamka, CareGroup Healthcare System,
Michael G. Kienzle, University of Iowa,
Clement McDonald, Regenstrief Institute,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSSatyanarayanan Mahadev, Carnegie Mellon University,David Pryor, Allina Health System,
Thomas Rindfleisch, Stanford University,
Jay Sanders, Global Telemedicine Group,
Elliot Stone, Massachusetts Health Data Consortium,
Peter Szolovits, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Elizabeth Ward, Foundation for Health Care Quality, and
Betsy Weiner, University of Cincinnati.Although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this
report rests solely with the authoring committee and the NRC.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION27
A Systems Perspective, 29
The Internet and Health, 33Drivers of Internet Applications in Health, 35
Impediments to Broader Adoption of the Internet, 36Technical Considerations, 38
Networking Alternatives, 41
Enhancing the Internet, 45The Next Generation Internet Initiative, 46
Private-Sector Efforts:  Internet 2 and Abilene, 50

Deploying Enhanced Internet Technologies, 51Organization of This Report, 52
References, 53
Notes, 552HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET57
Consumer Health, 58Consumer-Oriented Health Web Sites, 59
E-mail Between Patients and Providers, 62
Online Health Records, 64
Patient Monitoring and Home Care, 66
Technical Requirements for Consumer Health Applications, 69Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviCONTENTSClinical Care, 71Remote Consultation, 72
Medical Imaging, 76
Clinical Transactions, 80
Technical Requirements for Clinical Care, 87Financial and Administrative Transactions, 88Technical Requirements for Financial and AdministrativeApplications, 93Public Health, 94Public Health Surveillance, 96
Integrating Data Sources for Improved Decision Making, 98
Responding to Bioterrorist Attacks, 99
Technical Requirements for Public Health Applications, 100Professional Education, 102Graduate Education, 102
Continuing Education, 105
Technical Requirements for Health Professional Education, 107Biomedical Research, 108Biomedical Databases, 109
Linked Simulations, 112
Remote Control of Experimental Apparatus, 113
Publication on the Internet, 116
Collaboration Among Researchers, 118
Clinical Research, 120
Technical Requirements for Biomedical Research, 121Summary, 123Bandwidth, 123
Latency, 124
Availability, 124
Security, 124
Ubiquity, 124References, 126
Notes, 1283TECHNICAL CHALLENGES132
Quality of Service, 133Increasing Bandwidth, 135
Differentiated Services, 138
Integrated Services, 140
Alternative Quality of Service Options, 141
Quality of Service Policy, 141
Multicast, 143Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxviiSecurity, 144Elements of Security, 145
Firewalls, 148
Security Protocols, 150
Access Controls, 157
Network Availability, 160Broadband Technologies for the Local Loop, 162
Privacy-Enhancing Technologies, 167Anonymous E-mail, 169
Protected Web Browsing, 170
Anonymous Payment, 172
Anonymous Data Released from Sensitive Databases, 172Conclusion , 173
Bibliography, 174
Notes, 1764ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION
OF THE INTERNET178

Lessons from Other Industries, 179
Advancing the Strategic Interests of Health Care, 181
Impediments to Adopting Internet Applications, 184Barriers to Change, 185
Uncertainties Surrounding Internet Strategies, 189Establishing Organizational Leadership forInformation Technology, 197Summary, 199
References, 200
Notes, 2015ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY202
Protection of Personal Health Information, 203
Access to Information Infrastructure, 209
Intellectual Property Protection, 215Electronic Publishing, 215
Distance Education, 217Regulations Affecting Electronic Delivery of Health Services, 219Payment Policies, 219
Liability and Licensure, 221Federal Support for Health-Related Information TechnologyResearch, 223Workforce Issues, 227
Conclusion, 230
References, 230
Notes, 232Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiCONTENTS6CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS235
Conclusions, 236
Recommendations, 249Research, Development, and Deployment of NeededTechnical Capabilities, 250Demonstration and Evaluation of Health Applications of theInternet, 257Addressing Educational Needs, 261
Addressing Policy Issues, 263A Final Word, 265
References, 266
Notes, 268APPENDIXES
ASite Visit Summaries271
BNational Library of Medicine Awards to Demonstrate
Health Applications of the Next Generation Internet314
CBiographies of Committee Members334

DIndividuals Who Participated in Site Visits or Briefed the
Study Committee342
INDEX345
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKING HEALTH
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryThe Internet has great potential to improve AmericansÕ health byenhancing communications and improving access to information for care
providers, patients, health plan administrators, public health officials, bio-
medical researchers, and other health professionals.  Ongoing research

and development (R&D) efforts, such as the federal governmentÕs Next
Generation Internet (NGI) initiative and the complementary Internet 2
program of the private sector, could help to realize that potential.  Such

efforts promote the creation and deployment of new networking tech-
nologies to enhance the InternetÕs capabilities, enabling a growing range
of applications in health and other sectors.  But what technical capabilities

do health applications demand of the Internet?  How do these capabilities

differ from those needed by applications in other sectors, such as banking,
defense, and entertainment?  What types of experiments and demonstra-

tions should be undertaken now to learn quickly about the requirements
and benefits of different health applications of the Internet?  And how can

the health community ensure that its needs are considered within the
networking research community and in standards bodies that are defin-
ing future capabilities?Questions of this nature prompted the National Library of Medicine(NLM) to request a study by the Computer Science and Telecommunica-
tions Board of the National Research Council that would evaluate the
technical capabilities demanded by health applications of the Internet.  As

the health communityÕs primary representative in the NGI initiative and a
longtime supporter of R&D focusing on health applications of informa-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtion technology (IT), NLM sought advice on which capabilities should bedeployed in the NGI testbed networks and, ultimately, the Internet.  It

recognized that the potential for health applications of the Internet had
contributed to policy discussions of information infrastructure for several
years but that progress in realizing that potential had been slower than in
other economic sectors.  This report responds to the NLM request by

examining applications of the Internet in six health-related areas:  con-

sumer health, clinical care, health care financing and administration, pub-
lic health, professional education, and biomedical research.  It draws on a

series of visits by members of the committee to organizations that are
actively designing, developing, and in some cases operating networked
applications.  It identifies the technical capabilities that these applications

demand of supporting networks and makes recommendations regarding
the capabilities that need to be deployed to enable the health community
to take fuller advantage of the Internet.  It also identifies additional work
that is needed to develop complementary and appropriate information
technologies, such as tools to help consumers evaluate the quality of the
information they find on the Internet and access controls to reliably limitInternet usersÕ ability to access resources 
such as patient medical records.But the report does not focus exclusively on networking technologies,since the capabilities needed in networks are intertwined with other tech-
nical, organizational, and policy considerations.  As the committee learned
during its site visits, an adequate communications infrastructure is not theonly prerequisite for expanded Internet use within the health community.
Efforts are also needed to surmount organizational and policy impedi-
ments to the adoption of the Internet and Internet-based applications.  At

present, health care organizations are ill prepared to deploy Internet-
based applications, because they lack information upon which to base
investment decisions, face an uncertain financial environment, and have
difficulty attracting the talent needed to design, develop, and implement
such applications.  A number of public policy issues, ranging from con-

cerns about patient privacy to the lack of payment mechanisms for some
medical consultations delivered remotely, also stand in the way of greater
deployment of Internet applications.  All of these issues need to be ad-

dressed if health organizations are to take advantage of the capabilities
offered by an enhanced Internet.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNETThe most visible examples to date of the InternetÕs role in health-related activities are in the consumer domain.  Tens of thousands of sites

on the World Wide Web (the Web) offer information on health topics, and
a growing number of companies have established Web sites to provideNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3consumers with information on specific diseases, therapies, and healthylifestyles.  Some sites allow consumers to evaluate risks to their health,

manage chronic medical conditions, purchase health-related products,
pose questions to health professionals, or engage in discussions with other
consumers.  These systems take advantage of the InternetÕs broad, publicreach to engage significant portions of the online population, often with
information that is specially tailored to their needs.  An estimated 30

million users searched for health information on the Internet in 1999 alone,
and in 1998 consumers and studentsÑas opposed to practitioners andresearchersÑaccounted for roughly 30 percent of the use of the NLMÕsMEDLINE system, which contains references to millions of journal articles
(Lindberg, 1998).Although health-related Web sites garner considerable media atten-tion, they represent only a small sampling of the ways in which the

Internet can be used in health, itself a large sector embracing health care,
public health, health education, and biomedical research.  Because the

Internet, in theory, can link all the participants in the health community, it
can be used to improve consumer access to health information and health
care, to enhance clinical decision making and improve health outcomes
by making better information available to clinicians on demand, and to
reengineer the processes of care to make them more efficient.  The Internet

can also be used to improve the education of medical professionals,
enhance public health surveillance, and facilitate biomedical research.  In
each of these domains, specific applications can be envisioned in which
the Internet is used to transfer text, graphics, or video files (and even
voice); control remote medical or experimental equipment; search for

needed information; and support collaboration, in real time, among mem-
bers of the health community (Table ES.1).  For example, the Internet

could do the following:¥Enable consumers to access their health records, enter data or in-formation on symptoms, and receive computer-generated suggestions for
improving health and reducing risk;¥Allow emergency room physicians to identify an unconsciouspatient and download the patientÕs medical record from a hospital acrosstown;¥Deliver care instructions to a traveling businessperson who beginsto feel chest pains while in a hotel room;¥Enable homebound patients to consult with care providers overreal-time video connections from home, using medical devices capable of
transmitting information over the Internet;¥Support teams of specialists from across the country who wish toNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETTABLE ES.1  Primary Technical Challenges and Limiting Technical
Factors in Selected Health Applications of the InternetClass of ApplicationReal-Time VideoTransmissionStatic File TransferRemote Control
ApplicationDomainConsumer healthRemote medicalAccessing personalRemote control of
consultations tohealth records online.patient monitoring

the home, office,Downloadingequipment.
or wherever theeducational videos.
patient is located.Sending periodic
reports on healthconditions to acare provider.Clinical careRemote medicalTransfer of medicalRemote and virtual
consultationsrecords and imagessurgery (a long-
between clinician(e.g., X rays, MRI,term possibility
and patient orCT scans).being examined by

between twothe defense and
clinicians.space communities).
AdministrativeVideoconferencingPayment of services,N/A
and financialwith real-timeenrollment of

transactionssharing ofpatients, quality
documents.reviews, etc.  Large
medical records and
images may betransmitted insupport of some
claims.Public healthVideoconferencingIncident reporting.N/A
among publicCollection of
health officialsinformation from
during emergencylocal public health

situations, such asdepartments and
chemical orlaboratories.
biological attacksSurveillance for

by terrorists.emerging diseases or
epidemics.  Transfer
of epidemiology
maps or other imagefiles for monitoringthe spread of a
disease.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5Information SearchReal-Time
and RetrievalCollaborationPrimary Technical Challenges
Online searching forCollaboration withProtection of sensitive patient
health information orcare providers.information from breaches of

self-assessment guides.Participation in chatconfidentiality and from
Looking for a doctorgroups and supportcorruption.  Ubiquity of access so
or hospital.groups.that all health care consumers can
be reached at the location atwhich care is needed. Tools andpolicies for validating the quality
of online information.Practice guidelines.Consultation amongAccess to sustained bandwidth
Searches ofcare providers, suchand low latency for remote
professional medicalas for surgicalconsultations and collaboration.
literature.planning, which maySecurity of clinical records.
involve manipulationNetwork reliability. Ubiquity of
of digital images.access for care providers.
Consumer access toN/ASecurity to ensure confidentiality
information aboutand integrity of records. Network

health plans,reliability sufficient to support
participatingregular use for business
practitioners, eligibilitytransactions. Standards for data

for procedures,exchange and definitions of data
covered drugs inelements.
formulary.Access to publishedVideoconferencingSecurity to ensure confidentiality
literature and researchamong publicand integrity of laboratory reports
results as well ashealth officialsand other public health
epidemiological data.during emergencyinformation that may contain

Delivery of alerts andsituations, such aspersonal identifying information.
other information tochemical orNetwork reliability.  Security from
practitioners or otherbiological attacksinformation warfare or attacks on

health workers.by terrorists.the network
Õs physicalinfrastructure.continuedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETTABLE ES.1  Continued
Class of ApplicationReal-Time VideoTransmissionStatic File TransferRemote Control
ProfessionalDistance education:Accessing electronicSimulations of
educationeither real-timemedical records fromsurgical procedures.
transmission ofremote clinics.Virtual
lectures or on-Downloading sets ofenvironments for
demand streamingreference images orexploration of

video withprerecorded videosthree-dimensional
integrated graphics.of lectures.environments.
Real-time
consultations withexperts aboutdifficult cases.BiomedicalVisual feedbackTransferring largeControlling
researchfrom remotedata sets betweenexperimental
instrumentation.computers for high-equipment, such
Online conferences.speed computationas electron
Collaborationand comparisons.microscopes.

among distantReviewing results of
researchers.remote experiments.
Searching archives ofthree-dimensionalmedical images.LimitingTechnical FactorsAvailability ofAuthentication ofNetwork latency
sustained,source and recipientand bandwidth.

predictable,of information.Ability to obtain
high-bandwidthSecurity of personallyguaranteed
connections toidentifiablebandwidth for

many locations,information in transitpredictable periods
including ruralacross the networkof time.
health clinics andand in storage at

patientsÕ homeseither end of the
(to support remotenetwork.  Availability
consultations).of sustained
high-bandwidthconnections fortransfer of large,
time-critical files.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7Information SearchReal-Time
and RetrievalCollaborationPrimary Technical Challenges
Accessing referenceVirtual classrooms.Sufficient bandwidth to
materials and courseDistributedaccommodate large numbers of

materials.collaborativetransactions from a single
projects.educational institution or to
Distributedsupport access to remote scientific

discussions.and clinical simulations.  Ubiquity
of access for students in remoteclinical rotations and to support
educational applications in thehome.Searching remoteCollaboration amongSufficient bandwidth to support
databases andresearchers.  Peerrapid transfers of large sets of

professional literature.review. Interactivedata for distributed simulations.
virtual conferences.Low latency to accommodate
remote control of equipment.Tools for locatingSustained access to
information of interesthigh-bandwidth,

and for determininglow-latency networks
the quality of retrievedfor collaborations
information.  Means ofinvolving real-time

allowing anonymousvideo or manipulation
searches.of images. Multicast
protocols to make
more efficient use ofnetworking resources.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETplan particularly challenging surgical procedures by manipulating sharedthree-dimensional images and simulating different operative approaches;¥Allow a health plan to provide instantaneous approval for a refer-ral to a specialist and to schedule an appointment electronically;¥Enable public health officials to detect potential contamination ofthe public water supply by analyzing data on nonprescription sales of
antidiarrheal remedies in local pharmacies;¥Help medical students and practitioners access, from the examiningroom, clinical information regarding symptoms they have never before
encountered; and¥Permit biomedical researchers at a local university to create three-dimensional images of a biological structure using an electron microscope
a thousand miles away.A number of these applications have been demonstrated in localizedsettings, such as individual hospitals or health care delivery systems.  For

reasons of technology, organizational capabilities, and public policy,
many of them have yet to be deployed more broadly across the Internet or
on private networks that rely on dedicated communications links.  As a

result, little is known about their costs and benefitsÑwhether they wouldimprove health or research capabilities, how much they would cost to
implement, or whether they would reduce health costs if deployed on a
larger scale.  That kind of knowledge will require continued exploration

and evaluation, as well as an understanding of how the economics of the
large but decentralized health sector can influence the development of the
Internet, driving decisions about which capabilities will be deployed, and
when.This report addresses a broad spectrum of health applications in anattempt to demonstrate the diversity of needs and the degree of common-
ality in the technical capabilities they require.  It is intended to guide a

faster realization of the InternetÕs potential for health, a potential that haseluded the health sector for too long.  The report recognizes that the

applications themselvesÑand the technical capabilities they demandÑare moving targets with uncertain trajectories.  While today
Õs demonstra-tion programs hint at the kinds of capabilities that will be needed in the
future, the evolutionary path of health applications of the Internet is
unclear.  Will, for instance, remote medical consultations become viable

between any patient and any care provider connected to the Internet, or
will this capability remain more localized in its reach and limited to
patients and providers in the same health plan?  The answer depends on

technical, economic, social, and policy considerations that are difficult to
predict, and different answers could drive the need for significantly dif-
ferent technical capabilities, as well as a different scale and scope ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9deployment.  The report attempts to recognize these uncertainties and to
derive conclusions that are reflective and cognizant of them.TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONSThe technical capabilities needed to support health-related use of theInternet vary considerably from one application to another.  The relative

importance of bandwidth, latency, availability, security, and ubiquity in
six different classes of health application is shown in Table ES.2 (see Box
ES.1 for a definition of the technical terms used in this report).  For the

most part, these considerations are common to Internet applications in
other sectors, and that broader base increases the likelihood of affordable
solutions.  But in communicating with Internet researchers and technol-

ogy developers, the health community (i.e., all those active in health-
related activities, such as provision of care, public health, professional
education, and biomedical research) can call attention to its need for par-
ticular attributes, and it can point out the characteristics of the health
sector that differentiate its needs from those of sectors such as entertain-
ment, defense, or finance.For example, security is a primary concern in virtually all healthapplications of the Internet because the extreme sensitivity of personal
health information demands high levels of confidentiality.  Furthermore,

the paramountcy of safetyÑindividualsÕ health and lives are at stake,
after allÑrequires that information not be corrupted before, during, orafter transmission across the network from one party to another.
Although security is also important in many other Internet applications,
including electronic commerce (e-commerce, itself a player in the evolv-TABLE ES.2  Technical Demands of Health-Related Applications of the
InternetApplication AreaBandwidthLatencyAvailabilitySecurityUbiquity
Consumer health+++++++++++++
Clinical care+++++++++++++++++

Financial and+++++++++++
administrativetransactionsPublic health++++++++++
Professional education+++++++++++
Biomedical research+++++++++++++
NOTE:  Plus signs (+) denote the relative importance of the technical feature within the
designated application area.  A single plus sign denotes minimal importance; four plus
signs signify great importance.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX ES.1Glossary of Technical TermsA range of technical capabilities must be considered in determining the suitabil-ity of different networking technologies for particular applications.  Among the more
important are five that are emphasized throughout this report:1.Bandwidth is the data-carrying capacity of a network, usually expressed asthe number of bits per second that can be transmitted across a particular link or the
network as a whole.2.Latency is the time required for an individual packet of data to be transmittedbetween communicating entities on a network.  A related concept is 
response time,which refers to the time required for an entire message or file to be transferredacross the Internet and acknowledged.3.Availability is the likelihood that the network is available for service andfunctioning properly.  Availability can be compromised by the failure of individual
components or network links, by hostile attacks that overload the system, or othercauses discussed in Chapter 3.4.Security, as used in this report, refers to the capability of a network to ensurethe confidentiality and integrity of information transmitted across it.  An important
part of ensuring confidentiality is authenticating the identity of participants in a
network-based transaction.5.Ubiquity is the degree of access to a network.  The telephone system is
highly ubiquitous because access can be achieved by almost anyone in the UnitedStates from almost any location.  Access to private networks is, by design, less
ubiquitous because it is constrained to a limited number of people and/or a limited
number of geographic locations.Related to the first two of these terms is quality of service (QOS), which refers
to the capability of a network to provide a range of guarantees about its perfor-mance, measured in terms of sustained bandwidth, latency, and/or packet lossrates.  The current Internet contains no provisions for QOS, offering only best-

effort delivery of packets of data, although several protocols have been developedfor implementing QOS.ing health environment), health applications pose special challenges, thesolutions to which may lie in the computers attached to the network
rather than in the network itself.  For example, the exchange of electronic
medical records, payment data, or prescription information demands that
the identities of both the sender and recipient of the data be validated
(authenticated) with high levels of assurance.  Mechanisms for authenti-

cating individuals that are more secure than passwords are not in wide-
spread use across the Internet.  This situation has not, however, impeded
consumer-oriented e-commerce applications, because online vendorsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11have robust means of authenticating themselves to their customersÕ Web
browsers (using electronic certificates provided by a handful of certificate
authorities, as described in Chapter 3).  Moreover, the vendors do not

necessarily require strong authentication of users who present a valid
credit card number:  credit card companies and vendors who accept credit

cards expect to incur some costs from fraud, and consumer losses are
generally capped at nominal levels.  By contrast, health has a low tolerance

for losses and other kinds of mistakes:  before an electronic prescription

can be filled or a copy of an electronic medical record sent, the identity of
the requester must be verified as rigorously as the identity of the supplier.
The constantly shifting relationships among health organizations further
complicate security considerations.  Other aspects of security also present

challenges in health applications, as outlined in Chapters 2 and 3 of this
report.1Network availability is also important in health applications of theInternet.  High levels of availability are needed in mission-critical applica-

tions in many industries, and similar needs obtain in health:  if insurance
companies and managed care organizations are to rely on the Internet for
claims processing, referrals to specialists, or checks on eligibility for par-
ticular services, they must be sure the network will be running when
needed and that data will not be corrupted.  But the health sector
Õs needfor high levels of network availability to and from a large number of
possible locations can also be greater than in other sectors, because health,
well-being, and even life may be at stake.  If care providers are to use the
Internet to access electronic patient records when treating patients in the
emergency room, they must know that the network and the applications
are operational 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Accordingly, health appli-

cations add to the call for the Internet to be made resistant to malicious
attacks and resilient in the face of failures of hardware, software, or human
operators.Many of the applications that can be envisioned in the health domaindemand high levels of bandwidth or timely delivery of data, often for an
extended period of time.2  Consider the case of remote medical consulta-
tions, which could make expert care more equitably available across the
country, regardless of the location of the patient.  Video consultations

demand high-bandwidth connections (roughly 384 kilobits per second) in
both directions between two communicating sites for the duration of the
sessionÑas long as 30 minutes in some casesÑeven if one of the sites is asmall medical practice or a patientÕs home.  Although the backbone net-
works that make up the Internet have sufficient capacity to accommodate
such needs, they cannot currently guarantee that adequate bandwidth
and latency will be available whenever needed, because other traffic with
unknowable bandwidth needs will also be traversing the network.  These
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtypes of applications therefore demand mechanisms for ensuring qualityof service (QOS) across the Internet, whether by allowing users to sub-
scribe to higher-end services (referred to as differentiated services, or diff-
serv) or allowing them to reserve capacity on an as-needed basis (referred
to as integrated services, or int-serv).The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has codified standards forboth diff-serv and int-serv, but neither has yet been deployed across the
Internet.  Moreover, it is not clear that Internet service providers (ISPs)

will deploy them in the near futureÑor in ways that support the healthindustry.  For example, the highly decentralized nature of the health

industry implies that health organizations will obtain their Internet service
from many different ISPs rather than from a single provider.  To provide

QOS between the many different sets of communicating parties that are
possible, QOS mechanisms would need to be deployed through the entire
Internet, not just across a single ISPÕs network.  However, mechanisms do
not yet exist for supporting QOS (either diff-serv or int-serv) between
ISPs, precluding the possibility of end-to-end QOS guarantees any time
soon.  Furthermore, the protocols for supporting int-serv will not neces-

sarily scale sufficiently to allow their use across the Internet.  The decen-

tralized structure of the health industry makes it hard for health organiza-
tions to come up with viable business models whereby they can pay ISPs
to deploy the kinds of QOS they need.  Almost any solution to this prob-

lem will require the participation of the insurance companies and other
third-party payers who finance health care in the United States.Ubiquity of access is particularly important in health applications ofthe Internet because people in need of health care and related services can
be almost anywhere.  Indeed, the most significant advance in health care

brought about by the Internet may prove to be better access for care
providers, consumers, and administrators operating in relatively isolated
environments.  Although many near-term applications that extend to indi-

vidual consumers do not require high-bandwidth connections, future
applicationsÑwhether remote medical consultations or the downloadingof educational videosÑcould easily drive a need for ubiquitous, broad-band access technologies.  Of particular interest could be broadband tech-

nologies for residential access that provide sufficient bandwidth both
upstream (from the end user to the Internet) and downstream (from the
Internet to the end user).  Most existing residential broadband technolo-

giesÑsuch as cable modems and digital subscriber line service using thetelephone networkÑallocate much more bandwidth downstream thanupstream, consistent with a view of the Internet as a mechanism for dis-
tributing content from a centralized source (such as an entertainment
company) rather than facilitating collaboration and interaction among
multiple participants.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS TO THE ADOPTION OFINTERNET APPLICATIONSA handful of pioneering health organizations are developing anddeploying innovative applications of the Internet, but such capabilities
are diffusing slowly throughout the sectorÑin traditional care providerorganizations, in particular.  A number of factors have impeded the

broader deployment of Internet-based systems within the health sector,
including the structure of the sector itself.  Despite some consolidation

over the past decade, the sector is very diverse and decentralized and
marked by local solutions to problemsÑit has been characterized as aÒtrillion-dollar cottage industry.Ó  As a result, effecting wide-scale change
can be difficult, as is achieving a unified voice on issues of technology and
its application.Further slowing adoption is a paucity of reliable information on thecosts and benefits of Internet-based applications in operational settings.
How much will Internet-based systems cost to deploy, operate, and main-
tain?  How will they improve care and/or reduce costs?  How well can

Internet-based systems be integrated with legacy databases in large health
care organizations? Health care professionals tend to be cautious in adopt-
ing unproven technologies because of the overwhelming need to ensure
patient safety and positive health outcomes.  Organizations that pay for

health care (including traditional insurance companies and the Health
Care Financing Administration, or HCFA, which processes Medicare and
Medicaid payments) also want evidence of cost savings or medical effec-tiveness if they are to pay for services based on the new technology.
Although Internet applications have been demonstrated to improve effi-
ciency in some applications run across enterprises, Internet technology is
still fairly new and untested in health care applications, making evalua-
tions and comparisons difficult and prompting caution in the pursuit of
Internet strategies.Evaluating the costs and benefits of health applications of the Internetis made more difficult by the uncertainties surrounding the effects of
Internet-based communications on relationships among the numerous
entities involved in health care.  For example, little is known about the

ways in which the Internet will alter the traditional relationships among
patients, primary care physicians (PCPs), medical specialists, and hospi-
tals.  Will the Internet change the way consumers seek care, enabling

them to learn enough about their health to bypass PCPs and go directly to
specialists, or will they be confused by all the information and need to
consult their PCP more often?  Will Internet-based care improve manage-

ment of the chronically ill, and if so, how will it affect the cost structure of
health care organizations?  Restructuring may also be needed within indi-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETvidual organizations.  As has happened with other applications of infor-
mation technology, Internet applications have been shown to alter work
patterns within organizations in unanticipated ways.  What types of skills

will information systems staffs need to develop and implement Internet-
based systems for health care?  What types of skills will administrative

staff and health professionals need to work with Internet-based health
care systems?  What type of training do intended system users need?

Answers to these questions will come only after additional experimenta-
tion and evaluation.Internet applications also tend to demand new (or modified) organi-zational policies and procedures.  For example, when should electronic

mail (e-mail) be used between patients and care providers?  What types of

liability does an organization assume for the quality of the information
that is relayed in the online discussion groups it hosts?  How can patient

privacy be protected in electronic transactions, and what balance between
security and access is acceptable to consumers who want online access to
their health records?  Progress is being made on a number of these issues
(e.g., the American Medical Informatics Association has developed a set
of guidelines for clinical uses of e-mail, and the Department of Health and
Human Services has promulgated draft regulations governing the pri-
vacy and security of electronic health information), but new issues con-
tinue to arise and managers of health organizations are struggling to keep
up, at times slowing the broader deployment of new applications.PUBLIC POLICY ISSUESPublic policy influences the ways in which health organizations canuse the Internet to achieve their goals.  For example, state-based practices

for licensing health care professionals and resolving malpractice suits
hamper efforts to provide remote medical consultations across state lines.
Uncertainties over evolving federal regulations for the privacy and secu-
rity of electronic health information continue to deter organizations from
implementing systems for sharing health records or administrative and
financial information across the Internet.  Other issues, such as the protec-

tion of intellectual property contained in materials developed for educa-
tional purposes, affect a broad base of constituents, including some in the
health community.  So does the issue of unequal access to the information

infrastructure, the so-called digital divide.  Reports show that people in

different geographic regions and socioeconomic classes and with differ-
ent levels of educational attainment have considerably different degrees

of access to the Internet (NTIA, 1999).  Such differences are alarming in a

number of contextsÑthe delivery of government services and educationalopportunities among themÑbut take on added significance in a healthNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15care setting, where limited access to the information infrastructure couldexacerbate the existing differences in access to quality health care.
Furthermore, many of the near-term remedies proposed for enhancing
Internet access for the general publicÑsuch as the wiring of schools, li-braries, and community centersÑdo not necessarily translate well tohealth care,  because consumers may be reluctant to conduct transactions
in public settings and may need access outside normal business hours.
Policy issues such as these have to be resolved if health applications of the
Internet are to become more pervasive and more effective.  Their resolu-

tion will require the health community to become more actively engaged
in the policy-making process to ensure that health-related interests are
addressed.EVOLVING THE INTERNET TO MEET HEALTH NEEDSBefore Internet use can become widespread throughout the healthcommunity, action is needed in four areas:  (1) research on, and the devel-

opment and deployment of, technologies suitable for health applications
of the Internet, (2) continued demonstration and evaluation of health
applications of the Internet, (3) educational needs of health care organiza-
tions and their workers, and (4) resolution of policy issues that impede
the use of the Internet in health applications.  The committee
Õs recommen-dations are intended to guide efforts in each of these areas, and progress
is needed in all of them.  As a group, the recommendations recognize that

what differentiates health from other sectors is the juxtaposition of exact-
ing technical requirements with a vast geographic expanse and a highly
decentralized industrial structure and economic base.  This combination

exacerbates the difficulties arising from the failure to articulate technol-
ogy needs or to devise means to ensure that needed services are provided.
By advocating the needs of a broad constituency, NLM can provide timely

leadership in enhancing the Internet for health.Research, Development, and Deployment of Technical CapabilitiesBroadening the utility of the Internet for health applications demandsthat the Internet possesses the necessary technical capabilities.  This can

be done by deploying the technologies that will soon be available for
improving security, availability, QOS, and ubiquity across the Internet
and by continuing to research and develop improved capabilities over the
long term.  Efforts must also be made to ensure that the health commu-

nityÕs needs are relayed to the networking research community and thatadvances are made in complementary technologies that will enable health
organizations to take advantage of the networking infrastructure.  These
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETefforts need to reflect the many uncertainties surrounding health applica-tions of the Internet and their technical needs.Recommendation 1.1.  The health community should ensure that
technical capabilities suitable for health and biomedical applica-
tions are incorporated into the testbed networks being deployed
under the Next Generation Internet initiative and eventually
into the Internet.As a first step toward enhancing the Internet to support health appli-cations, the health community should push to have the capabilities described
below deployed in the testbed networks being constructed under the fed-
eral governmentÕs NGI initiative.  Without these capabilities, future health
applications could be thwarted or delayed and the opportunities the
Internet offers could be lost.  While the entire nation has a stake in ensur-
ing that these capabilities are deployed, it is the health community itself
that is in the best position to identify the capabilities it needs, to commu-
nicate them to the network research and development community, and to
help shape the business case that will impel their deployment.  The net-

works being deployed under NGI will support a range of experimental
health applications, such as remote medical consultations, collaboration
among practitioners and researchers, and access to online repositories of
information (see Appendix B for a listing and brief description of ongoing
NLM projects).  The testing of technical capabilities in these testbed net-

works will provide an opportunity for evaluations and refinements that
will be incorporated into the demonstration projects, enabling the health
community to better assess the capabilities its applications demand.  Those

that prove effective should be deployed in the public Internet as they
become more stable.  These technologies are described in more detail in

Chapters 3 and 6 of the report.¥Quality of service.  QOS protocols should be deployed across theNGI testbed networks so that users are guaranteed access to needed capa-
bilities (e.g., bandwidth and latency).  A number of academic medical

centers will have access to the NGI via their universities and have received

funding for projects to demonstrate a variety of applications that demand
high bandwidthÑfrom remote medical consultations to real-time trans-mission of high-resolution radiological or biological images.  The deploy-

ment of differentiated services would allow users to experiment with
premium services that could eventually be offered across the Internet.
The deployment of integrated services would allow further experimenta-
tion with protocols for reserving capacity as needed for particular events
and would allow further evaluation of the scalability of existing proto-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17cols.  By experimenting with these protocols, users may be able to better
understand the specific capabilities required and devise business models
that will support the deployment and effective use of the new protocols
across the public Internet.¥Security.  Both Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption and IPSecurity(IPSec) should be deployed in the NGI testbed networks to allow the
continued evaluation of different modes of securing transactions across
the Internet.  Although SSL is already in widespread use across the

Internet, the broader deployment of IPSec would provide a complemen-
tary means of protecting information exchanges among organizations,
and it might prove effective for financial and administrative exchanges
among affiliated organizations.  Before either of these protocols (espe-

cially SSL) can be used successfully in health applications, a public key
infrastructure must be established, along with the technical mechanisms
needed to support stronger authentication of all parties involved in trans-
actions across the Internet.  Such mechanisms are generally lacking across

the Internet, although there are enclaves where they are used in the pri-
vate sector and within the federal government.  More research is needed

to develop means of authenticating large numbers of users, many of
whom need to communicate securely despite having no established rela-
tionships.Recommendation 1.2.  To ensure that the Internet evolves in
ways supportive of health needs over the long term, the health
community should work with the networking community to
develop improved network technologies that are of particular
importance to health applications of the Internet.Continued research will be needed to make the Internet even morecapable of supporting healthÑand otherÑapplications in the long term.The technologies of most interest to the health community include the
following:¥More readily scalable techniques to guarantee bandwidth on demand.Existing protocols for providing QOS on demand across the Internet,
such as the integrated services model, may not scale sufficiently to allow
widespread use.  To enable applications such as remote consultation, new

protocols will be needed.¥Stronger forms of authentication.  Continued effort will be needed tofind ways of identifying participants in Internet transactions, including
participants who have not previously communicated with each other.
The new techniques will need to scale to cover all Internet users and be
simple to administer.  Work on smart cards, token-based authentication,
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETand biometric authentication devices should be pursued.  This kind of
R&D may fall under two headingsÑhigh-confidence systems and NGIresearchÑwithin the federal governmentÕs portfolio of information tech-nology research programs.¥Symmetric or dynamically reconfigurable broadband technologies for thelast mile.  Users of residential-grade access technologies (e.g., cable modemsand digital subscriber lines) will need either access to a more balanced
allocation of bandwidth into and out of their homes or the capability to
reconfigure the allocation as needed to support applications such as
remote medical consultations, which could extend to many small health
clinics, places of employment, and patientsÕ homes.
¥Hardened quality-of-service guarantees.  Mechanisms will be neededto ensure that critical applications in health (and other sectors) do not lose
QOS guarantees except in extreme circumstances, such as a major net-
work outage.  One area of interest is techniques for rapid reconvergence

after link failures to ensure that new paths across the Internet are found
quickly in the event that a particular link fails.  Many parties and sectors

want QOS guarantees, and many Internet users are responding to offers
by large ISPs who make such guarantees within their own large net-
works.  The challenge for health (which serves a dispersed national popu-

lation) is finding a way to improve QOS and availability of service across
multiple ISPs.¥Disaster operations.  Techniques are needed for delivering mission-critical, health-related traffic even in a major natural or man-made disaster.Recommendation 1.3.  The National Library of Medicine should
forge stronger links between the health and networking
research communities to ensure that the needs of the health
community are better understood and addressed in network
research, development, and deployment.The diverse and decentralized nature of the health sector impedes thedevelopment of a unified voice through which it can express its needs to
those involved in networking research, development of Internet stan-
dards (e.g., by the IETF), and deployment of Internet services.  The NLM,

by virtue of its leadership in health informatics, could play a more pro-
nounced role in this area, actively forging links between the health and
networking communities, which have historically had limited interaction.
This could be done in several ways, perhaps by providing special funding
to recipients of NLM grants and contracts that would support their par-
ticipation in conferences and meetings of the networking community or
by funding projects that explicitly involve researchers from the health
and networking communities.  Additional activities would undoubtedly
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY19be needed to help the health community find ways to more effectivelyidentify and communicate its needs to the networking community.  An ad

hoc task force could be set up to explore additional ways to accomplish
this goal.  The NLM itself could work more closely with the networking

community, leveraging its long-standing attention to information tech-
nology development and speaking for the health sector as a whole.  It

could also serve as a focal point for contact with ISPs, the business entities
responsible for deploying the capabilities that would benefit health.  It

could  advance the perspective that health is a leading example of a peer-

to-peer application (as opposed to the more asymmetric application asso-
ciated with many other kinds of content distribution) that requires
advanced networking services from the Internet, helping create a more
unified voice for the decentralized health sector.Recommendation 1.4.  The National Institutes of Health and its
component agencies should fund information technology
research that will develop the complementary technologies that
are needed if the health community is to take advantage of the
improved networking technologies that can be expected in the
future.Health applications of the Internet pose a number of challenges forinformation technology research on topics other than networking.  The

National Institutes of Health and its constituent centers and agencies
should pursue research in those areas that are of particular importance to
the health community, such as (1) validation of information retrieved
from the Internet, (2) tools for protecting the anonymity of Internet users,
(3) access controls governing the ability of many different types of users
to access different resources on the network, (4) controls on the secondary
distribution of information, (5) improved capabilities for auditing the logs
of accesses to databases and information, (6) QOS policies that are suit-
able for health and health care applications, and (7) applications that are
alert to QOS offerings and that use them appropriately.  Other technical

needs will undoubtedly emerge as new applications are developed and
gain acceptance within the health community.  The constantly changing

context of the Internet implies that the set of applications will evolve and
that the need for research will remain.Demonstration and Evaluation of Health ApplicationsContinued experimentation and evaluation will be key to the devel-opment of a better understanding of the types of health applications that
may become popular on the Internet and of the technical capabilities theyNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETdemand.  Through demonstrations of applications such as remote consul-
tation, remote control of experimental equipment, and online access to
electronic medical records, members of the health community will gain
an opportunity to examine the relative costs and benefits of these applica-
tions, the business models needed to support them, and the organiza-
tional policies needed to govern their use.  A number of public and private

organizations have supported programs to allow these types of demon-
strations.  Such efforts need to continue as new Internet technologies

become available and new applications are envisioned.  Demonstrations

will serve as venues for continued identification of technical needs that
the networking community can address and other problems and issues
for the health community to resolve. The process will be increasingly
important to the health community if it is to establish a dialog with the
Internet community about evolving needs and technical requirements
and if it is to leverage that dialog to grow capabilities from the confines of
a demonstration to widespread deployment.  To provide information that

will inform this dialog, a number of parallel efforts will be needed, as
recommended below:Recommendation 2.1.  The Department of Health and Human
Services should fund pilot projects and larger demonstration
programs to develop and demonstrate interoperable, scalable
Internet applications for linking multiple health organizations.Pilot projects are needed to explore the full range of health uses of thepublic Internet, particularly projects that link multiple distinct organiza-
tions in an operational context.  They could include projects to allow the

patients of one organization to obtain remote consultations with special-
ists at other organizations or to allow the transmission of financial and
administrative information among organizations that provide, pay for,
and manage health care.  Few health care organizations have a strong

incentive to implement such systems on their own, given the significant
uncertainties surrounding the effectiveness of different Internet-based
systems in health care, the fragmented and proprietary nature of the
industry, and the scale at which such systems would need to be built.
Federal funding could play an important role in stimulating such work,
especially if it focused on applications that link multiple organizations.Recommendation 2.2.  Federal agencies such as the Department
of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Defense, the Health Care
Financing Administration, the National Institutes of Health,
and the Indian Health Service should serve as role models andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY21testbeds for the health industry by deploying Internet-basedapplications for their own purposes.Federal agencies that operate large-scale health care programs should,whenever possible, attempt to be leading-edge users of Internet technolo-
gies.  By doing so, they could not only demonstrate the feasibility of

deploying different health applications but also provide a testbed for
developing needed standards and supporting technologies.  The Depart-

ment of Defense already has a sizeable program under way for delivering
health care at a distance (i.e., telemedicine), the Department of Veterans
Affairs has a network of hospitals that share patient information as
needed, and the HCFA processes Medicare and Medicaid claims.  Each of

these programs, as well as those of the Indian Health Service, could serve
as a testbed for Internet applications while helping to fulfill important
government missions.  Additional support might come from other ongo-

ing efforts to reengineer federal activities.Recommendation 2.3.  Health organizations in industry and
academia should continue to work with the Department of Health
and Human Services to evaluate various health applications of
the Internet in order to improve understanding of their effects,
the business models that might support them, and impediments
to their expansion.Work is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of different forms ofInternet-based health care and to compare their effectiveness against appli-
cations 
run across different network infrastructures.  Health care organi-
zations have little evidence or data on which to base their decisions about
Internet strategies.  Because such evaluations would benefit a wide range

of health-related organizations, not just those directly involved in the
studies, active federal support would be justified.Recommendation 2.4. Public and private health organizations
should experiment with networks based on Internet protocols
and should incorporate the Internet into their future plans for
new networked applications and into their overall strategic
planning.By using networks that incorporate Internet protocolsÑwhether theInternet protocol suite per se or those associated with the WebÑhealthorganizations could gain a better understanding of the capabilities and
trade-offs inherent in the use of the Internet for health applications with-
out exposing themselves to the associated risks and uncertainties.  Using
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETthese protocols locally would also prepare health organizations to takebetter advantage of the InternetÑand the continued advances in its abili-tiesÑonce technical tools are in place to make it safer and reliable enoughfor health applications.Addressing Educational NeedsWider deployment of Internet-based applications in health care willrequire that organizations in the health sector adopt, adapt, and extend
Internet technologies to fit their missions and develop the internal capa-
bilities to do so.  The Internet promises to radically transform the provision

of health care and the education of health professionals, and organiza-
tions that fail to take steps now may find themselves ill prepared when
improved Internet technologies become available.  To make better use of

the Internet, health care organizations will also have to learn how to
evaluate the benefits of Internet technologies and develop effective poli-
cies for guiding their use, just as they had to learn how to use earlier and
more localized forms of information technology, an effort in which the
health care system is still lagging.  Efforts are recommended in three areas:
Recommendation 3.1.  Professional associations with expertise
in health issues and information technology should work with
health care organizations to develop and promulgate guidelines

for safe, effective use of the Internet in clinical settings.Part of the challenge of Internet use in health care is the developmentof suitable policies, practices, and procedures to guide its use.  For exam-
ple, how should providers handle e-mail from patients to ensure timely
responses, maintenance of patient confidentiality, and the incorporation
of necessary information into the medical record?  How can care providers

be sure of the identity of a patient to whom they are sending e-mail?
What is the role of a health care organization in monitoring discussion
groups that operate under its initiative or that of affiliated care providers?
Health care organizations have little experience upon which to base such
policies, but they can learn from each otherÕs experiences.  Professional
associations have a significant role to play in helping define industrywide
guidelines for safe, effective use of the Internet. The American Medical
Informatics Association has developed guidelines for clinical uses of
e-mail (Kane and Sands, 1998).  Similar guidelines on other topics would

support industry efforts to develop Internet-based systems.Recommendation 3.2.  Government, industry, and academia
should work together and with professional associations withNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY23experience in health and information technology to educate thebroader health and health care communities about the ways the
Internet can benefit them.One obstacle to the greater use of the Internet in health care is thathealth workers at all levels (care providers, administrators, and informa-
tion systems staff) do not fully appreciate the ways in which the Internet
can improve the provision and administration of health care.  The grow-

ing amount of publicity for e-commerce and even consumer-health-infor-
mation Web sites does not translate into the kinds of institutional and
procedural changes that would make the most of Internet capabilities in
health care.  Educational outreach programs would create a more recep-

tive audience for new technologies.  Academic health centers and profes-
sional associations have unique capabilities to educate members of the
health community.Recommendation 3.3. The Department of Health and Human
Services should commission a study of the health information
technology workforce to determine whether the supply of such
workers balances the demand for them, to identify the kinds of
training and education that workers at different levels will
need, and to develop recommendations for ensuring an adequate
supply of people with training at the intersection of informa-
tion technology and health.The process of developing, deploying, and evaluating health applica-tions of the Internet demands workers with a solid understanding of the
Internet, of other information technologies, and of the processes involved
in health care.  The policy community has already expressed concern

about a perceived shortage of skilled information technology workers.3Anecdotal evidence indicates that similar concerns may apply to the field
of health informatics, and in June 1999 DHHS announced its Biomedical
Information Science and Technology Initiative, which would boost the
pipeline of people educated as computational biologists.  However, there

is little documentation with which to evaluate these concerns or to project
the types of IT skills that workers at different levels within a health orga-
nization will need.  Additional study would be required to determine theextent of the problem and the best way of solving it.Resolving the Policy IssuesPublic policy issues that impede Internet-based activities in health,health care, and biomedical research need to be addressed.  These include
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETissues specific to the provision of health care services over the Internet,such as payment for services, professional licensure, and liability, as well
as issues of patient/consumer privacy, intellectual property protection,
and equitable access that extend far beyond the health domain.  Such

issues could stand in the way of use of the Internet in health care and in
the education of health professionals.  Accordingly, although the com-

mittee was not constituted with the range of expertise needed to make
recommendations for solving these problems, the report offers the follow-
ing recommendation for advancing the debate on these policy issues:Recommendation 4.1.  The Department of Health and Human
Services should more aggressively address the broad set of
policy issues that influence the development, deployment, and
adoption of Internet-based applications in the health sector.Ensuring that the Internet evolves in ways that meet the needs of thehealth care community and enabling the health sector to better take ad-
vantage of these capabilities will require the continuous coordination of
many independent activities and stakeholders in the public and private
sectors.  The concerns and needs of the health community must be reflected
in efforts to resolve national policy issues such as intellectual property
protection, privacy, and access to information infrastructure, and specific
efforts are needed to ensure that policy issues of concern only to the
health community, such as licensure of care providers, payment policies,
federal funding for health informatics research, and the supply of health
information technology workers, are addressed.  While many of these

issues are being addressed by various elements of the federal govern-
mentÑincluding agencies within DHHSÑother issues have seen littleinput from the health community. The constituent agencies of DHHS
vary in the importance they attach to these policy issues and in their
approaches to resolving them.  Strong, stable leadership is essential to

keep these policy-related activities focused and sustained.DHHS should assert itself more aggressively in this arena.  Private-
sector organizations also have significant leadership roles to play, but their
effectiveness in bringing about industrywide change can be limited because
the private sector is so highly decentralized.  DHHS is not the only federal

agency with responsibilities in health (the Department of Veterans Affairs,
the Department of Defense, the Indian Health Service, and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration all have health-related programs),
but the breadth of its programs and its mission argues for it to play the
lead role within government for coordinating Internet-related activities,
especially as they relate to the health community.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY25The establishment of a data council within DHHS and the realign-ment of the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics into an
advisory committee on health data, statistics, and national health infor-
mation policy are positive steps that should be built upon.  They have

enabled DHHS to make significant strides in policy areas such as the
development of regulations for protecting electronic health information.
There are other roles for DHHS to play in this effort:  (1) providing strate-

gic leadership for Internet-related efforts within the department and its
constituent agencies (this would include the use of the Internet in support
of department and agency missions) and coordinating them with those of
other federal agencies, (2) convening public and private bodies to iden-
tify, examine, and propose mechanisms for addressing issues related to
the Internet and health care, (3) exploring cross-cutting issues that affect
many health agencies and developing programs for addressing them (e.g.,

implementing a public key infrastructure that would support a range of
federal health activities), (4) encouraging federal health agencies to share
information and perspectives on their many responsibilities and interests,
including the provision of care, payment for care, monitoring of care,
health-related research, and public health, (5) advancing national debate
about key information technology issues that affect health care, including
the technical, organizational, and policy issues identified in this report,
and (6) creating the organizational structures needed to ensure that issues
at the nexus of health and information technology are identified and

addressed promptly and efficiently.  Although these activities will not by

themselves resolve the issues, they will set in motion processes that can
lead to a resolution.LOOKING FORWARDThese recommendations are intended to help the nation move for-ward on technical, organizational, and policy fronts so that it can reap the
benefits of the Internet for health applications.  Additional work will be

needed to identify other networking technologies of interest to the health
community and to ensure that related information technology needs are
met.  This report prescribes the actions needed now to develop a truly

healthy Internet in the future.
REFERENCESKane, Beverley, and Daniel Z. Sands.  1998. 
ÒGuidelines for the Clinical Use of ElectronicMail with Patients,Ó Report for the AMIA Internet Working Group, Task Force on
Guidelines for the Use of Clinic-Patient Electronic Mail, Journal of the American MedicalInformatics Association 5(1).  Available online at <http://www.amia.org/pubs/
pospaper/positio2.htm>.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETLindberg, Donald A.B.  1998.  Fiscal Year 1999 President
Õs Budget Request for the NationalLibrary of Medicine.  National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Md., March 18.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/staffpubs/od/budget99.html>.National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).  1999
.  Falling
Through the Net:  Defining the Digital Divide.
  U.S. Department of Commerce, Washing-
ton, D.C.NOTES1.As an example, a large number of individuals may have legitimate needs to review a
patientÕs medical records, making the determination of access rules extremely complicated.In an emergency room situation, information may have to be accessed by a care provider
with whom the patient has had no prior relationship, perhaps even at a hospital the patienthas never visited.2.Timeliness is not critical in many health care functions, such as when information is
transmitted for review at a later time.  But in some cases, such as acute trauma and remote
consultation, timeliness can be important.3.CSTB has a project under way to examine issues related to the information technol-
ogy workforce.  Information is available online at <www.cstb.org>.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.271Overview and Introduction
The Internet is rapidly and radically transforming many aspects ofsociety, reshaping industries from aircraft manufacturing to retailing by
enabling the widespread sharing of information and creating new rela-
tionships between buyers and sellers of goods and services.  Businesses

now sell goods and services over the Internet, often dealing directly with
customers rather than working through traditional distribution channels
and intermediaries, tailoring products to match more closely the prefer-
ences of individual customers.  Governments disseminate public infor-

mation on World Wide Web sites, and consumers use the Internet to find
information, communicate with friends and family, plan trips, shop, and
pursue hobbies.  Both the scope of applications and the number of Internet

users will undoubtedly continue to grow as technologies improve and
innovators continue to experiment with new online applications.Health-related activities stand to benefit enormously from theInternet.  As a highly information-intensive set of functions characterized

by complex interactions among a large number of stakeholdersÑprimary
care physicians, specialists, nurses, patients, health plan administrators,
public health officials, medical librarians, researchers, and othersÑhealth-

related activities can take advantage of the nearly ubiquitous reach of the
Internet and its capability to support communication between users who
may not have interacted with each other before.  Already the Internet is

beginning to influence the health sector by forging new relationships
among stakeholders and improving access to health information.  Its

application in the delivery of health care, maintenance of public health,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETpayment for health care services, education of health professionals, andconduct of health sciences research could improve the quality of care and
access to it as well as reduce its cost.Despite its promise, the InternetÕs future in supporting health andhealth care is far from assured.  A number of technical, organizational,

and policy barriers stand in the way of its adoption by health organiza-
tions and consumers.  Furthermore, although much can be done with the
Internet in its present form, some health applications demand greater
technical capabilities than the Internet can now provide, especially in the
areas of security, reliability, and timely transmission of information.  As a

result, some health applications cannot be implemented across the Internet
and used in operational settings without potentially threatening the pri-
vacy and optimal care of patients.Health applications have helped motivate a number of efforts toimprove the nationÕs information infrastructure.1  Ongoing research and
development (R&D) efforts, such as those being pursued under the federal
governmentÕs Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative and the privatesectorÕs Internet 2 initiative, also hope to foster technologies that couldenhance the InternetÕs ability to meet the needs of the health sector.  These
efforts will also provide testbeds for improved evaluations of the benefits
of different health applications of the Internet and their technical and
nontechnical requirements.  But these testbeds
Ñand ultimately the InternetitselfÑwill not adequately support health applications unless a betterunderstanding is developed of the technical capabilities that these appli-
cations demand.This report explores the use of the Internet in health-related applica-tions and attempts to delineate the technical capabilities that such appli-
cations demand.  Taking a broad view of health applications, it considers
uses of the Internet in consumer health, clinical care, public health, medi-
cal education, health care financing and administration, and biomedical
research.2  It does not, however, attempt to predict which applications are
most likely to catch on or to estimate levels of use; rather, it attempts to
illustrate the types of applications that are possible and to assess the
technical capabilities required for their safe, effective deployment in an
operational setting.The report also addresses organizational and policy issues that standin the way of broader adoption of Internet technologies for health appli-
cations.3  It became increasingly apparent during the course of the study
that health applications of the Internet involve systems that combine net-
work infrastructure with other computing technologies (both hardware
and software) and with end users who operate in multiple organizational
contexts and are influenced by the policy environment.  The close coupling

among these levels makes it impossible to focus on any one level to theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION29exclusion of the others.  Trade-offs are often made between the capabilities
embedded in different levels of the system,4 and networking can make
issues associated with other levels more important.  Security, for example,

takes on wholly new dimensions in a networked environment in which
information can be readily transferred among entities and stored in com-
puters that are attached to a public network.  Yet, many of the mecha-

nisms for addressing security concerns will be implemented not in the
network itself but in the devices or computers attached to the network.
An individualÕs access to health information in such an environment, andthe circumstances under which such access is allowed, will be determined
by a confluence of organizational and national policies for protecting
health information.The strong interrelationships between the network, other technology,and organizational and national policy introduce great uncertainties into
the evolutionary path of the Internet with respect to health applications.
For example, although many would agree that the Internet will enhance
the role of the consumer in health care, the future of specific applications,
such as remote medical consultations or online access to patientsÕ medical
records, is more difficult to discern because of the range of technical,
organizational, and policy issues to be resolved (as detailed in later chap-
ters of this report).  Further research and experimentation are needed to

understand these issues more fully and develop workable solutions.  Con-

sistent with the charge to the committee, this report does not attempt to
resolve these policy issues, but by highlighting their significance in en-
abling effective and safe applications of the Internet for health care it may
hasten their resolution.  In the end, the report recommends ways of help-
ing the Internet better serve a range of health interests.  It identifies both

long-term needs that will require R&D and steps that must quickly be
taken to help people and organizations adopt and adapt to the next gen-
eration of Internet technologies.  This chapter provides a broad overview
of past and present uses of the Internet in health care; technical terms and
considerations; and current R&D efforts that may advance the applica-
tions of the Internet and so improve health care.A SYSTEMS PERSPECTIVEAn example may help to demonstrate both the potential value of theInternet in health care and the close linkages between networking tech-
nology, other information technology, and nontechnical issues.  Consider

the following hypothetical scenario:Alice and Bob are recovering from a particularly virulent fluthat kept them both out of work for the past week.  They awakenNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETone snowy February night to hear their 6-year-old daughter,Charlotte, coughing, wheezing, and crying.  She seems warm and

will not be comforted.  Alice and Bob are worried, but they have

recently joined a plan that offers them the option of an in-home
consultation.  Because packing up their daughter and driving to

the emergency room of the nearest hospital would take at least
half an hour, they telephone the on-call pediatrician.  After

hearing the symptoms, the pediatrician decides to ask for basic
measurements and have a quick look at Charlotte right away to
decide whether she needs to be brought to the emergency room.Alice turns on their Internet access device (a set-top box) andtheir television, while Bob sets up the home health assessment
pack, including a digital thermometer, heart rate monitor, stetho-
scope, and video camera.  Alice uses the keyboard to navigate to

the health planÕs Web site and inserts a smart card into the boxthat authenticates them to the health plan server.  While they

wait a few moments, their access device exchanges digital certifi-
cates authenticating both the server and their device and estab-
lishes an encrypted session with the server.  Because video-

conferencing will be used, the device also reserves a suitable level
of bandwidth from Bob and AliceÕs Internet service provider tocarry the quality of video needed for the consultation (a few
hundred kilobits per second).Once connected to the health plan Web site, a menu ofoptions appears, and the couple make a video call to the pediatri-
cian.  A live image of the pediatrician appears in a video window.

Alice transmits an authorization code to the pediatrician enabling
her to access CharlotteÕs medical record from the online repositoryin which Alice and Bob maintain all their family medical records.
The pediatrician asks them to take CharlotteÕs temperature andpulse and to position the microphone so that she can hear the
childÕs breathing.  Alice first uses the thermometer and heart rate
monitor, which transmit results to the set-top box over wireless
links.  Guided by the pediatrician, Alice then places the stetho-

scope around various landmarks on CharlotteÕs chest and backto listen to the childÕs respirations.  The pediatrician can see an
image of Charlotte beamed to the set-top box from BobÕs videocamera.  Alice and Bob can see a split-screen image on their tele-

vision showing the pediatrician on one side and the image from
their video camera on the other.The pediatrician determines that CharlotteÕs condition doesnot require her to come in to the emergency room.  From her

remote observations, she concludes that the most likely diagnosisNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION31is acute asthma.  Charlotte has had two previous episodes of
asthma during the past year, and in both cases she responded
well to inhalants.  The pediatrician asks the parents to administer

a dose of the inhalant.  Because it is possible to determine within

10 minutes whether the inhalant will work, the pediatrician opts
to keep the video call running.  Bob makes Charlotte comfort-

able, seating her within range of the video camera.  During the

ensuing 10 minutes, the pediatrician engages the parents in a
brief review of the events leading up to the evening, exploring
such things as exposure to dust and toxins as well as stress events
in the family.  Recalling that Charlotte
Õs school has some majorrenovations under way, Alice asks the pediatrician about a possi-
ble connection between dust from the renovation and CharlotteÕsasthma flare-up.The pediatrician guides Alice to the American Lung Associa-tionÕs Web site, and together they review the information aboutasthma in children.  A checklist of environmental risk factors

appears simultaneously on the screen, and the pediatrician and
Alice review these together.  Next they listen to an audio clip of

various breath sounds, with the pediatrician coaching Alice on
how to identify the distinctive sound of wheezing.The pediatrician notes that CharlotteÕs breathing is easing,and the little girl is no longer crying.  The pediatrician asks to

speak to Charlotte and asks a few questions about how she feels.
Charlotte points to her chest and says it feels tight.  Noting that

she is able to pronounce common words and that the audible
wheezing has stopped, the pediatrician judges the situation to be
under control and advises the family that Charlotte should be
helped back to sleep.The on-call pediatrician also recommends that an appoint-ment be made for Charlotte to be seen by her own pediatrician
the following afternoon.  Bob navigates to the health plan
Õs sched-uling program and sets up the appointment. The site provides a
map to the clinic that can be printed.  The next day, as soon as

she arrives at the clinic, Charlotte is welcomed and escorted into
the examination room.  While her doctor is finishing up another

appointment, the nurse takes CharlotteÕs vital signs and adds theinformation to her electronic medical record, which is accessed
from the computer in the examination room.  Shortly thereafter,

the doctor enters the room, reviews CharlotteÕs vital signs, exam-ines her, and provides a diagnosis.  Once the diagnosis and a

prescription for a new inhaler are entered into the electronic
record, a claim for payment is automatically filed with CharlotteÕsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNEThealth plan and an electronic prescription is sent to the pharmacy
near her house.  The medication will be waiting when Bob and

Charlotte stop by on their way home.This scenario identifies a number of benefits that Internet-based com-munications could bring to health care and related activities.  It allows the

patient (and her family) to avoid a potentially hazardous auto trip on a
cold and snowy night and it eliminates waiting in an emergency room,
during which time Charlotte could have been exposed to other infectious
patients.  In addition, the remote consultation allows rapid examination

of the patient and preliminary evaluation (or triaging) of needs using
several data sources (e.g., sound, vision, and instrumented sensors).  Had

CharlotteÕs condition been more serious, her parents could have beendirected to take her directly to an emergency room; had her condition
been less serious, the system could have enabled the family to avoid an
office visit altogether.  Although telephone-based services can produce

similar benefits, they do not enable the clinician to examine the patient
visually or with medical devices.  Similarly, they are not as effective at

allowing care providers to teach patients and their families to distinguish
among various symptoms and at providing expert educational materials
for understanding a particular condition.  The electronic system also

supports paperless billing, which could speed payment for services and
reduce error and loss as information proceeds through the system of
reviews and approvals.  The system also allows easy, but protected, access

to the patientÕs medical record to give the care provider more completeinformation when making a diagnosis and plan of treatment.  The record
can be updated easily in real time as new information is collected and can
be made available to any care provider who needs it.Of course, considerable effort would be required to transform such ascenario into a reality on a broad scale.  A number of technical advances,

related to both the networking infrastructure itself and the devices
attached to it, would be required.  For example, communication links into

and out of homes would be needed that are sufficient to support color
video of adequate resolution, and there must be suitable assurance that
the video service will be available without significant interruption for the
duration of the call.  Smart cards would need to be issued to consumers to

authenticate them to a health care site and support encryption for a ses-
sion.  This type of health care would also depend on electronic patient

records, to which patients can grant providers access as needed and which
can be updated during the course of a consultation.  The equipment used
would have to be reliable enough to create and sustain a connection
between a family and a care provider for the duration of a consultation
and to provide valid measurements of vital signs.  Internet-compatible
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION33medical devices would be needed to capture vital signs and transmitthem to a remote physician.  Nontechnical issues would need to be

addressed as well.  Families would have to be trained to properly use the

system and the home medical equipment, such that care providers could
be assured of receiving valid information remotely.  Health plans would

need policies on payment for remote consultations and on care providersÕaccess to the electronic patient record.  If any one of these capabilities was

lacking, the system would fail.THE INTERNET AND HEALTHThe health sector has a three-decade-long history of linking comput-ers together to improve heath care and administration.  The National

Library of Medicine (NLM) made its Medical Literature Analysis and
Retrieval System (MEDLARS) available online to regional libraries over a
time-shared network in the early 1970s.  The resulting MEDLINE (for

MEDLARS onLINE) system made the libraryÕs repository of biomedicalreferences more widely available to support clinical decision making.5Shortly thereafter, the first local area networks (LANs) were introduced at
the University of Vermont Hospital to support clinical and administrative
processes (Box 1.1).Since these beginnings, the health care industry has gradually cometo rely heavily on information technology (IT).  In 1996, IT constituted

56percent of the industry
Õs total net capital stockÑthe fourth highestpercentage out of 53 industries examined by the U.S. Department of Com-
merce (1999).  Only the telephone and telegraph, radio and television, and

securities and commodities brokerage industries were more IT-intensive.
Nevertheless, health care expenditures on IT are relatively small in rela-
tion to the size of its labor force.  The industry overall spent just $543 per

worker on IT in 1996, compared to $12,666 for securities brokers and
$29,236 for telephone and telegraph industry workers; on this scale, health
care ranked only 38 out of the 53 industries in the Commerce Department
sample.6Health is already a bustling area of activity on the Internet.   Recent
surveys indicate that more than 22 million Americans used the Internet to
retrieve health-related information in 1998Ña figure that was expected togrow to 33 million in 1999 (Davis and Miller, 1999).  Other estimates place

the number as high at 70 million (Morrison, 1999).  Since it was made

available to the public via the Internet in 1997, NLMÕs MEDLINE data-base, which contains more than 15 million abstracts and references from
more than 3,900 medical journals, has experienced a surge in activity to
300,000 searches per day (Benton Foundation, 1999).  Health is one of the

more popular topics on the Internet, with estimates of the number ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNEThealth-related Web sites running as high as 10,000 or more (Benton Foun-dation, 1999).  Health-related Web sites allow consumers to search for

information on specific diseases or treatments, pose questions to care
providers, manage chronic diseases, participate in discussion groups,
assess existing health risks, and purchase health-related products.  By one

estimate, the online consumer market will grow to $1.7 billion by 2003,BOX 1.1Early Efforts in Networking HealthThe first attempts to deploy communications networks in support of clinicalrecords involved the use of local area networks at the University of VermontHospital in 1976 and at Walter Reed Army Hospital in 1977.  These systems

allowed users to log on to many computers from the same terminal, eliminating theneed for multiple terminals at nursing stations, each connected to a different com-puter for a different function.  Both projects used a technology pioneered by the

Mitre Corporation called broadband, which at the time referred to coaxial cablesimilar to that used for cable television, by which multiple communication channelswere carried across a single cable.1  The system made use of frequency-division
multiplexing to squeeze multiple channels onto a single cable.Subsequent efforts at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF)Medical CenterÑunder the direction of Donald W. Simborg, who worked with
Steve Tolchin of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics LaboratoryÑled tothe development in 1979 of the first true back-end network.  Four minicomputers
were connected to the network to exchange transactions between the admitting
office, the clinical laboratory, the pharmacy, and the radiology departments.  The
computers exchanged several core messages, including the synchronization ofpatient admission-discharge-transfer information, orders from clinical areas, and
the display of results to the clinical areas.  Unlike the earlier front-end networks,
these networks did not require a user to be involved in the transaction; instead, theexchange of messages was handled by the computer applications themselves,using a protocol developed specifically for the system.  The result was the creation
of the first application-level data interchange protocol in health care.Dr. Simborg left UCSF in 1984 to create the Simborg Systems Corporation,and a similar data interchange protocol was developed for his product.  This com-mercial protocol was later placed in the public domain and became the core of the
first version of the Health Level 7 (HL7) protocol, which today is the most widelyused data interchange protocol in health care.1Today, the term ÒbroadbandÓ is used to refer to a range of technologies that offer high-bandwidth (i.e., high-data-rate) communications across telephone wires, coaxial cable,optical fiber, or wireless communications channels.SOURCE:  Donald Simborg, KnowMed Systems, Inc., personal communication dated
October 31, 1999.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION35fueled largely by online sales of products such as prescription and non-prescription medicines and vitamin supplements (Nash, 1999).Beyond its popularity with consumers, the Internet is also used byhealth care professionals, biomedical researchers, and health care admin-
istrators.  Web sites geared to health care professionals allow them to

access the professional literature, consult with colleagues electronically,
order medical supplies, or communicate with insurance companies.7  Bio-
medical researchers use the Internet to access online databases of journal
articles and scientific information.  Organizations involved in the provi-

sion of health care, whether individual hospitals, managed care plans,8 or
integrated delivery networks (IDNs),9 have begun to use the Internet to
reach out to consumers.  Their Web sites provide information on available

services and may allow consumers to change their enrollment status,
select physicians, and schedule appointments electronically.Drivers of Internet Applications in HealthThe health applications available on the Internet today take advan-tage of the InternetÕs expansive reach to enable health care organizationsto interact with a growing number of online consumers (Miller and Reents,
1998).  Whereas just 17percent of U.S. households had Internet access in

1997, roughly one-third did by 1998 (NTIA, 1999), and analysts predict
that 90 percent of U.S. households will have Internet access by 2005 to
2010 (Rosenberg, 1999).  As people become accustomed to using the

Internet for routine activities, from electronic commerce (e-commerce) to
homework, they are likely to use the Internet for health-related activities.
Consumer experiences in other areas of Internet activity, such as e-com-
merce and electronic mail (e-mail), will influence the expectations they
bring to online health applications (Mittman and Cain, 1999).Care provider organizations face a number of pressures to integratethe Internet more effectively into their operations.  Recent trends toward

consolidation in the health care industry and the expansion of managed
care have erased some of the impediments to sharing information among
competing organizations.  As they attempt to link individual practices,

clinics, and hospitals into single entities, IDNs have a greater need to
share information with affiliated institutions.  As purchasers, accrediting

bodies, and the general public increasingly hold managed care plans
accountable for the quality of  health care, plans have developed schemes

for the electronic sharing of data on facilitiesÕ utilization rates and health-
related outcomes.  With such data, managed care plans can compile statis-

tics on quality-of-care indicators and monitor the quality and costs of the
individual care providers.  As care provider networks grow and consumers

become more mobile, the electronic transmission of patient informationNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETamong providers could improve care and reduce costs to the provider,the patient, and the managed care plan.10Impediments to Broader Adoption of the InternetDespite the flurry of Internet activity within and around health care,many potential applications have yet to be realized.  Many organizations

in the health sector continue to rely on private networks (e.g., leased lines)
rather than the Internet for many data communications tasks, and some
health-related applications have not yet been deployed across any type of
communications network, public or private (Box 1.2).  Few health care

organizations, for example, have integrated the Internet directly into the
provision of care.  Remote medical consultations remain a novelty prac-

ticed by a few institutions, typically over dedicated networks, for a small
subset of their patients and with support from external financial grants.
Most public health offices remain unconnected to the Internet and there-BOX 1.2Representative Applications Conducted over the Internet andPrivate NetworksFunctions Commonly Performed Today over the Internet¥Search for consumer health information¥Participate in chat/support groups¥Exchange electronic mail between patients and care providers (limited)¥Access biomedical databases and medical literature¥Find information about health plans, select physicians (limited)¥Purchase pharmaceuticals and other health-related productsFunctions Performed Today over Private Networks¥Transfer medical records among affiliated health organizations¥Transfer claims data to insurers and other payer organizations¥Conduct remote medical consultations (limited)¥Send medical images (X rays, etc.) to remote site for interpretation (verylimited)¥Broadcast medical school classes over campus networks (limited)Functions Not Commonly Performed Today over Either the Internet or PrivateNetworks¥Videoconferencing among public health officials¥Remote surgery or guidance of other procedures¥Public health surveillance/incident reporting¥Home-based remote medical consultations¥In-home monitoring of patientsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION37fore are unable to accept electronic reports from testing laboratories orcommunicate health information over the Internet to neighboring juris-
dictions.  Private insurers have in general not adopted the Internet for

financial and administrative transactions but instead continue to seek
payment through paper-based claims or electronic data sent over direct
connections via modems.The reasons for the limited adoption of the Internet in health-relatedactivities are manifold, but the underlying reason is a lack of demon-
strated value in different applications.  The Internet has been widely

adopted by the public as a tool for gaining insight  into issues of illness

and health because it is perceived to deliver value.  Many (but not all) care

providers use the Web frequently for searching online databases (such as
MEDLINE), also because it is perceived to deliver value.  A small, but

growing, number of care providers engage in e-mail discussions with
their patients about health problems.  Care providers do not use the

Internet more broadly in the process of treating patients because the valu-
able, usable, affordable, and practical Internet-based solution has yet to
be built.  The process of determining which applications add value in

health applicationsÑand which specific capabilities and attributes pro-vide that valueÑrequires continued experimentation and analysis of dataon the benefits and costs of the Internet relative to those of other media.To date, little information is available with which to gauge the contri-butions of the Internet to the provision of health careÑnot to mention itspotential to improve public health, biomedical research, and professional
education.  Emerging evidence of the benefits to health care of informa-

tion systems generally bodes well for the Internet; a growing number of
studies demonstrate, for example, reductions in adverse drug interactions
and improved diagnoses stemming from the use of computer-based
decision support tools in clinical environments.11  Research has also dem-
onstrated the positive effect of information technology applications in
several other areas of health care.12  However, the ability of the Internet
(as opposed to private networks) to improve the quality of health care or
expand access to it has not been demonstrated.  On the contrary, there has

been considerable concern about the quality of health information avail-
able on the Internet and its potential to harm consumers (Mittman and
Cain, 1999; SCIPICH, 1999).  In an industry already facing serious fiscal

and organizational upheaval, health care organizations may remain skep-
tical of a range of Internet applications until there is greater evidence of
their benefits, along with more information about the policies and proce-
dures needed to avoid the potential harms.The benefits of the Internet in health applications may prove difficultto measure because the most notable benefits may be indirect and may
vary across segments of the health sector.  For example, the advantages of
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETconsumer-oriented Web sites to care provider organizations such as hos-pitals might include marketing, possibly advertising, and the collection of
valuable data about interested consumers.  The direct and indirect rev-

enues from many of these activities, however, may be insufficient to sup-
port the development and maintenance of the applications themselves.
Furthermore, the use of the Internet could stimulate changes in industry
structure that are difficult to foresee at present.  For example, the Internet

could enable large provider organizations to extend their reach more
directly into local communities, working with local care providers to
provide greater continuity and consistency of care.  Or, it could allow

consumers to better triage their own health needs using online modules
created by their health plans.  These changes could improve health and

disease management among local populations, but the benefits may
accrue most directly to consumers.  The benefits to care providers may be

more difficult to measure, especially if healthy patients demand fewer
health services in the long run.Further slowing adoption of the Internet by health organizations areuncertainties about the technical capabilities needed to support health
applications.  Managers of many health organizations say that security

concerns prevent them from using the Internet to transfer patient medical
records among affiliated organizations or from allowing care providers to
access such records remotely (Siwicki, 1999).  At the same time, they are

not certain what types of security technology are needed to adequately
protect patient information in such applications.  With respect to other

applications, such as remote medical consultations, practitioners note that
they cannot obtain sustained access to the bandwidth they might need for
real-time video.  It is appropriate to question whether today
Õs Internetprovides a sufficiently strong infrastructure to support applications such
as critical-care monitoring and automated delivery of medication.  If

deployed in health care settings without proper attention to these capa-
bilities, the Internet could have an adverse effect by eroding patient pri-
vacy and preventing care providers from accessing needed information.TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONSWhether the Internet will become more widely adopted in health carewill depend, in part, on the technical capabilities it can provide and how
these capabilities compare with those provided by other networking alter-
natives available to health organizations and consumers.  A number of

technical factors need to be considered in such evaluations.  The five

primary factors considered in this report are bandwidth, latency, avail-
ability, security, and ubiquity.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION391.Bandwidth
 is the rate at which information is transmitted through a
network, measured in bits (or kilobits or megabits) per second.  The band-

width a network can provide is a property of the transmission medium
(e.g., fiber optics, coaxial cable, telephone wire, radio waves), the network
topology, and the switching or routing devices used to guide traffic
through the network.  The amount of bandwidth a particular application

demands is determined by the amount of data to be transmitted and the
time in which that transmission must be completed.  Applications that

must transfer large amounts of data quickly demand much greater band-
width than do applications that transfer smaller amounts of data (such as
e-mail) or transfer data more slowly (e.g., if a response is not needed
quickly).  From the point of view of an individual user (e.g., a consumer,

a doctor, or a nurse), the demand for bandwidth is a demand not so much
for a uniform increase in the bandwidth of the entire network but for
access to sufficient bandwidth when needed.2.Latency
 is the time required to transmit data across the network
(i.e., the delay between a sender transmitting a message and a recipient
receiving it).  The minimum latency a network can provide is influenced

by the speed of its switches and routers and the physical distance across
which the message is sent.  Data communications traverse different media

at the speed of light, which places a lower limit on the time it takes for a
message to travel between two points on the network.  The latency an

application demands can vary tremendously.  Real-time, interactive appli-

cations demand low latency so that users can interact with each other
easily.  Many interactions, such as telephone conversations or control of

remote devices, become unwieldy if round-trip latencies (i.e., across the
network and back) exceed 300 milliseconds.  Applications that do not

demand real-time interactions between users
Ñso-called asynchronousapplications such as e-mail and store-and-forward messaging systemsÑhave only weak demands on latency requirements.  Closely related to

latency is jitter, the variation in latency over time.  High levels of jitter

imply unpredictable degrees of latency across the network, although
several techniques, including temporary buffering of information, can
remove jitter at the receiverÕs end of the network.  In some applications,
the related notion of response time is more important than latency per se.
Response time refers to the length of time needed to transmit a full mes-
sage (such as a service request or an image) rather than an individual
packet across the network and receive a response.  Messages can consist

of many packets, and successful transmission can depend far more on
network reliability on a packet-by-packet basis than on the actual latency.
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) used on the Internet, for exam-
ple, may transmit more than one packet before it receives an acknowledge-ment that the first packet has been received, but if a packet is not received,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETTCP has to wait for a certain period of time before transmitting that packetagain.  Thus, both response time and latency can be affected by the load

on a network at a given point in time.3.Availability
 refers to the continuous availability of the network, the
individual links of which it is composed, and the services it offers.  Avail-

ability can be measured in terms of the percentage of the time the network
(or a particular link) is operational or by the average time between fail-
ures.  A number of factors can render networks unavailable, including

physical damage to network links or nodes, hardware or software failures
(i.e., component reliability problems), operator error, software errors, and
deliberate malicious attacks against the system.  Steps can be taken to

harden systems against these sorts of failures, and procedures can be
developed for restoring some level of network services in the event of
failures.  Nevertheless, some applications cannot function properly if the

performance of the network is degraded; and many time-critical applica-
tions cannot tolerate network failures, even if very brief.4.Security
, in the computer science community, generally encom-passes three elements:  system availability, confidentiality, and integrity.

The first of these is addressed above.  Confidentiality refers to the ability

to prevent communications from being disclosed to unauthorized parties
in violation of disclosure rules.  Integrity refers to the ability to prevent

malicious or accidental alteration of data.  These two capabilities can be

provided by a variety of technical mechanisms that support authentica-
tion of user identities, encryption of communications, and different forms
of access control.  The need for confidentiality and integrity varies greatly

across applications.  Both are important concerns in applications involv-

ing exchanges of personal health information.  Integrity is of paramount

importance for some applications, such as setting levels on dosimetry
equipment that delivers drugs to patients and preserving the authenticity
of medical images.5.Ubiquity
 refers to the relative accessibility of a network.  The ubiq-
uity of a network is influenced by the networkÕs geographic scope (i.e.,whether it can be accessed from many places) and by rules regulating
participation (i.e., whether it is open to the general public or to members
only).  The telephone network, for example, is highly accessible because

roughly 94 percent of U.S. homes have telephone connections, and any-
one is allowed to subscribe to the service.  Cable television is almost as

ubiquitous because it passes most homes and is also available to all who
pay for service.  However, cable modem service (to support data commu-

nications as opposed to television) is not yet available to all locations in
the United States.  Such systems stand in contrast to private networks,

such as those used by financial institutions, which may have broad geo-
graphic reach but strict rules regarding membership.  Applications that
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION41serve the general public usually demand high levels of accessibility (ubiq-uity), whereas those that serve limited populations do not, although there
may be interest in allowing access by members from multiple locations.Another term that is important in describing network performance isÒquality of serviceÓ (QOS).  Network engineers use this term to refer to
the ability of a network to provide a range of assured levels of perfor-
mance.  Performance is characterized by metrics such as the bandwidth

obtained between two points in the network (which may be dramatically
less than the bandwidths of the individual communications links involved,
either because of other traffic on the network or because of the need to
retransmit packets of information dropped during transmission); latency
and jitter (defined above); and the packet loss rate, the percentage oftransmitted packets that are dropped inside the network and not deliv-
ered to their intended destinations.13The need for QOS stems from a design characteristic of networkswhereby resources (e.g., especially backbone links) are generally shared
among many users who are running applications simultaneously.  Thus,

even if the bandwidth of the system is measured in megabits or gigabits
per second, any single user might gain access to only a small fraction of
that bandwidth.  How much bandwidth a single user obtains depends on

the level of activity of the other users.  When using the Internet, for exam-

ple, a user often obtains high bandwidth and low latency over certain
paths and at certain times of day, but it is not currently possible to ensure
that such conditions will be available on a given path at a given time.
Hence, although some users may succeed in making telephone calls of
acceptable quality over the Internet, they cannot depend on this medium
to make calls to any location at any time.  Quality of service guarantees

require mechanisms that enable applications with specific requirements
to negotiate to receive appropriate treatment in the network.  Those mecha-
nisms must be able to deal with requests from huge numbers of applica-tions running simultaneously.14NETWORKING ALTERNATIVESThe Internet differs from other communications networks in all thedimensions outlined above.  Many of these differences stem from the

public character of the Internet (Box 1.3), which carries aggregated traffic
from numerous parties, whereas private networks interconnect a limited
number of sites using dedicated transmission links that are not shared
with any other users.  Two private networks are completely isolated from

each other in the sense that no data can ÒleakÓ from one into the other, a
user of one network cannot access resources on the other, and the level ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 1.3Defining the InternetThe Internet is commonly defined as a network of networks.  Although it is often
considered a single, uniform network, the Internet is actually composed of a large
(and growing) set of independent networks that are connected to each other usinga set of common standards and protocols, such as the Transmission Control Pro-tocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP).  The Internet is based on a technology

called packet switching, which breaks down messages (electronic mail, data files,digital images, etc.) into smaller pieces called packets and sends them across thenetwork in a series of hops from one routing device (or router) to another.1Routers determine dynamically which route to send each packet along, with theend result that the packets constituting a single message may be sent alongdifferent routes, depending on relative levels of congestion and other factors.  The

packets are reconstituted at the recipientÕs computer and assembled in the properorder.The underlying networks that make up the Internet can assume many forms,ranging from access networks to backbone networks.  Access networks connect
customers (whether individuals or entire organizations with their own internal localarea networks) to an Internet service provider (ISP).  These access networks

connect to backbone networks with wider geographic scope, providing regional,national, and international connectivity.  Thousands of ISPs offer connectivity in
the United States, but the major Internet backbone networks are operated by a
small number of independent companies that interconnect with each other atnumerous points, some of which are private (typically a connection between only
two providers) and others of which are public.  The public interconnection points
are used not only by backbone providers but also by local providers to gain accessto the backbone.  Backbone networks connect to access networks and to each

other at points of presence, where service providers house switching hardwareand transmission equipment.This topology has two important consequences.  One is that a packet traversingthe Internet will normally cross networks owned and operated by many differentproviders en route to its eventual destination, with implications for overall perfor-mance and security.  The second is that backbone networks carry highly aggregated

traffic, representing the combined traffic flows of millions of customers connectedto access networks.  Although individual users have some control over the capacity
of access lines and the flows of information across those lines, they have virtually
no control over data flows across the rest of the networkÑmeaning they have littleassurance of the speed at which their messages will transit the net.  They have a
similar lack of control over the other organizations and individual users that may
join the network.  The Internet is a public network that interconnects other net-
works running IP and any user with an Internet account.  The public nature of the
Internet therefore introduces a number of security risks not seen on private net-
works (see Chapter 3).1Packet switching differs from circuit switching used in the telephone system in that itdoes not establish a dedicated circuit between sender and recipient for the duration of atransmission.  Rather, packets pertaining to many different messages may be routed
over the same links to use communications channels most efficiently.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION43usage on one network has no effect on the availability of resources in theother.15  Thus, users have greater control over QOS (i.e., the bandwidth
that will be available at a given time) and confront fewer security risks
than do users of the Internet.  For these reasons, the Defense and Energy

Departments, the banking industry, and other sectors have developed
communications networks that are separate from the Internet.And yet, the distinction between public networks such as the Internetand private networks is blurred by a number of factors.  For example,

many private networks used for internal communications among ele-
ments of a single corporation can be connected to the Internet in a con-
trolled way that limits the messaging traffic that can transit the interface
(indeed, many of the networks attached to the Internet are private).  Simi-

larly, many organizations develop private intranets that are based on
Internet technologies and protocols to facilitate data sharing within an
enterprise.  Other networks, called extranets
, use Internet standards and
technologies to support secure exchanges of information among trading
partners.  Many of these private networks
Ñwhether intranets or extranetsÑcould be made accessible to valid users over the public Internet through
the use of appropriate security and authentication technologies.  The dis-
tinction between private and public networks is further blurred by tech-
nologies such as virtual private networks (VPNs), which provide many of
the same properties of private networks while using shared network fa-
cilities (including possibly the Internet itself) to provide connectivity.  In

this way, VPNs (discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3) create the illu-
sion of private, dedicated point-to-point connections, but many VPNs
may be supported on the same physical network.  They provide almost

the same level of security as true private networks because there is no
connectivity among the VPNs, but messages on one virtual circuit must
contend with those on other circuits for network resources (e.g., band-
width).Whether a network is truly or virtually private, it differs in a veryimportant way from the Internet.  In a private network, connectivity is

deliberately constrained to a limited number of sites, and these sites are
known a priori.  Every time a new site is added to the network, some
administrative overhead is involved, whether ordering and awaiting the
installation of a new circuit or provisioning a new virtual circuit.  Thus,

private networks are ideally suited to an environment in which the neces-
sary connectivity is known and remains stable over time.  A classic appli-

cation is interconnection of the different geographic locations of a single
corporation.  Another application is the connection of a number of com-

panies that have a long-standing business relationship, such as a large
manufacturer and its parts suppliers.  However, private networks are

fundamentally unsuited to environments in which arbitrary connectivityNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETis required.  The Internet, by contrast, enables users to connect to each
other without a prior arrangement.  In a business setting, this enables

consumers to find suppliers readily, and vice versa.Because of the range of technical capabilities available across differenttypes of networks, organizations can tailor their network architectures to
their specific needs.  When security and QOS are important and the rela-

tionships between communicating parties are sufficiently well known in
advance, private networks are likely to be chosen.  Accordingly, health

organizations continue to use dedicated networks to transmit sensitive
patient information, share large image files, and submit claims for reim-
bursement.  When the overriding goal is maximum connectivity without

a priori knowledge of the communicating parties, as in the case of making
a product or service available to a wide set of consumers, the Internet is
likely to be chosen.  In some cases, the most judicious choice might be a

network that uses a combination of private or dedicated lines that are
connected in appropriate ways to the Internet to allow broader access, but
with suitable security capabilities in place.  What may be most important
is the use of consistent, interoperable protocols for all communications so
that various networks can be connected as needed with appropriate gate-
ways.  The architectures chosen by various organizations depend on the

requirements and cost-benefit analyses of technical alternatives.The value of open (i.e., public) networks in health care is rooted in thenature of the industry, which remains highly decentralized and involves
a range of individuals and organizations in providing care, paying bills,
analyzing health data, conducting health services research, and monitor-
ing public health.  As recently as 1995, the United States had 1.2 million

health care providersÑhalf of whom work in private practicesÑand morethan 3,000 private insurance payers.16  The patterns of data sharing among
these organizations are complex and can change frequently.  Internet use
could enable IDNs, for example, not only to exchange patient records
among affiliated hospitals and clinics, but also to send records to other
hospitals to assist in the treatment of patients who are injured or become
ill while traveling.  It could enable any rural care provider to arrange

remote medical consultations with any remote specialist connected to the
Internet who has the expertise needed to handle a particular patientÕscase.  It could lead to much more rapid reporting of diseases, enabling

state public health officials to accept reports directly from physicians and
testing laboratories throughout the state.Furthermore, Internet connections promise to be less expensive toinstall and maintain than private networks.  Individual lines do not need

to be leased from telephone companies to connect the various partners in
the network.  Internet connections entail some costs, especially if high-

bandwidth connections are needed, but they tend to be lower than theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION45costs of leased lines and can be spread among a wider range of applica-tions and users.  Finally, the Internet has been the catalyst for the integra-

tion of many applications and systems of applications.  The existence of a

communication infrastructure built on a common set of protocols makes
it more difficult to justify, both economically and technically, the use of
separate, special-purpose networks for different applications; the com-
mon infrastructure also facilitates interactions between separately devel-
oped systems.  When separate information systems are integrated on the

foundation provided by the Internet, the investments frequently are justi-
fied on the basis of both savings in communication costs and improved
functions.  With improved security and QOS, the Internet might become

preferable to private networks in almost all cases.The Internet may prove to be an ideal technology for use by willinghealth care organizations to simplify and standardize processes and col-
laborate more effectively with one another.  The value of this common

communications infrastructure in other sectors, from entertainment to
banking to retail sales, could extend to health care if technical obstacles,
organizational uncertainties, and policy barriers can be overcome.  Orga-
nizations that adopt the Internet could reap significant benefits, including
cost savings from support of a wide range of applications and the ability
to leverage the technology investments of other communities.  An anal-

ogy to the telephone system may be illuminating.  There is no separate

U.S. telephone system for health applications.  Despite the distinct set of

priorities and trade-offs associated with health applications, the health
community uses Òplain old telephone serviceÓ (POTS) for most of its
voice communications, leveraging the telephone companiesÕ investmentsin R&D as well as infrastructure deployment and accepting inconve-
niences such as busy signals that might not be desirable in emergencies.
Features such as 911 have been added to POTS to support emergency
needs (whether related to health or public safety), but even this feature
leverages the existing network.  Some specialized voice communications

networks, such as communications between emergency rescue vehicles
and hospital emergency rooms, have also been established for health
needs not well served by POTS.ENHANCING THE INTERNETA number of efforts are under way to improve the ability of theInternet to provide QOS, security, and availability, which would enable
its broader use within the health domain.  These efforts include attempts

by individual companies to increase the capabilities of Internet routers
and deploy high-speed data services on demand, as well as attempts by
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to develop new standards andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETprotocols for improved services (see Chapter 3).  In addition, two major
collaborative efforts are under way to develop and demonstrate advanced
networking technologies that promise to improve the QOS, availability,
and security across the Internet.  The government
Õs Next GenerationInternet initiative and projects sponsored by the private-sector University
Consortium for Advanced Internet Development (UCAID) are attempt-
ing to develop advanced networking technologies and applications and
deploy them in testbed networks that link a limited number of sites and
allow early experimentation with advanced applications.  The technolo-

gies and applications to be developed under these programs, which are
described below, could diffuse onto the Internet as they are demonstrated
and proven.The Next Generation Internet InitiativeFormally initiated in October 1997, the NGI initiative is a multiyearprogram, funded at approximately $100 million per year, that involves a
number of federal agencies:  the Defense Advanced Research Projects

Agency (DARPA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE), the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion (NASA), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (Table 1.1).  The initiative is

managed by individual agencies, with coordination provided by the large-
scale networking working group of the White House National Science
and Technology CouncilÕs Committee on Technology, Subcommittee onComputing, Information, and Communications R&D.17The NGI initiative has three components:  R&D on advanced net-
working technologies for improved performance and functionality; the
deployment of high-speed testbed networks that emphasize end-to-end
performance; and the development and demonstration of revolutionary
applications that demand advanced networking and are not possible on
todayÕs Internet.18  The first component involves R&D projects in areas
such as high-speed routing, security, QOS, and network management
and modeling.  This work will be funded primarily by DARPA but also

by NSF, NASA, and NIST.The second component will be achieved by developing and demon-strating applications of two types:  (1) discipline-specific applications of

interest to participating agencies, including health care, basic science, edu-

cation, and environment and (2) their enabling technologies, including
collaboration technologies, digital libraries, distributed computing, pri-
vacy and security, and remote operation and simulation (National Science
and Technology Council, 1999).  The NIH is actively involved in this

effort through the NLM, which awarded 24 contracts totaling $2.3 millionNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION47in October 1998 to investigate and develop health care applications of theNGI.  These projects make up the first phase of a three-phase program.

Several of the projects received phase II awards in late 1999 and early 2000
to allow their implementation in local testbed settings (see Appendix B
for a list of all NLM project awards as of January 2000).  Phase III will

support scale-up to the regional or national level of successful phase II
testbed projects.  These projects are intended to improve the health

communityÕs understanding of the ways in which the NGI can affecthealth care, health education, and health research systems with respect to
cost, quality, usability, efficacy, and security.  Supported projects include
efforts to (1) build a virtual human cadaver for educational purposes,
(2)develop telemedicine technologies to support health care in rural

areas,19 (3) demonstrate the feasibility of a national breast imaging archive
and networking infrastructure to support telemammography, and
(4) create a personal health record that can be integrated with more tradi-
tional sources of clinical information for patient use in the home, at work,
or at school (see Box 1.4 for examples of these projects and Appendix A
for a complete listing of NLM project awards).Other federal agencies, including NASA and the NSF, have alsofunded projects that will demonstrate health-related applications of theTABLE 1.1  Agency Funding for the Next Generation Internet Initiative,
1998-2000 (in millions of dollars)199819992000
AgencyaResearchTestbedsApplicationsTotalTotalTotal
DARPA20202425040
NSF5108232525
DOE0000150

NASA23510108
NIST005555
NIH/NLM005555
Total2733258511083
NOTE:  Breakouts for 1999 and 2000 funding into categories of research, testbeds, and

applications are not available.aDARPA, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; NSF, National Science Foundation;DOE, Department of Energy; NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration; NIST,
National Institute of Standards and Technology; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NLM,National Library of Medicine.SOURCE:  Grant Miller, National Coordination Office for Computing, Information, and
Communications, 1999, personal communication.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETNGI.  Researchers at NASA
Õs Ames Research Center, for example, aredeveloping a system for sharing high-resolution, three-dimensional
medical images in real time for purposes of collaborative diagnosis and
surgical planning.20  NSF is supporting work to provide psychological
services over a distance to deaf patients, to develop digital video resources
for teaching and learning the life sciences (using materials that reside atBOX 1.4Examples of Projects Funded by theNational Library of Medicine¥Networked Three-Dimensional Virtual Human Anatomy.  The University ofColorado Health Sciences Center plans to build a virtual human cadaver based onthe National Library of MedicineÕs Visible Human data set, which provides detailedinformation on human anatomical structures.  An online virtual cadaver would be
available over the Internet to a wide range of students, who could explore thevirtual cadaver with a variety of tools.  High-end applications will have a haptic

(tactile) interface.¥NGI-Aware, Scalable, Secure, and Adaptive Technology for Rural Tele-medicine. West Virginia University Research Corporation will develop a plan todemonstrate telemedicine applications that will use the Next Generation Internet(NGI) infrastructure.  Telemedicine scenarios include nomadic clinics, public health
stations, and a consulting health station in rural clinics and hospitals.  These

systems will be configured with a set of videoconferencing, diagnostic, and patientmonitoring equipment.¥Telemammography Using the NGI.  The University of Pennsylvania will plan
and implement a test bed to demonstrate the feasibility of a national breast imag-ing archive and network infrastructure to support telemammography using NGItechnologies. The proposed infrastructure would support traditional breast screen-
ing; provide the opportunity to maintain and apply standard image processing andcomputer-aided diagnosis software; permit access to breast imaging experts forprimary and secondary interpretations; and provide an opportunity to study andunderstand epidemiological issues in breast cancer.¥Personal Internetworked Notary and Guardian (Children
Õs Hospital, Boston).The Personal Internetworked Notary and Guardian (PING) project is designed toaddress the control of a personal record that can be integrated with more traditionalsources of clinical information for patient use in the home, at work, and at school.
In particular, PING is focused on (1) the reconstitution via the Internet of patientlongitudinal records from both provider-based information systems and portable,personal record systems, (2) providing simple and secure authentication mecha-
nisms, and (3) evaluation of the impact of PING on the health care process.SOURCE:  Derived from information provided on the National Library of Medicine
Õs Webpage, available online at <www.nlm.nih.gov>.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION49the NLM), and to allow Web-based control of a remote electron micro-scope for biological research, among other projects.  Such efforts reflect

the importance of health-related applications in motivating large-scale
information infrastructure programs such as the NGI.The third component of the NGI initiative will be carried out by con-structing two types of testbed networks, one of which will link approxi-
mately 130 participating universities and federal agencies at speeds 100
times faster than those available across the Internet in 199721 and the
other of which will link about 10 sites at speeds 1,000 times faster than the
1997 Internet.  The first testbed will be built on several existing federal

networks:  the NSF
Õs very-high-performance Backbone Network Service(vBNS),22 NASA
Õs Research and Education Network, DODÕs DefenseResearch and Education Network, and DOEÕs Energy Sciences network.The vBNS, for example, operated at 622 megabits per second (Mbps) in
1998 but is expected to be upgraded to 2.4 gigabits per second (Gbps) by
the year 2000.  Universities connecting to the vBNS at 45 Mbps will be

upgraded to 155 Mbps to help them take greater advantage of the
increased backbone capacity.The NGI initiativeÕs other testbed will be built on DARPAÕsSUPERNET, a network composed of a variety of high-speed technologies
and testbeds, enabling researchers to collaborate and experiment with
advanced networking technologies and applications in a diverse, high-
capacity, wide-area environment.  It will use wave-division multiplexing

technology (WDM) to allow multiple frequencies of light (and hence mul-
tiple communications channels) to share a single fiber-optic cable (see
Chapter 3).  DARPA demonstrated a 5-node network at 2.5 Gbps per

channel in 1999 and plans to establish a 10-node network with 160 Gbps
facilities in 2002. The NSF, NASA, and DOD networks will connect to this
network.The goal of these networks is to provide a cutting-edge but stablenetwork that will support the development of revolutionary applications
and serve as a testbed for new technologies and protocols.  According to

the 1998 NGI implementation plan, the testbed networks will be initially
deployed with best-effort services using IP version 4 (IPv4) (Large Scale
Networking Next Generation Implementation Team, 1998).  New versions

of IP (including IPv6), QOS technologies, multicast protocols (for facilitat-
ing group interactions), security protocols, and network management
tools will be deployed in the networks as soon as they become stable.
Feedback from application developers to network researchers, operators,
and implementers will help ensure that the testbeds evolve in a manner
suitable to the types of applications that are expected to be run on them.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETPrivate-Sector Efforts:  Internet 2 and Abilene
The UCAID, which was incorporated in 1998, has two related net-working projects under way that promise to enhance the capabilities of
the Internet.  The first is the Internet 2 project, which will link more than

100 member universities and partners to an advanced academic network.
Research supported by Internet 2 is attempting to enable applications that
are not possible with the technology underlying todayÕs Internet (someexamples are telemedicine, digital libraries, and virtual laboratories).  The

program is intended to demonstrate new applications for improving
research and enhancing the delivery of education and other services,

including health care.  It will facilitate the development, deployment, and

operation of an affordable communications infrastructure capable of sup-
porting differentiated QOS based on the applications requirements of the
research and education community, and it will promote experimentation
with the next generation of communications technologies.23Biomedical applications play a significant role in the Internet 2 initia-tive.  The first demonstration of the network, in October 1999, consisted of

an online broadcast of a gall bladder operation.  The surgery team inserted

light, camera lenses, and surgical tools inside the patientÕs body, creatinginternal views of the operation.  Audio and video were transmitted over

the network in real time, requiring network bandwith that would support
a consistent data transmission rate of 2 Mbps.  Only a small audience was

able to view the demonstration, but it enabled a doctor based in Wash-
ington, D.C., to assist in the surgery, which took place at Ohio State
University.24A related UCAID project, Abilene, is seen as a second Internet 2 back-bone.  Abilene is based on a partnership with Qwest, Cisco Systems,

Nortel, and Indiana University.  The goals are to provide a high-availability

backbone network to support the demands of the advanced research
applications being developed by UCAID members; a separate network to
enable the testing of advanced network capabilities (for example, QOS,
multicasting, and security and authentication protocols) prior to their
introduction into the application development network; and a separate
network capability to conduct networking research, including the design
of an alternative network capable of advancing both the Abilene network
and the general state of the art.25  Internet 2 member universities have
committed more than $70 million per year in new investment on their
own campuses for the Internet 2 project, and corporate members have
committed more than $30 million over the life of the project.Although programmatically distinct from the NGI initiative, theUCAIDÕs efforts are related to federal networking activities.  More than 90
Internet 2 universities have received grants under NSFÕs High Perfor-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION51mance Connections program to support links to advanced backbone net-works such as Abilene and the vBNS.  Internet 2 is also participating in

the NGI Joint Engineering Task Force to ensure the cohesiveness and
interoperability of the technologies that Internet 2 is developing.  Internet

2 member institutions may receive funding in the form of competitively
awarded grants from the NSF and other federal agencies participating in
the federal NGI initiative.  Additional cooperative relationships are being

planned as part of NGI implementation.Deploying Enhanced Internet TechnologiesAlthough they are structured as programs with a limited number ofparticipants, the NGI and Internet 2 initiatives are intended to serve as
launching points for enhancement of the public Internet.  Both programs

have a stated interest in transferring new technical capabilities to the
public Internet once the technologies are developed and demonstrated to
be robust.  Just as early DARPA support for the ARPANET and subse-

quent NSF support for NSFNET laid the groundwork for todayÕs Internetby funding networking research and applications development and
deploying network infrastructure,26 so too, it is hoped, will the NGI and
Internet 2 initiatives plant the seeds for an improved Internet that can
serve the public at large.  They intend to accomplish this by developing

and demonstrating technologies that can later be deployed in networks
maintained and operated by private companies.Whether the public Internet will evolve into a network capable ofsupporting a full range of health applications will depend on many fac-
tors other than technology.  Of particular importance will be economic

incentives for network providers to deploy the levels of bandwidth, QOS,
security, availability, and ubiquity that health applications demand.
These incentives will be derived from the combined demands of many
applications in different sectors, including health.  The history of Internet

development is one of innovation and experimentation, not planned
development.  The forces that drive its continuing evolution are increas-

ingly economic, and these forces alone may not yield an infrastructure
that can support the integration of critical and noncritical functions of the
health community.  In the end, some capabilities may prove too expensive

to deploy throughout the Internet, leaving health organizations to operate
with a mixture of different networking infrastructures to meet their vari-
ous needs.Only by making its needs explicit and working with organizationsinvolved in the deployment of Internet capabilities can the health com-
munity hope to ensure that an enhanced Internet infrastructure meets
health needs.  This report respresents the first step in that effort.  By
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETevaluating the technical capabilities that the Internet must provide tosupport different health applications, the report offers the health commu-
nity information that it can use to shape the networks being deployed as
part of the NGI and Internet 2 initiatives and, ultimately, as part of the
Internet.  Clearly, ongoing evaluation and experimentation will be needed.

The many uncertainties inherent in the process of developing and deploy-
ing Internet-based applications make any attempt to predict the long-
term evolution of the Internet within the health community foolhardy.
Sustained interaction will be needed to ensure that the emerging needs of
the health community continue to be met by the evolving capabilities of
the Internet.ORGANIZATION OF THIS REPORTThe remainder of this report outlines the technical and nontechnicalchallenges that must be overcome if the Internet is to support a widening
range of health applications.  
Chapter 2 examines specific applications ofthe Internet across this domain.  
The first part of the chapter focuses onapplications of the Internet in the provision of health care, addressing
topics such as consumer health, remote consultation, and the transfer of
medical images for diagnostic purposes.  The next parts of the chapter

explore Internet applications in areas such as public health, health care
finance and administration, and biomedical research.  The chapter draws
on a series of site visits by the committee that provided insight into the
types of Internet applications being developed today and the networking
challenges that cannot currently be ported to the Internet.  The chapter

reviews the technical capabilities that each application demands in terms
of QOS (combining bandwidth and latency requirements), security, avail-
ability, and ubiquity.  The applications examined are intended to illus-

trate the range of ways in which the Internet might be used rather than to
identify them as likely paths.Chapter 3 reviews the technical challenges posed by applications ofthe Internet in health, health care, and biomedical research.  It examines

ongoing efforts to enhance the capabilities of  the Internet and identifies

areas in which health care needs might not be addressed if they are not
explicitly considered during the research process.  Chapter 4 examines

organizational barriers to the deployment of the Internet for health and
health care.  It describes ways in which the Internet can serve the strategic

interests of health care organizations and identifies the range of uncertain-
ties surrounding the InternetÕs use that hamper efforts to deploy it morebroadly in such organizations.  Chapter 5 discusses elements of public

policy that stand in the way of greater use of the Internet in the health
community.  These barriers range from issues of payment for services and
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION53licensure that have stymied previous attempts at telemedicine, to broadissues of intellectual property protection and privacy that have special
significance in the health domain.Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the committeeÕs conclusions and offersa series of recommendations for facilitating the more widespread use of
Internet technologies in health care and biomedical research.  The recom-

mendations suggest ways in which technical and nontechnical barriers
can be overcome to enable the design of an Internet that will more fully
support the needs of the health sector.REFERENCESAT&T.  1999.  
ÒAT&T and M.D. On-Line, Inc. to Promote AT&T WorldNet Internet Connec-tivity to Healthcare Providers,Ó News release. February 8.  Available online at <http:
//www.att.com/press/item/0,1193,339,00.html>.Barry, M.J., J.J. Fowler, Jr., A.G. Mulley, Jr., J.V. Henderson, Jr., and J.E. Wennberg.  1995.
ÒPatient Reactions to a Program Designed to Facilitate Patient Participation in Treat-ment Decisions for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia,Ó Medical Care 33:771-782.
Benton Foundation.  1999.  
Networking for Better Care:  Health Care in the Information Age.
Benton Foundation, Washington, D.C., March.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999.  Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research.
  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Davis, Robert, and Leslie Miller.  1999.  
ÒMillions Comb the Web for Medical Info,ÓUSA Today, July 15.  Available online at <www.usatoday.com/life/health/online/
lhon1012.htm>.Gillespie, Greg.  2000.  
ÒOnline Clinical Guidelines Help Trim Costs,Ó Health Data Manage-ment 8(1):39-45.
Greenfield, S., S. Kaplan, and J. Ware, Jr.  1985.  
ÒExpanding Patient Involvement in Care,ÓAnnals of Internal Medicine 102:520-528.
Gustafson, David H., R.P. Hawkins, E.W. Boberg, and E. Bricker.  1992.  
ÒCHESS:  A Com-
puter-Based System for Providing Information, Referrals, Decision Support, and Social
Support to People Facing Medical and Other Health-Related Crises,Ó pp. 161-165 in
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care. McGraw-Hill, Health Professional Division, New York.Gustafson, David H., M. Wise, F. McTavish, J.O. Taylor, W. Wolberg, and J. Stewart. 1993.ÒDevelopment and Pilot Evaluation of a Computer-Based Support System for Womenwith Breast Cancer,Ó Journal of Psychosocial Oncology 11:69-93.
Gustafson, David H., R.P. Hawkins, E.W. Boberg, and E. Bricker.  1994.  
The Impact ofComputer Support on HIV Infected Individuals.  Final Report to the Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research, Washington, D.C.Halamka, J., and M. Hughes.  1998.  
ÒA Paradigm Shift in Health Care Information Systems:Clinical Infrastructures for the 21st Century,Ó pp. 401-405 in 
Proceedings of the AmericanMedical Informatics Association Fall Symposium, C. Chute, ed.  Hanley & Belfus, Phila-
delphia.Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF), Committee on Applications and Technology.1994.  Putting the Information Infrastructure to Work.  National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Gaithersburg, Md.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETInstitute of Medicine.  1996.  
Telemedicine:  A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in Health
Care, Marilyn J. Field, ed.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Large Scale Networking Next Generation Implementation Team. 1998.  Next GenerationInternet Implementation Plan, Second Printing.  National Coordination Office for Com-
puting, Information, and Communications, Arlington, Va., February.Lindberg, Donald A.B., and Betsy L. Humphreys. 1998. ÒMedicine and Health on theInternet:  The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly,
Ó Journal of the American Medical Association280(15):1303-1304.Miller, Thomas E., and Scott Reents.  1998.  
The Health Care Industry in Transition:  The Online
Mandate to Change.  Internet Strategies Group, Cyber Dialog, Inc., New York.
Mittman, Robert, and Mary Cain.  1999.  
The Future of the Internet in Health Care: Five YearForecast.  Institute for the Future, Menlo Park, Calif., January.
Morgan, M.W., R.B. Deber, H.A. Llewellyn-Thomas, P. Gladstone, R.J. Cusimano, and K.OÕRourke.  1997.  
ÒA Randomized Trial of the Ischemic Heart Disease Shared Deci-sion-Making Program:  An Evaluation of a Decision Aid,
Ó Journal of General InternalMedicine 12(1):62.
Morrison, J. Ian.  1999.  
ÒHealthcare in the New Millenium: The Promise of the Internet,ÓPresentation at Internet Health Day II:  Health Care in Transition-Preparing for an

Interactive Future.  New York, October 12.
Nash, Sharon.  1999.  ÒThe Doctor Is Online,Ó PC Magazine Online, July 14.  Available onlineat <www.zdnet.com>.National Science and Technology Council, Committee on Technology, Subcommittee onComputing, Information, and Communications R&D.  1999.  
Information TechnologyFrontiers for a New Millennium.  Supplement to the President
Õs FY 2000 Budget, National
Coordination Office for Computing, Information, and Communications, Arlington,Va., April.National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).  1999
.  Falling
Through the Net:  Defining the Digital Divide.
  U.S. Department of Commerce, Washing-
ton, D.C.Rosenberg, Matt.  1999. 
ÒPopularity of Internet WonÕt Peak for Years, Ó Puget Sound BusinessJournal, May 24.  Available online at <http://www.amcity.com/seattle/stories/1999/
05/24/focus.html>.Science Panel on Interactive Communication and Health (SCIPICH).  1999.  Wired for Healthand Well-Being:  The Emergence of Interactive Health Communication,
 Thomas R. Eng and
David H. Gustafson, eds.  Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., April. Available onlineat <http://www.scipich.org>.Siwicki, Bill.  1999.  
ÒApplying the Internet in Health Care,Ó Health Data Management 6(3):38-
48.Smith, K.A., and R.B. Mehnert.  1986.  
ÒThe National Library of Medicine:  From MEDLARS
to the Sesquicentennial and Beyond,Ó Bulletin of the Medical Libraries Association74(4):325-32.U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic Statistics Administration.  1999.  
The EmergingDigital Economy II.  Washington, D.C., June.
Vickery, D.M., T.J. Golaszewski, E.C. Wright, and H. Kalmer.  1988.  
ÒThe Effect of Self-CareInterventions on the Use of Medical Service Within a Medicare Population,Ó MedicalCare 26:580-588.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION55NOTES1.For an illustration of the role of health applications in motivating federal programs
to develop national information infrastructure, see IITF (1994).2.The Internet also has applications in support of clinical research (e.g., clinical trials),
but these applications are not investigated in great detail in the report.3.Others have also noted the importance of organizational and policy issues in influ-
encing the rate of adoption of Internet technologies in health applications.  For example, see

Lindberg and Humphreys (1998).4.For example, systems to transfer large medical image files between sites can be de-
signed in different ways.  Some systems demand high network bandwidth because there is

little preprocessing of images and little attention to representative workflows; others relymore on preprocessing, which reduces network bandwidth requirements.5.For a more detailed history of MEDLARS and MEDLINE, see Smith and Mehnert
(1986).6.These data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis as presented in U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce (1999), the Appendix to Chapter III.7.For an example of a Web site enabling communications with insurers, see AT&T
(1999).8.Managed care plans integrate insurance and delivery of care
Ñfunctions otherwiseprovided by separate entities.  Most managed care plans now pay care providers some
form of discounted fee for services rendered, although some still pay a fixed fee based onthe number of patients enrolled in their care.9.Integrated delivery systems combine entities related to the provision of health care
and may have relationships with health insurance plans.  Such organizations typically in-
clude a range of different facilities, from major hospitals to local clinics, so they can providea continuum of care.10.For an example of Internet-based quality indicators and managed care data exchange,
see Halamka and Hughes, 1998.11.For example, researchers at Intermountain Health Care in Salt Lake City, Utah, have
developed a system that provides clinical guidelines in real time to physicians who use the
electronic medical record system.  One study indicated that use of the system improved
from 30 to 70 percent the percentage of diabetic patients with safe blood-sugar levels.  It is
estimated that the clinical guidelines have saved the organization $10 million, or $2,000 per
patient, through improved clinical decision making (see Gillespie, 2000).12.As noted by the Science Panel on Interactive Communications and Health (1999),
self-care books provided to members of health maintenance organizations and Medicare
beneficiaries have been shown to reduce office visits and specialty referrals (Vickery et al.,1988); systems to help patients prepare for office visits have been shown to improve treat-ment outcomes for chronic diseases (Greenfield et al., 1985); computer access to support
groups and decision guidance has been shown to help women with breast cancer andpatients with AIDS (Gufstafson et al., 1992, 1993, 1994); and shared decision-making toolshave been shown to improve health outcomes while reducing the use of surgery and other
high-cost medical procedures (Barry et al., 1995; Morgan et al., 1997).13.These metrics are not independent of each other.  For example, a high packet loss
rate is likely to lead to low throughput because lost packets must be retransmitted, and the
complete message cannot be reassembled until all packets are received.14.Quality of service is distinct from reliability, which refers to the likelihood that a
service remains available at all times.  A network may be highly reliable in the sense that it

is always possible to obtain connectivity to a given destination, but the same network maylack any assurance of performance (QOS, as defined here).15.This level of isolation can be achieved even if there is some physical sharing at the
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETvery lowest layer of the protocol stack; for example, the transmission links of the twodifferent networks might share a physical fiber.  At the same time, the separation is only as
good as the trust of the user in the service provider.  A simple misconfiguration of a router

could connect a third-party link to a private network.  In addition, the service provider has
full access to the data carried over a private network.16.As a result of recent consolidation in the insurance industry, for example, care pro-
viders now work with policies established in large corporate headquarters that are greaterdistances away, and standards for reducing the administrative burden on providers can nolonger be set at the state level.17.For more information, see <http://www.ccic.gov>.
18.The formal specification of the NGI program reverses the second and third items in
the list above.  The order of presentation is changed herein for stylistic purposes and to

highlight that the development of testbed networks is just one element of a much broader-based program.19.The term 
ÒtelemedicineÓ refers to the delivery of health services when distance sepa-
rates the care provider and patient (see Institute of Medicine, 1996).  This construction
recognizes that a range of different interactions are possible, from videoconferencing at theone extreme to the use of the telephone or text e-mail at the other.  Indeed, the most preva-

lent uses of telemedicine today are not video-based but involve the use of asynchronousstore-and-forward systems to exchange still images across networks.  Other applications
include telephone- or Internet-based systems for monitoring patients in their homes.20.The study committee visited with the researchers at NASA Ames Research Center as
part of this project.  A summary of that visit is contained in Appendix A of this report.
21.It is expected that 25 more sites will be added to this testbed in FY00.

22.The vBNS is a nationwide network that supports high-performance, high-bandwidth
research applications.  Launched in 1995, it is the product of a 5-year cooperative agreement
between NSF and MCI WorldCom. Approximately 100 research institutions, chosen througha peer-review process, will be connected to the network.  It currently connects 92 institutions.23.For additional information on Internet 2 and UCAID, see <www.ucaid.org>.

24.Belfast Telegraph Online 10/26/99 as summarized in 
ÒInternet 2 Gets Ready to Op-erate,Ó Edupage, November 1, 1999.25.This information was obtained from the Abilene Web site at <http://www.ucaid.edu/
abilene/>.26.For additional information on these networks and the evolution of the Internet more
generally, see Chapter 7 in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (1999).Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.572Health Applications of the Internet
Many health-related processes stand to be reshaped by the Internet.In clinical settings, the Internet enables care providers to gain rapid access
to information that can aid in the diagnosis of health conditions or the
development of suitable treatment plans.  It can make patient records, test

results, and practice guidelines accessible from the examination room.  It

can also allow care providers to consult with each other electronically to
discuss treatment plans or operative procedures.  At the same time, the

Internet supports a shift toward more patient-centered care, enabling con-
sumers to gather health-related information themselves; to communicate
with care providers, health plan administrators, and other consumers
electronically; and even to receive care in the home.  The Internet can also

support numerous health-related activities beyond the direct provision of
care.  By supporting financial and administrative transactions, public

health surveillance, professional education, and biomedical research, the
Internet can streamline the administrative overhead associated with
health care, improve the health of the nationÕs population, better train
health care providers, and lead to new insights into the nature of disease.The capability of the Internet to support these applications dependson whether the relevant technical needs are met and whether the opera-
tional aspects of the systems involved are understood and manageable.
As with any information technology system, the technical requirements
depend heavily on the specific characteristics of the individual systemsÑ
the number of anticipated users, degree of real-time interaction desired,
number of simultaneous sessions that must be supported, and so on.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETMany of these factors, in turn, are influenced by considerations other thannetwork performance.  These include organizational competencies, chang-

ing preferences and expectations of consumers and care providers,
reimbursement policies for different health services, availability of com-
plementary technologies, and laws.  The confluence of so many factors

confounds attempts to predict viable future applications of the Internet in
the health sector.This chapter presents a broad overview of the types of applicationsthat the Internet can support in consumer health, clinical care, financial
and administrative transactions, public health, health professional educa-
tion, and biomedical research.  It draws on a series of site visits by the

committee (these visits are summarized in Appendix A) and other brief-
ings to the committee to examine applications that have been deployed
and that are still in the early stages of conceptualization.  The chapter

attempts to assess the technical capabilities demanded of the Internet in
terms of bandwidth, latency, security, availability, and ubiquity (as defined
in Chapter 1).  Specific technical information is presented where possible,

but because of the nascent nature of many Internet applications in the
health sector, often the most that can be offered is a qualitative assess-
ment.  Accordingly, a ranking scale is used to assess the importance of

each technical dimension to each class of applications.  These dimensions

are ranked on a scale of one to four, with one plus sign (+) indicating little
importance relative to the other dimensions and four plus signs (++++)
signifying the most importance.  The chapter also identifies organiza-

tional- and policy-level issues that will influence the way the Internet is
deployed in different health applications and notes, where applicable,
other technologies that must be developed to make certain applications
feasible.  Specific technical, organizational, and policy issues are addressed

in subsequent chapters of the report.CONSUMER HEALTHConsumer health is one of the areas that could be most dramaticallyreshaped by the Internet.  Consumer health refers to a set of activities

aimed at giving consumers a more pronounced role in their own health
and health care, ranging from the development of tools for self-assessment
of health risks and management of chronic diseases, to home-based moni-
toring of health status and delivery of care.  This area is similar to public

health (discussed later in this chapter) in that it aims to provide consumers
with the information and tools needed to improve their health, but it is
less concerned with the detection of regional outbreaks of disease and is
not part of government-based reporting structures.  The Internet could

become a significant enabler of consumer health initiatives in that it pro-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET59vides an increasingly accessible communications channel for a growingsegment of the population.  Moreover, in comparison to television
Ñalso awidely available medium for reaching consumersÑthe Internet offersgreater interactivity and better tailoring of information to individual
needs.  These capabilities may lead to significant changes in consumer

behavior (e.g., cessation of smoking, changes in diet) that could greatly
improve health.Ongoing trends in health care are likely to reinforce the shift towardconsumer-oriented health information.  Since the mid-1960s, patients have

been encouraged to take a more active role in their own health care, and
care providers have recognized the value of engaging patients to partici-
pate more meaningfully in their own care.  Furthermore, attempts by care

providers and managed care plans to streamline services and cut costs
have shortened hospital stays, increasing the need for patients and their
families to understand how to provide care themselves.  Greater empha-

sis is being placed on preventive care, which requires consumers to under-
stand health risks and the effects of different behaviors (such as smoking
and dietary habits) on their health.  These trends heighten the need for

consumers to have access to reliable health information and open chan-
nels of communication to care providers and other health professionals.Consumer health initiatives that rely on the Internet reflect, and couldeven drive, significant changes in the structure of the health care industry.
Concurrent with changes in the economics of the health care delivery
system, the duration of a medical consultation is steadily declining, and
the availability of practitioners for substantive discussions between visits
is decreasing.  Continuity of care is increasingly disrupted as patients

change care providers in response to changes in their health insurance
plans.  These trends favor consumers who are well informed and autono-

mous.  Consumer health initiatives attempt to involve patients more

actively in care-related decision making and enable them to exercise greater
control over their health.  Indeed, the Internet could change the culture of

health care from one in which patients are viewed as recipients of care to
one in which they are partners in care.  Eventually, they may be able to

use the Internet to access and update their personal medical records or
receive care in their homes.Consumer-Oriented Health Web SitesOver the past few years, leading providers of health information haveidentified the Internet as an effective medium for reaching large numbers
of health consumers.  The most visible aspect of this recognition is the

explosion of Web sites geared to consumer health issues (Table 2.1).  These

sites are dedicated to the diagnosis and management of diseases, theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETpromotion of various healthy lifestyles, and interventions to prevent theonset of disease.  The formats range from mailing lists to interactive Web
sites, chat sessions, or compilations of online resources.  One recent sur-

vey suggested that consumers use these sites to gather information on
diseases, medications, and nutrition, as well as to find care providers or
participate in support groups (Table 2.2).TABLE 2.1  Examples of Commercial Health-Related Web Sites
SiteContent
Americasdoctor.comOffers free, private chats with physicians.  Also sells
health-related items.Betterhealth.comCovers various aspects of physical and emotional health.
Includes expert advice, feature articles, and support groups.Discoveryhealth.comIn conjunction with Intelihealth, offers disease-related
information, health news, online prescription ordering,
and risk-assessment services.drkoop.comOffers health information and more than 120 chat groups
with advice from a physician.  Also allows consumers to

check for drug interactions.  Plans to add capabilities for
consumers to keep track of their medical histories andmedical expenses.Healtheon/WebMD.comStarted as a subscription service for doctors but has a free
consumer site that offers health news and information, aphysician directory, and condition-specific support groups.InteliHealth.comA joint venture between Johns Hopkins University
Hospital and Health System and Aetna U.S. Healthcarethat offers health news; access to the Johns Hopkins health
library, drug databases, and journal abstracts; and catalogitems for sale.Mediconsult.comFocuses on patients with chronic ailments, offering
information on 60 common conditions.  For a fee,
consumers can pose questions for a physician.Medscape.comOffers original, peer-reviewed reports and journal articles
organized by specialty and intended for both healthprofessionals and consumers.  A dedicated consumer site
is under development.OnHealth.comAimed primarily at women, has an alliance with
drugstore.com for pharmaceutical purchases and offersguides that rate the health quotient of communities
nationally.Thebody.comAn AIDS and HIV information Web site aimed primarily
at the homosexual community.Thriveonline.comFeatures alternative medicines, diet, and exercise tips.
SOURCES:  Carns (1999); Nash (1999).
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET61TABLE 2.2  Primary Health Activities for Consumers to Conduct Online
ActivityPercent of Respondents
Research an illness or disease62.1
Look for nutrition and fitness information20.0
Research drugs and their interactions11.6

Look for a doctor or hospital3.7
Look for online medical support groups2.3
SOURCE:  USA Today (1998).
The network capabilities required by consumer health Web sites arenot especially demanding today, but the requirements could grow over
time.  Most sites offer text and limited graphics, which do not require

significant bandwidth, but the availability of greater bandwidthÑespe-cially in the local loopÑcould enable the design of more sophisticatedsites offering educational videos for downloading over the Internet.  Security

requirements are also minimal because personal health information is
generally not exchanged on these sites.  Protection is needed for financial
transactions related to the purchase of health products, but this require-
ment is no different than that for other e-commerce applications.  Simi-

larly, consumer health Web sites do not demand exceptional reliability
because they are unlikely to be used for applications in which lives are at
stake.  However, consumer health Web sites may drive the need for

improved privacy-enhancing technologies.  The information sought by

consumers on the Internet, and the purchases they make, can reveal much
about personal health concerns and problems.  To prevent organizations

from compiling profiles of their health concerns, consumers may demand
greater anonymity in their Web browsing and purchasing and tighter
restrictions on the ways in which organizations can use information about
their habits.A larger issue is the need for tools to help consumers find informationof interest and evaluate its quality.  The sheer volume of health informa-

tion available on the Internet can be overwhelming.  For example, a simple

Web search for Òdiabetes mellitusÓ can return more than 40,000 Web
pages,1 and some 61,000 Web sites contain information on breast cancer
(Boodman, 1999).  To sort through this volume of material, consumers

need effective searching and filtering tools that can identify and rank
information according to their needs and capabilities and present it in a
form that they can understand, regardless of educational and cultural
background.  Consumers also need a way to judge the quality, authorita-
tiveness, and provenance of the information.  The Internet enables anyone
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETto publish information, so filtering and credentialing become moreimportant.  A recent study found that 6 percent of the 400 sites containing

information on a form of cancer called EwingÕs sarcoma contained erro-neous information, and many more were misleading.  Sites contained

different (and often incorrect) estimates of basic information such as sur-
vival rates (Biermann et al., 1999).Several initiatives are already under way to evaluate the quality ofhealth information on the Internet.  The Department of Health and Human

ServicesÕ Scientific Panel on Interactive Health Communication calls for
disclosure statements on Web sites to make it easy for consumers to

evaluate the source and authority of information resources (SCIPICH,
1999).  Other efforts focus on systems for classifying health Web sites

according to metrics such as accuracy, timeliness, completeness, and
clarity.2  With these evaluations, standard search engines could provide
consumers with a measure of trust in the information they are retriev-
ingÑat least to the degree that they trust the organization performing thecontent labeling.  The World Wide Web Consortium, for example, has

created a system called the Platform for Internet Content Selection (PICS),
which can help users control the types of information retrieved from the
Internet.3  To accommodate different perspectives on health and health
care (e.g., alternative as opposed to traditional medicine), a wide variety
of organizations could rate health Web sites.  Additional research may

suggest ways of automating the evaluation process, perhaps using metrics
such as the number of pointers to, or users of, a given site as indicators of
the siteÕs effectiveness (as some search and referral engines are currentlydoing).  Technology could also be used to help prevent alterations of the

siteÕs rating to assure consumers that an evaluation was indeed performedby the stated third party.  This function requires cryptographic authenti-

cation technologies that are currently available but have not yet been
widely deployed for this purpose.E-mail Between Patients and ProvidersThe Internet can also be used to facilitate electronic communicationsbetween patients and care providers, typically in the form of electronic
mail (e-mail).  To date, e-mail has been used only sporadically between

patients and providers, but it is of growing interest.  It could prove to be

an effective mechanism for improving care and lowering costs because
more frequent communications might enable better tracking of a patientÕsprogress or eliminate the need for an office visit.  This premise has yet to

be tested rigorously in clinical settings, and a number of technical and
nontechnical issues need to be resolved (Mandl et al., 1998).Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET63Bandwidth and availability are not issues in the near term becausemost messages currently consist of text only and are not used for time-
critical communications.  The most pressing technical issue is security.

Most e-mail exchanges between patient and provider involve discussions
of personal health information, which must be suitably protected from
breaches of confidentiality and, to a lesser extent, alteration.  Most e-mail
is not encrypted during either transmission or storage, and its point of
origin is not authenticated.  It is therefore much easier to forge an e-mail

message than a clinicianÕs note or telephone call.Several approaches are available for improving the security of e-mailexchanges.  Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) encryption, which is commonly

used to encrypt e-commerce transactions (see Chapter 3 for a description
of the technology), can be used to protect communications between a
userÕs personal computer and the electronic mail server.  Other protocols,
such as Pretty Good Privacy (also described in Chapter 3), can be used to
protect communications as they move across the network between the
sender and recipient.  User authentication can be enhanced through the

use of nontrivial user names and passwords or more secure forms of
authentication, such as those based on public key encryption (also
described in Chapter 3).The more daunting barriers to patient-provider e-mail are institu-tional policies for confidentiality and for integrating e-mail into work
flows.  Most e-mail systems are without even the most basic protection of

the confidentiality of message contents.  Mail received at the place of

work is, by law, fully accessible to the employer.  One study showed that
patients are hesitant to use e-mail from work to communicate about their
health for fear that employers or insurance companies might use the infor-
mation in ways that affect them personally (Fridsma et al., 1994).  To

avoid the risk of having messages discoverable at a place of work or other
sensitive locations, individuals can store their e-mail files on the server of
a trusted third party and/or encrypt messages for storage, but rules
regarding disclosure still need to be developed.Health care organizations are also concerned that e-mail might over-load care providers with yet another task in the context of increased

clinical and administrative burdens.  There are related concerns about the

liability of providers if, for example, they miss a subtle but (in retrospect)
irrefutable and important question or comment in a patientÕs electronicnote.  Many organizations have yet to establish policies regarding the

quality of service, such as a maximum time to respond or even acknowl-
edge receipt, that patients can expect from e-mail with providers.  Another

important concern is economic: there are currently no mechanisms for
paying providers for what could be as taxing or time-consuming a clinicalNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETactivity as any in-person clinical visit.  Furthermore, no policies and pro-
cedures have been developed for incorporating e-mail into electronic
patient records.  As a consequence, decisions made on the basis of e-mail

information are at risk of having no documented basis in the record.Safe and effective use of e-mail for clinical discussions betweenpatients and providers will require the development of policies to govern
its use.  These policies will need to address issues of confidentiality, data

integrity, authentication, timeliness, and the appropriateness of the use of
e-mail for different kinds of discussions.  In some cases, telephone or face-

to-face conversations may be considered a more appropriate form of com-
munication.  These policies will need to be articulated to all consumers

and also embodied in the e-mail user interfaces so that health care con-
sumers can have realistic expectations about the use and safety of clinical
e-mail.Online Health RecordsThe Internet is emerging as a medium for giving consumers directaccess to their personal health records.  Historically, care providers have

maintained voluminous records of patient encounters within their orga-
nizations, documenting dates and times of consultations, diagnoses, lab
results, prescriptions, and more.  These records are maintained and largely

controlled by care providers, although patients have the right, in some
states, to review their records and propose amendments as necessary.  In

the past two years, however, a number of new Web sites have begun to
allow consumers to store their own health records online.4  The potentialbenefits of these sites are many.  With them, consumers can create com-

prehensive, longitudinal records that capture information about the care
received from different organizations over an extended period of time.
Consumers can use these records to help monitor and evaluate their health
status, and they can grant access, if they wish, to different providers for
purposes of care.  Many sites provide some sort of override feature that

enables care providers to gain access to a patientÕs records in an emer-gency situationÑsomething that is much more difficult to do if the recordsare not stored online.5Like e-mail used for clinical purposes, Web-based medical recordsrequire considerable attention to security to minimize the risks of inap-
propriate disclosure.  Personal medical records must be protected against

inappropriate disclosure, both to outsiders who attempt to break into the
system and to those who operate and maintain the Web sites.  Most exist-

ing services use SSL encryption to protect data communications between
users and the host Web site and a combination of user names and pass-
words (transmitted securely over the Internet) to authenticate end users.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET65Systems operating with user identification and passwords can providereasonablyÑbut not fullyÑsecure access to many types of applications.If online records become more widely used in the provision of care, then
it may be advisable to enhance the robustness of user authentication,
perhaps with public key encryption systems and user certificates (see
Chapter 3).  The PCASSO system being developed by Science Applica-

tions International Corp. (SAIC) and the University of California at San
Diego, for example, uses public key encryption and a challenge-response
token, as well as a password, to protect patient information at a far higher
level than is possible with SSL.6Other technical requirements will be modest in the near future unlessonline patient records become more complex and more widely used in
the provision of care.  At present, most online medical records consist

primarily of text and demand little bandwidth for fairly rapid download-
ing.  If such records begin to include medical images (e.g., X rays, com-

puted tomography (CT) scans, and mammograms), then much higher
bandwidth would be needed for timely downloading (see the section on
medical images below).  Similarly, reliability requirements are not high

because online records are still supplements to, as opposed to replace-
ments for, the records maintained by provider organizations; an inability
to access an online record is unlikely to interfere with the provision of
care.  If online records become more widely used and more complete than

providersÕ records, then reliability could become more of a concern.
Scalability is not an issue, either, because records are not needed simulta-
neously by multiple users.Ubiquity of access to the Internet is a significant consideration in thedevelopment of online medical records because it would ensure that all
consumers could keep such records and that those records could be acces-
sible from a large number of unpredictable locations, such as a consumerÕshome or office, a care providerÕs office, or an ambulance responding to anemergency.  A number of business and policy issues need to be resolved

as well.  Organizations that store online health records will need to

develop policies that balance the need for privacy and security against the
need for ready access to records by patients and eventually by care pro-
viders and perhaps insurance companies, researchers, and others.  Rules

may also be needed to govern organizationsÕ use of the online records
they maintain.  Under what conditions will they be able to provide con-

sumers with recommendations about necessary medical tests or possible
drug interactions?  To what extent should they be allowed to mine patient

records for information that might lead to direct marketing efforts?  Under

what circumstances should records be made available to public health
agencies and researchers?Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETPatient Monitoring and Home CareThe Internet offers the opportunity for improved monitoring of con-sumer health and, potentially, provision of in-home care through video-
based consultations with care providers (discussed in the Clinical Care
section,  below) and control of medical equipment (e.g., pacemakers and

dosimeters) deployed in the home.  The goals of such activities are to

assist in the early detection of potential health problems, ranging from
heart attacks to congestive heart failure and diabetes, and to reduce the
need for clinical intervention and costly hospital stays.7  Remote consul-
tations to the home may be most useful for monitoring patients with
ailments such as congestive heart failure and end-stage liver disease.
These applications do not require video imagery; the provider simply
listens to heart and lungs, taking vital signs and pulse oximetry.  In-home

care is consistent with existing trends in the health care industry.  Since

1975, the number of home health agencies has grown from 2,300 to almost
8,500, while the number of hospital beds per 1,000 enrollees has declined
from 51 to 28.8  Similarly, the number of patients receiving home care
nearly tripled between 1982 and 1994.  These trends reflect, in part,

attempts by health insurers and health management organizations to
reduce the costs of care associated with long hospital stays.9To date, few attempts have been made to monitor patients at home.Most efforts have focused on chronic conditions, such as diabetes, asthma,
and congestive heart failure, for which well-established protocols exist
for home care.  The devices used for monitoring are minimally modified

copies of devices used in hospitals.  Little effort has been made to develop

or distribute small devices that mimic the functionality of much larger
hospital counterparts with automated quality control and calibration and
remote polling and configuration by authorized care providers.  Almost

none of these devices is as portable or easy to use as a standard pager.  In

part because of these limitations, home monitoring has not grown as
much in popularity as have consumer information on the Web and
patient-provider e-mail.In January 2000, however, Medtronic Inc. announced plans to workwith IBM Corp. and Microsoft Corp. to develop a system that will enable
heart patients with implanted pacemakers, defibrillators, and experimen-
tal cardiac-pacing and -monitoring devices to transmit cardiac data over
the Internet to their cardiologists.  Eventually, care providers may be able

program the devices over a secure Internet connection without requiring
patients to visit their offices.  Developers of the system posit that it will

result in fewer office visits and hospitalizations, thereby lowering costs
while improving patient monitoring and care, but a means of charging for
the monitoring service has not yet been devised.  Medtronic hopes that its
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET67secure Internet system will find utility beyond cardiac patients, perhapsallowing patients with implanted drug pumps to have their doctors
change the drug regimen remotely over the Internet (Burton, 2000).Continued advances in computing and communications technologiescould enable more widespread deployment of home-based health moni-
toring systems.  For more than two decades, the feasible density of

transistors on an integrated circuit has been increasing by a factor of 10
every 7 years.  Memory densities have increased even faster, gaining an

order of magnitude every 6 years.  As a result, medical devices such as

stethoscopes, glucometers, and electrocardiogram monitors already can
be equipped to support Internet connections and deployed to consumers
at low cost.  Over time, computing and communications capabilities will

probably be incorporated into a number of other devices that could serve
as sources of health information, whether bathroom scales or exercise
equipment.  If a house is networked, then it would be possible to use a

personal computer to connect and control a number of medical monitor-
ing devices.  Although the number of homes with conventional local area

networks (LANs) is small (mainly because of the high cost of wiring a
house appropriately and the disruption involved), Ethernet-like connec-
tivity can be provided to any room in a house through devices that are
either wireless or attached to the existing telephone or electric wiring.Indeed, advances in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices,combined with those forecast in microelectronics, biosensors, and bio-
materials, could lead to revolutionary changes in therapies, delivery of
medication, and monitoring and alerting systems for the elderly and those
with chronic conditions.  Devices already on the market, such as pace-

makers, wireless stethoscopes, and blood sugar monitors, could be
augmented with networking capabilities.  High-resolution digital video

cameras that are acquired by consumers for recreational or other purposes
might become useful in health care applications.Home-based monitoring is unlikely to require high-bandwidth con-nections from homes to the Internet because individual messages tend to
be small.  In demonstration projects, however, investigators have had to

work hard to ensure that all participating patients had uninterrupted
access to even modest bandwidth, often contracting with the local cable
or telephone company to hook up a specific home.  The installations,

connectivity, and subsequent support costs have accounted for a large
portion of the cost of the monitoring efforts.  Bandwidth is a more signifi-

cant issue for provider organizations, which will need to ensure that their
facilities can handle the aggregate load of monitoring numerous devices
(e.g., if hundreds of thousands of patients with congestive heart failure
are monitored at home).  At this point, it is difficult to estimate the aggre-

gate bandwidth needed by providers of monitoring services because it isNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETnot clear how many patients would be monitored simultaneously or bythe same server.  The load on the network might be reduced if monitoring

hardware reported only summary data and any anomalies detected,
unless detailed raw data were requested.  Home-based monitoring would

require high reliability to ensure that data can be regularly and routinely
transmitted and high levels of security to prevent alteration of data as
they transit the network.Other factors are equally or more important to the evolution of home-based monitoring.  Even modest monitoring efforts will not be effective

unless mechanisms are deployed to enable care providers to review the
monitored data, identify worrisome outliers, and respond in a timely
way.  The need for oversight of such large numbers of patients at home

could result in the emergence of a new category of ancillary health profes-
sionals.  Furthermore, the effective use of such large amounts of moni-

tored data will require automated data reduction and intelligent data
analysis techniques.  For some populations (e.g., patients with diabetes or

congestive heart failure), this approach could enable fine-grained medical
oversight that could result in improved short- and long-term outcomes.
But, if used inappropriately, it could also afford vast opportunities for
unnecessary and unwanted intrusions into the privacy of all health care
consumers.The benefits of home monitoring cannot be fully realized unless reim-bursement is provided for virtual home visits and remote monitoring.  In

addition, policies for protecting the confidentiality of data gathered in
this way will have to acquire the force of law if abuses are to be pre-
vented.  Even the strongest cryptographic methods cannot prevent the

subversion of a system by parties with strong financial interests in breach-
ing patient data confidentiality.  The challenges that must be overcome to

provide this level of surveillance appear to be more nontechnical than
technical, and they include issues of organizational structure and reim-
bursement rather than networking capabilities.Beyond the use of the Internet for home monitoring is the possibilityof using it to modify home medical devices remotely.  After a remote

consultation or review of home monitoring data, a care provider might,
for example, want to change the setting of a threshold on a patientÕspacemaker, alter the parameters for a programmable insulin pump, or
increase the dose delivered by an infusion pump for an oncology patient.
Such capabilities are already used to control spacecraft and other remote
equipment and could have a large impact on health care, especially in
rural environments.  Although remote control of such equipment will be

unnecessary (or unnecessarily paternalistic) for some patients, it might be
appealing in cases involving disabilities or simply for the sake of conve-
nience.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET69The control of remote medical equipment would pose a number ofchallenges for the InternetÑor any other control network.  Although
bandwidth requirements would be minimal because the commands
would likely consist of short messages, the requirements for security and
availability would be extremely high.  Data would need to be protected

from intentional and unintentional corruption to ensure that commands
are transmitted as intended.  High levels of authentication would be

needed on both ends of the connection to ensure that the appropriate
equipment is being manipulated and that only authorized personnel send
modifications.  The network would have to be protected from denial-of-

service attacks that could prevent the receipt of update information.Technical Requirements for Consumer Health ApplicationsThe technical capabilities needed to support consumer health appli-cations of the Internet are modest, largely because the systems developed
to date have had to rely on the existing Internet infrastructure.  Early

experimentation with more advanced systems that provide real-time
video connections between care providers and patients (or their parents)
at home demonstrates the increased demands that consumer health could
place on networking resources.  The discussion below reviews the techni-

cal needs for consumer health applications with respect to bandwidth,
latency, availability, security, and degree of access.  As noted at the begin-

ning of this chapter, the importance of each capability is indicated on a
four-point scale, with one plus sign (+) indicating limited needs and four
plus signs (++++) signifying an important need.Bandwidth  ++
Consumer health applications vary considerably in the bandwidththey demand.  The retrieval of information from health-related Web sites
demands little bandwidth on the consumer end, but the potentially large
volume of requests made of any particular site could drive up the aggre-
gate bandwidth requirement on the information providerÕs side.  Access
to patient health records could demand somewhat greater bandwidth
than is typically available today or significantly greater if records include
enhanced content, such as medical images or videotapes of telemedicine
consultations.Latency +In general, applications that support consumer health do not requirethe instantaneous delivery of information, so the latency requirements ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETthe Internet are not great.  In some patient-monitoring applications, time-
liness is a concern, but delays of a few seconds would not threaten a
patientÕs well-being.  Latency could become more of an issue if online
medical records became the norm and care provider organizations needed
timely access to them for purposes of treating patients.  In many instances,

however, records could be uploaded from remote sites in advance of
scheduled appointments, and latency would be a significant issue only in
emergency situations.Availability  ++
The need for network availability differs significantly among con-sumer health applications.  The Internet is already sufficiently available

for the distribution of health information to consumers and for exchanges
of e-mail between patients and providers.  Somewhat greater availability

would be needed for remote monitoring and remote control operations,
although most home monitoring devices and medical equipment could
be designed to buffer enough data to overcome short lapses of connectiv-
ity.  Home monitoring and control will not become commonplace, how-

ever, until providers (and consumers) of such services receive guarantees
that lengthy network outages will occur very infrequently.Security ++++Many consumer health applications demand high levels of security.Although this is generally not an issue with respect to the downloading of
health information from consumer Web sites, access to online patient
records demands confidentiality because such records contain personal
information.  The same is true for e-mail messages between patients and

providers that contain personal health information.  Data from remote

patient monitoring devices also require security to prevent corruption
(intentional or unintentional) during transit across the network or after
storage.  As described in greater detail in Chapter 3, both technological

and administrative solutions are required to secure these types of con-
sumer health information.  For example, authentication technologies are

needed to validate the identities of those requesting and transmitting
data.  Effective controls are needed to prevent users from accessing infor-

mation about other consumers.  Encryption technologies are needed to

protect the confidentiality of data transmitted across the network and
ensure its integrity.  Policies will be needed to determine who can have

access to consumer health information and under what conditions.
Security requirements will grow as consumers use the Internet to store,
retrieve, and update their personal health records.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET71Consumer health applications also raise the issue of online anonymity.Searches for online information can reveal a lot about consumersÕ health
concerns, as can their online purchases of prescription and non-
prescription pharmaceuticals.  Given the sensitivity of some of these con-

ditions, the demand for anonymous Web browsing and even anonymous
e-commerce could grow.  Consumers may also demand greater anonymity

in e-mail to online physician services offered by some consumer Web
sites.  Whether anonymity is desirable from a social perspective
Ñandunder what circumstances (e.g., anonymous Web browsing may be more
plausible than anonymous e-commerce)Ñis an issue for continued debateand discussion.Ubiquity ++++Key to the success of consumer health applications is widespreadaccess to the Internet.  As noted above, many consumer applications cur-

rently demand only moderate bandwidth and latency, meaning that stan-
dard modem access to the Internet, at 28.8 to 56 kilobits per second (kbps),
may suffice.  Additional bandwidth could be needed if online access to

health records and downloading of educational videos become more
popular and widespread and if online health records grow to include not
just text but medical images and perhaps even videos.  As discussed in

the next section (Clinical Care), remote medical consultations to the home
over the Internet could require bandwidth of 128 kbps or more in both
directionsÑif such applications prove technically feasible and economi-cally viable.  The larger issue may be that of ensuring equitable access to

health resources by different demographic groups.  There are already

considerable differences in access to health care in the United States;
ensuring that differential access to the Internet along demographic lines
does not exacerbate this imbalance could become an increasingly impor-
tant issue, especially if the provision of health care moves online.CLINICAL CAREThe Internet offers several avenues for augmenting the health careservices in clinical settings.  Remote video consultation, for example, could

give consumers greater access to skilled health professionals regardless of
geographic proximity.  The use of the Internet to transfer medical images
to expert interpreters could accelerate and improve the diagnostic process
as well as reduce costs.  Virtual reality tools could help surgeons plan

medical procedures and improve their use of information during proce-
dures.  The use of the Internet to access and assemble health records could

give a provider improved information for treatment purposes, regardlessNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETof whether the patient is a regular client or a stranger.  Each of these
applications poses a range of technical challenges for networking research-
ers and other information technologists.  In most cases, the applications

have not yet been demonstrated on a scale sufficient to determine their
medical efficacy or influence on costs of care.  As the discussion below

demonstrates, the use of the Internet in clinical care will be influenced by
a range of technical, organizational, and policy issues.Remote ConsultationRemote medical consultation has long been pursued as a means ofovercoming the unequal distribution of clinical expertise.  It is a method

of offering expert consultations to patients in remote rural areas, for exam-
ple, or underserved urban areas or prisons.  Even where clinical expertise

is available, but inconvenient for either the patient or the provider, remote
medical consultations may be a cost-effective alternative to staffing mul-
tiple clinics with subspecialists.  Remote consultations may also be useful

to specialized service organizations that attempt to establish economies of
scale for particular types of clinical service, such as the interpretation of
radiological images (e.g., CT and magnetic resonance images), while also
developing more effective bargaining units for health care contracting.
These organizations, which are becoming more numerous, can benefit
insofar as their reach is extended beyond their immediate geographical
area, allowing them to serve a broader pool of consumers.The network performance required for remote consultation is vari-able and depends on a number of factors, including (1) the resolution
required in the transmitted signal or image to support diagnosis, (2) the
timeliness with which data must be received and interpreted (e.g.,
whether the system is used for real-time consultation or asynchronous
review), (3) the degree to which the data may be compressed, (4) whether
the entire data set must be transferred or application-specific decisions
can be made about which subsets to transmit, and (5) whether the trans-
mission can be considered only on a point-to-point basis or as part of
aggregate traffic.  These factors vary significantly across different applica-

tions and operating modes.  For example, psychiatric evaluations may be
viable with video that has lower resolution than a cineo-angiogram, but
the application needs to operate in real time rather than in a store-and-
forward mode for review at a later time.No conclusive studies have been done regarding the bandwidthneeded for different applications; the results of research on this issue
generally depend on the provider involved and the study structure.  How-

ever, reasonable guidelines can be gleaned from experiments conducted
to date.  Practitioners at East Carolina University (ECU) in Greenville,
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET73North Carolina, for example, have considerable experience with remoteconsultations, having conducted about 3,000 real-time consultations in 31
different specialties since establishing a telemedicine program in 1991
(see Appendix A for more information on the ECU program).  The five

most active specialty areas have been dermatology; cardiology; neurology;
gastroenterology; and allergy, asthma, and immunology.  Practitioners

have found that the bandwidth needed for most real-time, video-based
consultations varies from 128 kbps to 384 kbps, depending on the degree
of resolution needed for diagnosis and the rate of motion in the video
(Table 2.3).10For some procedures, such as cineo-angiograms, echocardiograms,and gait analysis (Box 2.1), more bandwidth can be advantageous.  Cineo-

angiograms, for example, can be transmitted at 384 kbps, but 768 kbps
produces better results.  Cineo-angiograms are generally not performed

in real time (because the source is film); therefore, they can be done in a
store-and-forward mode, with bandwidth needs determined by the num-
ber of cases to be examined on a given day and the desired turnaround
time.  Adult echocardiograms are often done in real time and can be read
adequately at 384 kbps, but pediatric cardiograms may require 768 kbps
because the area being observed is so small.  Extensive testing with

echocardiography indicates that data rates in excess of 1.5 megabits per
second (Mbps) probably do not contribute to an increase in clinical effi-
cacy, but further investigation is under way.11  For remote analysis of a
TABLE 2.3  Nominal Bandwidth Requirements for Different
Telemedicine ApplicationsType of TelemedicineNeeded Bandwidth
aExamplesHigh resolution,Store-and-forwardRadiology, dermatology, pathology
no motionMedium resolution,128 kbpsStethoscope, visual exams, psychiatric
low motionconsultations, gastroenterology
Medium resolution,384 kbpsCardiology, neurology, and
high motionemergency room consultations
High resolution,768 kbpsCineo-angiography and
high motionechocardiograms
Very high resolution,Up to 2.5 MbpsGait analysis
high motion»kbps, kilobits per second; Mbps, megabits per second.SOURCE:  David Balch, East Carolina University, personal communication, February 2,
1999.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 2.1Examples of Video Images Used in Medical DiagnosesCineo-angiograms are movies made from X rays taken in rapid succession while
dye is injected into the blood vessels of the heart.  The motion picture shows blood
flowing through the heart and reveals blockages of the arteries of the heart and
any abnormalities of the motion of the heartÕs pumping chambers.Echocardiograms use high-frequency sound waves to generate images of the
heart in motionÑlike pictures of submerged objects obtained with sonar.  Echo-
cardiograms reveal the size of the heartÕs chambers, images of the heart musclecontracting and relaxing, and information about heart valve function.Gait analysis is the measurement and interpretation of how a person walks.  It is
useful in diagnosing problems affecting both nerves and muscles.  Although often
taken for granted, the act of walking is a remarkably complex sequence of balanceand motion.  Neurological problems such as ParkinsonÕs disease and stroke may
affect gait in distinctive and treatable ways.  Muscle diseases such as muscular

dystrophy and autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosis maylead to walking difficulties that can be diagnosed and treated with the help of gaitanalysis.patientÕs gait, bandwidth of up to 2.5 Mbps may be necessary, but thisapplication has not been extensively evaluated.12For the most part, remote consultation programs rely on dedicatednetworksÑnot the InternetÑto provide connectivity between remote clinicsand a centralized consulting facility.  The ECU program, for example,

uses an amalgam of microwave links, T1 lines, telephone lines, and inte-
grated services digital networks (ISDN; see Chapter 3) for a variety of
applications.  The ECU program and other experimental programs, such

as the National Laboratory for the Study of Rural Telemedicine at the
University of Iowa, also make use of statewide fiber-optic networks for
connectivity between some sites.13  Although costly, dedicated lines have
been viewed as the most effective means of guaranteeing access to
adequate bandwidth as needed.  The Internet does not yet offer the quality

of service needed for real-time video consultations.  Some organizations,

including ECU, have begun to shift their systems to the IP in anticipation
of connections to the Next Generation Internet, but they will continue to
rely on dedicated links until a more viable Internet-based infrastructure is
available.Continued advances in telecommunications infrastructure could causeNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET75remote consultations to become less the province of a few sites equippedwith specialized telemedicine rooms and more a routine component of
the services offered by health plans.  A number of integrated health care

delivery systems have begun to experiment with remote consultations
(typically over leased lines) to provide specialty services in outlying areas.
If the Internet could support such capabilities, then remote consultation
could become more common, perhaps even extending beyond regional
boundaries.  Indeed, an enhanced Internet could help extend teleconfer-

encing to the home, enabling consumers to ask for videoconferences with
care providers whenever health problems require immediate attention.
Such capabilities could dramatically transform health care by eliminating
many office visits.Regardless of whether the patient is at home or somewhere else,
remote consultations require sustained bandwidth in two directionsÑfrom the patient to the provider and vice versa.  This stands in contrast to

many high-bandwidth applications, such as entertainment, education, or
scientific visualization, in which sustained access to high bandwidth is
needed in one direction only, from a centralized distributor of content to
a recipient.  Clearly, the need for high bandwidth in two directions is not
unique to health care; many businesses need bidirectional bandwidth to
support collaborations between workers in different locations.  However,

remote medical consultations to the home demand that such capabilities
be available from many locations, not just from corporate offices that
might already lease a high-bandwidth access line to the Internet or a
private, corporate network.  The most likely users of remote medical con-

sultations would be primary care providers and patients living in rural or
remote areas, many of whom have limited access to high-bandwidth
Internet connections (see Chapter 3).The future of remote consultations will be influenced by a number offactors beyond network technology.  Other technical challenges arise from

the need for appropriate data acquisition devices to digitize the observa-
tions involved in the consultation.  Although many medical devices have
been instrumented to allow for remote control and data acquisition, few
of them have achieved mass market acceptance.  As a result, such devices

tend to be confined to a few specially equipped rooms in institutions
supporting remote medical consultation.  Many more of the devices used

as part of routine physical exams could be modified for data acquisition
and control.  They could then be deployed in patientsÕ homes to facilitatehome-based consultations with patients whose diseases require intensive
monitoring and oversight.  In the near term, these devices might be indi-

vidually configured to work with a home computer and to relay informa-
tion to a remote care provider over the Internet.  Remote care providers

might even be able to exercise some control over these devices, whetherNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETadjusting their sensitivity or other operating parameters.  Eventually, thedevices could be designed to connect automatically to the Internet and be
configured by a remote Web browser.  Initially, this might be cost-effective

for only small, high-risk populations, but remote consultations to the
home could become more popular as the technology continues to evolve
and costs decline.Beyond technical challenges, a number of organizational and policyissues need to be resolved if remote consultations are to become more
viable in the future.  Health care organizations need to develop viable

business models for remote consultations that meet the needs of different
users.  Will remote consultations bring in income directly, or will they

generate revenues indirectly by channeling patients into a providerÕshealth care system?  East Carolina University, for example, has developed

at least five different business models for its services, but only oneÑproviding services to prison inmatesÑhas proved profitable.  The others
typically operate with grants from federal agencies or are seen as experi-
ments to broaden the reach of local provider organizations.  Profitability

is currently constrained by the fact that many health plans, including
Medicare, do not yet routinely pay for remote consultations, although
experiments are under way to examine alternative repayment schemes
(see Chapter 5).  Other issues, such as state-based licensure of health

professionals, impede attempts to deliver remote consultations across
state lines.Medical ImagingClosely related to the provision of remote medical consultations is theuse of communications networks to transfer still medical images.  This

capability could enable care providers to retrieve digital images from an
online repository (often referred to as a picture archiving and communi-
cations system, or PACS), send images to specialists for interpretation (a
form of remote consultation), or receive information from emergency
vehicles responding to a call.  The potential benefits of such systems could

include the following:¥Improved management and use of medical images (i.e., reduced probabilitythat images will be lost or incorrectly filed).  Physicians at the University of
California at San Francisco (UCSF), for example, noted during the
committeeÕs site visit (see Appendix A) that before establishing theirPACS, 15 to 20 percent of radiographic images were lost and hundreds
went unread.¥Improved quality of care through expert interpretation.  Five universitymedical centers, including UCSF, have established an expert radiographicNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET77interpretation center, Telequest, which accepts images from a variety ofclients, including rural clinics, and provides transcribed diagnoses.  This

experimental program makes expert interpretation more widely available
throughout the country.¥Reductions in the cost of radiological interpretation.  Centralization of
expertise could reduce health care costs by obviating the need for indi-
vidual provider organizations to maintain more expert radiologists than
they can keep busy.From a networking perspective, the challenge in remote imaging(sometimes called tele-imaging) is the size of medical images.  Typical

uncompressed radiographic files range from about 25 kilobytes (kB) for a
nuclear medicine image to 50 megabytes (MB) for digitized mammograms,
but multiple images often are needed, either to provide a complete view
of the object of interest from different angles or to compare various
images.  Hence, the size of an uncompressed radiographic study can range

from 1 to 2 MB for a nuclear medicine study to almost 200 MB for digi-
tized mammograms (Table 2.4).  The size of these studies is expected to

grow as imaging technology advances; image resolution is expected to
improve by a factor of 10 or more in cases such as cineo-angiography.  As

of early 1999 researchers at UCSF were working with digitized cineo-
angiograms that were 60 MB in size and with intravascular ultrasound
images that were 50 MB.14  High-resolution electron microscopes can
produce individual images that are 2 MB in size, but such instruments are
available only at a small number of research centers.15TABLE 2.4  Nominal File Sizes of Common Medical Images
ImagesSize of One Exam
Image TypeImage Size (bits)per Exam(MB)
Nuclear medicine128 
 128 
 1630-601-2
Magnetic resonance imaging256 
 256 
 12606
Ultrasound (color)512 
 512 
 2420-23016-180
Digital angiography512 
 512 
 815-40
4-10Digitized electron microscopy512 
 512 
 810.26
Digitized color microscopy512 
 512 
 2410.79
Computed tomography512 
 512 
 124020
Computed radiograph2,048 
 2,048 
 12216
Digitized X rays2,048 
 2,048 
 12216
Digitized mammography4,096 
 5,625 
 164184
SOURCE:  Huang (1996, 1999).
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETThe bandwidth required to transmit these images is determined byseveral factors, including the amount of time in which the image must be
transmitted and the degree of compression that is allowable without
degrading the image so much as to impair interpretation and diagnosis.
Lossless compression techniques can reduce image size by a factor of 3 or
4; lossy compression techniques can reduce images by a factor of 10 to 20
without sacrificing diagnostic quality in some applications (Lou et al.,
1997).  Acceptable compression levels vary by application domain (e.g.,

teleconferencing versus radiology) and by intended user (e.g., radiologist
versus primary care physician).  With digital mammography, the maxi-

mum degree of acceptable compression is controversial because of con-
cerns over the loss of detail.In many applications, images can be sent, often as e-mail attachments,to a remote site for interpretation and diagnosis within 1 or 2 days.  This

technique does not place extreme demands on the network and has been
used successfully by several organizations, even at low bandwidth.  Several

years ago, for example, Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston used
regular voice lines at 9.6 kbps to receive radiographs and CT images from
Saudi Arabia.  The images were compressed at ratios of 20 to 1 and 10 to

1, respectively, so that exams could be transmitted in 20 minutes to 1 hour
and interpretations could be provided in 1 to 2 days (Huang, 1996; K.J.
Dreyer, Partners Healthcare System, personal communication, 1999).  In-

creased use of this technique could demand greater bandwidth, however.
A busy mammography center may perform 80 to 100 examinations per
day.  If all these images were sent out for interpretation, an average

sustained throughput of almost 1 Mbps would be required without com-
pression and almost 100 kbps with 10 to 1 compression.  This admittedly

high-end application is within the average performance capabilities of the
Internet backbones but not of all Internet service providers.A desire for faster turnaround in the interpretation of medical imagescould increase demands on networking resources, even if the volume of
examinations transferred across the network is small.  Faster networks

would enable various types of service improvements.  For instance, they

could enable remote experts to provide faster diagnoses or second opin-
ions to help referring physicians plan follow-up treatments while their
patients are still in the office, or they could enable the remote experts to
provide real-time advice, such as suggesting a need for additional images
to aid in diagnosis before a patient leaves the mammography center.  In

the first example, sometimes referred to as teleconsultation, a response
may be desired within 30 minutes or so; in the second example, some-
times referred to as telemanagement, a response may be desired in near
real time.  Given the size of the images to be transmitted and the possible
need for reference sets, the bandwidth demands could be tremendous.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET79With lossless compression of 4 to 1, an entire mammography study wouldrequire 1.7 Mbps to be transmitted in 2 minutes to allow near-real-time
interpretation.  Such a capability would not be a necessity in most cases;

expert reading of mammograms in real time is not needed for regular
screenings, but it can be useful if potential abnormalities are discovered.In some imaging applications, high-speed networks become lessimportant if the data can be intelligently processed prior to transmission.
For example, during the development of PACS for integrated health care
delivery systems, users often specify that several care providers need to
be able to simultaneously access uncompressed medical images from any
location in the system within 2 seconds.  Such characteristics can translate

into a requirement for network bandwidths of 100 Mbps (typically a LAN)
and specialized high-resolution monitors, which can make such systems
costly (in the $2 million to $3 million range).  With some attention to

physicianÕs schedules, however, systems can be developed that storeimages locally on a computer that the physician is likely to use, thereby
reducing the strain on the network.  Furthermore, systems can be devel-

oped that operate efficiently on 10 Mbps LANs and standard computer
monitors.  For example, most computer monitors cannot display a full-

screen medical image at full resolution; if the maximum resolution of a
clinicianÕs video screen is 1,024  768 pixels 
 12 bits of gray scale (or 1.2
MB), then there is no use in sending all 128 MB of a digital mammogram
study.  Instead, a lower resolution image could be sent and additional

detail could be requested on smaller portions of the image as the radiolo-
gist identifies areas of interest.  A variety of commercial solutions are now

available that enable the design of tele-imaging systems that appear highly
responsive without greatly increasing network performance requirements
(Box 2.2).  Such systems tend to transmit only portions of a complete

image at any one time and therefore place less stringent demands on
network capabilities than full-screen, full-resolution systems.  Continued

evaluation will be needed to determine the relative effectiveness of these
alternative designs in diagnosis medical conditions.16Data security is also important to teleradiology applications.  Both
patient confidentiality and data integrity must be maintained during image
transmission and storage.  Confidentiality can be maintained through the

use of a host of technologies for authenticating users, controlling their
access to images, and encrypting transmissions (see Chapter 3).  Data

integrity can be maintainedÑan especially important function given theease with which a digital image can be alteredÑthrough the use oftechnologies such as digital signatures, which are used in a number of
e-commerce applications.  Nevertheless, trade-offs need to be made

between the level of protection of digital images and other considerations,
including cost and ease of use (Huang, 1996).Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 2.2A Picture Archiving and Communications System for
Personal ComputersThe typical Picture Archiving and Communications System (PACS) providesmultiple users with rapid access to imaging studies (e.g., computed tomography,
magnetic resonance, and X-ray images).  Imaging studies are typically 40 to 300
megabytes in size, and users want access in 2 seconds or less.  Assuming 10
simultaneous users, the system must provide more than 100 Mbps of bandwidth.
Although compression can reduce the bandwidth requirement, it can also result inthe loss of subtle features that may be important to proper diagnosis.  All these
requirements can lead to costly systems that cannot take advantage of existing
local area networks (LANs) in many health care organizations.An alternative that has been pursued by Stentor, Inc., is a system that relievespressure on network bandwidth by sending a lower-resolution image to a PC-
based workstation and allowing the user to zoom in on particular areas.  Images
are represented as wavelet transformations (a mathematical encoding of an imagebased on wavelet functions).  As the user zooms in on the image, the client

machine asks the server for a block of wavelet coefficients, which, when receivedby the client, are transformed into an image that allows additional details to beseen.  The update time depends on the size of the window being used, not on the
level of resolution; a PC-based computer can transform a 2,500 by 2,000 pixelimage in just 1.3 seconds.  The system preserves network performance because it
sends packets of 4 to 32 kilobytes rather than relying on dedicated network con-nectivity between the client computer and the image server.  As a result, it can
operate across slower LANs than is typical for PACs, allowing users to access full-
resolution images from virtually any location within a health care facility.SOURCE:  Based on a presentation by John Huffman, chief technology officer, StentorInc., to the study committee, March 2, 1999, Washington, D.C.Clinical TransactionsSeveral transactions form essential components of clinical care:(1)administrative functions such as referrals, practice management, and

billing (addressed in the section below on financial and administrative
transactions), (2) distribution of medical supplies and purchasing and
inventory control, and (3) clinical functions, such as reporting of results
from testing laboratories and interinstitutional communication of health
information.  While some progress has been made in the first two of these

areas, progress in the third has been limited.  Some health care organiza-

tions use a Web-based infrastructure for reporting laboratory results
within an institution, but few integrate the laboratory data into the clini-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET81cal information system containing patient records.  Fewer still use the
Internet for exchanging patient records among affiliated or unaffiliated
health care organizations.  As a result, when patients arrive at a health

care organization for the first time (perhaps after a referral or changing
health plans) or visit the emergency room of a hospital they have not
visited before, their medical records are either inaccessible or reduced to a
photocopied or faxed subset of the paper record in another institution.
This is often true of communications between departments even within
the same institution because only a small minority of health care institu-
tions have at least some form of enterprise-wide clinical information
system.Greater use of the Internet to facilitate exchanges of clinical informa-tion could improve the quality of care by making better and more com-
plete information available to care providers.  A recent report from the

Institute of Medicine identified medical errors as the source of much
unnecessary morbidity and mortality (IOM, 1999).  By integrating the

clinical transactions of all parties to health care delivery (hospitals, phar-
macies, clinicians, insurance) across the Internet, there is a significant
opportunity to detect and prevent such errors.17  Use of the Internet for
transferring medical records would enable care providers to better treat
patients who become ill or are injured while traveling or who have not
previously been under their care.Despite the lack of effort in this arena to date, the Internet appears toprovide a viable medium for use by hospitals to share patient health
records for the purpose of improving care. This capability was explored
through the World Wide Web Electronic Medical Record System (W3EMRS),
developed by researchers at BostonÕs ChildrenÕs Hospital, Beth IsraelHospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, and the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology.  The original purpose of the system was to allow the

sharing of clinical information across the Internet among emergency room
clinicians at the three participating hospitals.  The system was subse-

quently deployed for the sharing of birth data and perinatal maternal
data among Brigham & WomenÕs Hospital, Beth Israel Deaconess Medi-cal Center, and ChildrenÕs Hospital for the management of newborninfants with jaundice at ChildrenÕs Hospital or one of its affiliated prac-tices.  It was also adapted for use within the seven affiliated hospitals of

the Boston-area CareGroup; the system is accessible to all authorized

clinicians and saves an estimated $1 million annually by reducing the
time spent searching for records, time needed to admit a patient, number
of admitted patients, length of hospital stays, and time spent in training.
The impact on patient retention and member attraction is projected to
increase revenues by $3 million to $4 million per year (see Box 2.3 forNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETadditional information about the W3EMRS system and its implementa-tion within CareGroup).The bandwidth needs for exchanges of clinical information vary withthe size of the records to be exchanged, the number of records that are
transmitted in a given period of time, and the timeliness with which
records must be accessed.  The size of a medical record transmitted elec-

tronically between sites can vary considerably, from as little as 1 kB to as
much as several gigabytes if the record contains several medical images.
In general, older and sicker patients have the largest records.  Paper charts

3 to 4 inches thick and divided into several volumes are not unusual in
hospitals, like those in CareGroup, that serve large numbers of such

patients.  The number of records transmitted also varies considerably.
BOX 2.3Linking Medical Records Via the WebThe World Wide Web Electronic Medical Record System (W3EMRS), devel-oped by several Boston-area health care organizations, demonstrates the capabil-ities of the Internet in supporting exchanges of medical records.  The system
enables participating organizations to request clinical information about patientsunder their care from other local hospitals that may have provided treatment in thepast.The main challenges in developing the system were (1) determining how bestto integrate information from disparate, heterogeneous data sources at the varioushospitals using different database management systems, data models, and vocab-
ularies, (2) linking records from patients who receive care from a variety of facilities,often under slightly different names, (3) overcoming organizational obstacles tothe sharing of clinical data, and (4) developing ways of working with long-standing
legacy systems.  Instead of developing a centralized data depository containing
records from all participating hospitals, the system designers instead chose to pullinformation from each of the hospitalsÕ clinical information systems.  Physicians
use a Web browser to query the databases of participating hospitals so as toretrieve information about patients under their care.  Responses from the indi-
vidual hospitals are consolidated into a unified presentation that contains Web
pages with information on demographics, problems, medications, allergies, notes,and visits.  A key to the technical success of the W3EMRS architecture was the
agreement by all participants on how to represent a core set of data (dubbed the
Òcommon medical recordÓ) in the same form within the HL7 data model.Another major challenge in designing the system was addressing threats tosecurity and confidentiality.  System developers had difficulty identifying realistic

threats to the system but realized that as long as some form of encryption wasused across the communications links, it would be easier and cheaper for an
attacker to break into the source sites to obtain patient information than to interceptNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET83and decrypt patient information as it traveled across the Internet.  As a result, they
decided that most of the security effort should be devoted to protecting the sourcecomputers from which the clinical data were extracted and the so-called agglutina-torÑwhich compiles records from multiple sites into a single fileÑrather than thecommunications links themselves.System designers settled on a combination of organizational policies and tech-nical solutions to protect data, establishing common confidentiality agreements
among participating institutions and deploying technologies for authenticating sys-tem users, patients, and the source site.1  The technical solutions recommended
included secure (encrypted) communications and token-based authentication (in
which the identity of users is validated by something they know, such as a pass-word, and something they have, such as a physical device similar to a bank card).For example, in the CareWeb system, which is based on W3EMRS, authentication
of the requestorÕs identity is verified by a user name, a personal identificationnumber, and a code number generated by a hardware device that generates newcodes every 60 seconds (the SecurID system from Security Dynamics, Cambridge,
Massachusetts).  Data transmissions across the Internet are encrypted, and digital
signatures are used to confirm the veracity of the request.  Audit trails are available
at all participating institutions so that all accesses to health records can be inves-
tigated.  To address privacy concerns, patients at each hospital are allowed to
request that their health records not be shared with other institutions.1For information on the confidentiality agreements, see Rind et al. (1997).SOURCES: Kohane et al. (1996); Isaac S. Kohane, director, Informatics Program,Boston ChildrenÕs Hospital, presentation to the committee, September 13, 1998; andJohn Halamka, ÒThe Value of Implementing a Secure Web-Based Medical RecordsRetrieval System,Ó unpublished paper provided to the committee on December 17, 1999.
The average person will see a doctor as an outpatient three to four times ayear, with Medicare patients making five to six visits a year and healthy
adults making approximately two visits per year.  Children visit doctors

at the same rates as the elderly, but their records are smaller.  Overall, 116

hospitalizations occur per year per 1,000 people, with 332 hospitalizations
per year per 1,000 people for those 65 and older.  Overall, 380 emergency
room visits occur per year per 1,000 people. The timeliness required
depends on whether access is needed in an emergency room situation or
whether the record is to be transmitted to a specialist for an appointment
at a later date.Of greater concern is security.  At issue are the confidentiality of
clinical transactionsÑwhich tend to contain personal information andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETidentitiesÑand the integrity of the data transmitted.  Confidentiality of
the transmitted record can be addressed with encryption, as long as it is
accompanied by strong methods for authenticating both the sender and
receiver of the record.  In pre-Internet (i.e., telephone or fax) communica-
tions, authentication is handled by the participants, who have some
notions of how to verify that they have reached the correct party.  These

already shaky notions are ineffective in Internet communications.  Internet

protocols such as the hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), which handles
Web-based transactions, do have provisions for encrypting communica-
tions and validating usersÕ identities, but effective mechanisms have yet
to be deployed for distributing the tokens, certificates, or other technolo-
gies needed for authentication to all potential users of a system.  Few

organizations have adopted basic security procedures for protecting data
integrity and data stored on computers that are accessible over the
Internet.System reliability is also an issue in clinical transactions.  If health
care organizations are to rely on Internet-based systems for access to
patient records, then they must be assured that the systems will function
properly 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  System outages of limited dura-

tion may be tolerable if records are being transmitted to a specialist or
another institution in advance of a scheduled appointment, but they can-
not be tolerated if access is needed on demand, such as for emergency
room treatments.A number of other challenges stand in the way of Internet use forclinical transactions.  Perhaps the most daunting is the lack of agreement

on data interchange standards and standardized vocabularies, or nomen-
clature, to describe clinical entities.  Considerable support exists for the

Health Level Seven (HL7) standards, which were developed for clinical
transactions (Box 2.4),18 and the HL7 organization continues to improve
the completeness of its HL7 data model to encompass more possible medi-
cal transactions (e.g., the current standard does not cover all drugs, X-ray
studies, or nursing interventions or problems).  Nevertheless, proprietary

concerns and institutional inertia have led many vendors of clinical infor-
mation systems and health care organizations to develop commercial ap-
plications and home-grown systems that are not compliant with the HL7
standard or idiosyncratically compliant with it.  Furthermore, health care

organizations have not been able to agree on a standardized vocabulary
to use in describing different sets of clinical entitiesÑdespite significantsupport by the National Library of Medicine for multiple standardization
efforts, including the construction and maintenance of a metathesaurus as
part of the unified medical language system (UMLS).There are many reasons why neither the data models, such as HL7,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET85BOX 2.4Health Level SevenHealth Level Seven (HL7) is one of several organizations accredited by theAmerican National Standards Institute that is developing standards for represent-ing and communicating data related to health care.  HL7 has focused on the clinical

and administrative data generated within and across health care institutions.  The
data model and transactions standardized by HL7 have been widely adoptedthroughout the health care information industry for interchange between applica-
tions in a heterogeneous vendor environment.  However, the data models used by
most vendors remain proprietary and nonstandard.  The HL7 data model (the most
recent version, 2.3.1)1 has been implemented in several ways:  as a message-
based format using an HL7-defined syntax, as a relational data model, and as anobject-oriented data model.  Most recently, the data model has been implemented
within the framework of the  Extensible Markup Language (XML) (World Wide Web

Consortium, 1998). Because of the widespread adoption of XML as an interchangeformat for all kinds of Web commerce, this implementation is likely to have broadadoption.1See <http://www.hl7.org/library/standards_non1.htm#HL7> Version 2.3.1.nor the vocabularies that are among the constituents of the UMLS becamepopular, but these are beyond the scope of this report.  However, it is

clear that one important reason is that there have been no sufficiently
motivating arguments for data sharing across or even within institutions.
Unlike billing transactions or pharmaceutical transactions, clinical trans-
actions have only an indirect effect, at best, on the profitability of health
care organizations.  The health care industry is much less consolidated

than the pharmaceutical industry, which has been more successful in
deploying an interoperability standard.  An additional inhibitor is the

nature of clinical transactions, which tend to be more complex and varied
than commercial transactions.  The inertia with which clinical informa-

tion systems have been deployed and accepted into practice has encour-
aged the development of consumer-driven health information systems in
which third parties store and provide access to clinical data.  Nonetheless,

the functionality of these consumer information systems will be no better
than that of their counterparts in health care institutions without the wide-
spread adoption of standards for health data exchanges and the develop-
ment of a robust means for authenticating users.Use of the Extensible Markup Language (XML) for Internet-basedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtransactions may provide additional interoperability but could encountersimilar barriers.  XML is the universal format for structured documents

and data on the Web.  Like HTML, XML makes use of tags (words brack-
eted by Ò<Ò and 
Ò>Ó) and attributes (of the form name=ÒvalueÓ), butwhereas HTML specifies what each tag and attribute means (and often
how the text between them will look in a browser), XML uses the tags
only to delimit pieces of data, leaving the interpretation of the data to the
application that reads it.  XML documents include an XML document

type declaration, which contains or points to markup declarations that
provide a grammar for a class of documents.  This grammar is known as

a document type definition (DTD).  Therefore, before XML documents

adhering to the HL7 data model can be created, a commonly accepted
HL7 DTD must be ratified (Dolin et al., 1998).  Without agreement on this

common HL7 DTD, the exchange of clinical data across the Internet
among health care systems will be significantly more cumbersome and
will probably be further delayed.New federal mandates are likely to encourage greater standardiza-tion that could facilitate use of the Internet for exchanges of clinical infor-
mation.  The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA,

P.L. 104-191) requires the secretary of Health and Human Services to
adopt standards for the electronic transmission of health information
associated with the following transactions:  health claims or equivalent

encounter information, health claims attachments, enrollment and dis-
enrollment in a health plan, eligibility for a health plan, health care pay-
ment and remittance advice, health plan premium payments, first report
of injury, health claim status, and referral certification and authorization.
The challenge will be to ensure timely compliance with HIPAA standards
by the multitude of legacy applicationsÑa task that will require at least asmuch effort as the Y2K remediation.Furthermore, the emergence of Internet industries to host several ofthe aforementioned clinical transactions and their data repositories may
provide the means for the widespread implementation of automated
health transactions.  However, hosting such applications has its own dan-

gers.  By slicing the space of clinical transactions into sharply demarcated

segments (e.g. clinician documentation, laboratory reporting, medication
ordering), there is a risk that important data relevant to patient care will
become more dispersed and functionally unintegrated. Only by ensuring
close adherence to HIPAA with a high degree of interoperability (i.e.,
adherence to data storage and communication standards) can this risk be
abated.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET87Technical Requirements for Clinical CareThe technical capabilities required by clinical applications of theInternet are even more demanding than those required by consumer
health applications because a number of factors converge.  The need to

protect the confidentiality of patient information is combined with the
need for high bandwidth and low latency to support remote consulta-
tions; high availability is also required to ensure that patient records can
be accessed when needed and that systems remain operational for the
duration of a remote consultation.  Although not all clinical applications

of the Internet simultaneously stress each of these dimensions, the set of
foreseeable clinical applications, taken as a whole, does.Bandwidth ++++Bandwidth requirements for clinical applications vary considerably,but many possible applications could demand high bandwidth.  Remote

consultations, for example, would require sufficient bandwidth for real-
time video at rates approaching 1 Mbps for some types of diagnostic
procedures.  The transmission of large medical images could also require
high bandwidth in some instances, to support the transfer of large num-
bers of images between an imaging center and a remote interpretation
center or rapid turnaround of diagnoses from a remote specialist.  Even

remote access to electronic medical records could demand relatively high
bandwidth to the extent that such records include images or video.  In

many cases, records (or images) could be downloaded in advance of the
need to view them, although this technique would not be as effective in
emergency situations.Latency  +++
Latencies across the Internet are adequate for many clinical applica-tions, such as results reporting and downloading of most medical records
(if these records are already stored remotely online), but applications like
remote consultation would demand lower latencies to facilitate more

natural interactions between participants.  In virtual reality applications,

low latencies are needed to create realistic spaces and interactions that are
not distracting to users or participants.Availability  ++++
Because of safety and timeliness considerations in patient care, avail-ability of the network is vital.  Clinicians awaiting a lab result, radiologi-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETcal examination, or connection to a patientÕs home cannot tolerate anyunavailability of the network or the clinical applications running on it.
Likewise, remote consultations will not be viable if network availability
cannot be assured and connections are broken frequently.  Neither care

providers nor patients will tolerate delays, downtime, or lost connections
in such applications.Security  ++++
Because patient information is so sensitive and its safety is paramount,the security of the network is vital for clinical applications.  Without

assurances that the confidentiality and integrity of patient data will be
protected and that critical services will be available when needed, both
the government and the public will resist the sharing of data across insti-
tutions.  Security improvements will entail both technical measures (many

of which would be deployed within specific applications) and the devel-
opment of robust confidentiality policies to govern the disclosure of per-
sonal health information.  Considerable technology is available for improv-

ing the security of many clinical transactions between established partners,but it is not widely deployed in health organizations (CSTB, 1997).  More

advanced security technologies, as outlined in Chapter 3, could improve
protection, especially for data exchanges between unaffiliated health organi-
zations and between consumers and care providers.Ubiquity ++Ubiquitous access will be important for many clinical applications iffor no other reason than the dispersion of health care providers, many of
whom continue to work in private practice or remote clinics.  For remote

consultations, distributed collaboration, and home care, the ubiquity of
network services is essential.  High-bandwidth (broadband) access could

also be important for applications requiring the transmission of large
images or real-time video.FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRANSACTIONSThe Internet is being evaluated as a medium for streamlining finan-cial and administrative transactions in the U.S. health care system.  Health

care in the United States is financed largely by a network of so-called
third-party payersÑentities that insure and pay for health services butare not directly engaged in providing care.  These entities range from

government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid, which pay for the
care of the elderly and impoverished, to private-sector organizations,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET89including traditional indemnity insurers, self-insured companies, andmanaged care organizations.  The Internet could be used by providers to

submit claims for payment or by individuals to enroll, disenroll, and
change their coverage.  Payers could quickly confirm an individual
Õseligibility for coverage and convey any changes to the health plans, which,
in turn, could quickly relay the information to the personÕs designatedproviders.  By accelerating these transactions, the Internet could reduce

misunderstandings and disputes among parties, hasten payersÕ premium
payments to plans and plansÕ payments to providers, and reduce admin-
istrative costs, which by some estimates constitute 30 percent of all health
care expenditures in the United States.  By one estimate, paper claims cost

between $2 and $18 each to process, whereas electronic claims have costs
measured in cents (McCormack, 2000)Health care organizations have filed claims electronically for sometime.  Approximately 65 percent of the 4.7 billion claims submitted for

payment by care providers and pharmacies in 1999 were submitted in
electronic form.  Hospitals and pharmacies have gone the farthest down

this path, having submitted 85 percent and 89 percent of their claims,
respectively, in electronic format in 1999, compared to just 43 percent for
individual physician practices.  Much of this progress is due to prompting

from the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which adminis-
ters the Medicare and Medicaid programs, and from Blue Cross/Blue
Shield organizations, each of which was expected to receive more than 80
percent of claims electronically in 1999.  By contrast, HMOs and other

commercial insurers, which together account for 44 percent of all health
claims, were expected to receive just 18 percent and 45 percent of claims,
respectively, in electronic format.19  Medicare has required its contractedmanaged care organizations to transmit electronically beneficiary enroll-
ment, disenrollment, and correction data in batch mode to its data center
(HCFA, 1999b).  These managed care plans also obtain data on the dispo-

sition of their transactions and on plan membership and payments elec-
tronically.Despite the trend to electronic formats, only a few provider organiza-tions use the Internet to submit electronic claims or related transactions,
and few payers are capable of accepting Internet-based transactions.  Until

recently, Medicare transactions, for example, have been conducted using
telephone lines to access the data center.  HCFA is replacing this system

with the Medicare Data Communications Network, which will be ac-
cessed with Web browsers.  HCFA
Õs carriers for the conventional Medi-care program, fiscal intermediaries, and most of the Medicare+Choice plansare using this network, and by July 1999, the remaining managed care
plans were required to have made the transition.  No such requirements

apply to communications and data transfer between individual physi-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETciansÕ offices and the HCFA carriers that process their claims. Medicare
and other payers plan to increase the electronic transmission of data re-
lated to the quality of care and satisfaction of beneficiaries.  Medicare, for

example, foresees that its health plan management system will collect
plansÕ quality-related data from the Health Plan Employer Data and Infor-
mation Set (HEDIS) and the Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Survey
(CAHPS) (HCFA, 1999a).Private-sector organizations have also begun to experiment withInternet applications for financial and administrative transactions.  Many

such organizations see the Internet as a plausible means of achieving the
long-held vision of seamless integration of information across organiza-
tions. Health organizations can assume that networking capabilities will
be in place so they can concentrate their resources on higher-order func-
tionality.  The Internet may also make electronic claims submission prac-

tical for small group practices that cannot afford the hardware and staff
needed for more conventional electronic data interchange (EDI) systems.
The Regence Group of Seattle, Washington, for example, has developed a
Web-based interface application called Network Data Express (NDEX)
for determining beneficiary eligibility and making referrals.  The system

features claim status inquiries, provider directories, reference materials
(such as the formulary), e-mail, and managed care data and reports.  It

processes about 20,000 transactions per month, doing the work of two to
three full-time employees who would otherwise give the same informa-
tion out by phone (see Appendix A for additional information on
RegenceÕs system).Other efforts have been initiated at the state and regional level topromote health information exchanges.  The Community Health Informa-

tion Technology Alliance (CHITA) in Seattle, Washington, the Minnesota
Health Data Institute, and the Affiliated Health Information Networks of
New England, a project of the Massachusetts Health Data consortium, are
three examples.20  Such programs attempt to facilitate information exchange
among a variety of organizations, including care providers, insurers, phar-
macies and pharmaceutical benefits managers, accrediting organizations,
and state health organizations.  Considerable effort has been devoted to

defining standards for data exchange and determining the types of data
that must be exchanged for different transactions.Security concerns have been a major impediment to greater sharing ofinformation for payment and administration.  Many such transactions
Ñespecially paymentÑcontain sensitive information related to a particularpatientÕs health, so their confidentiality must be maintained.  Similarly
strong requirements exist for data integrity.  According to one informa-

tion security officer interviewed as part of this project, the responsibilities
of security officers in health care differ from those of their counterparts inNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET91other industries:  the applicable state and federal laws are different, and
the privacy and security concerns are greater.  At the same time, the

health care industry is driven by economics, not privacy, so there is a
need to balance cost effectiveness with security protections.CHITA and the Foundation for Health Care Quality worked with theMassachusetts Health Data Consortium and Minnesota Health Data Insti-
tute on a three-state project focusing on electronic security.  The goals

were to determine how electronic security could be implemented
affordably and to develop a business case for a community-wide, secure
infrastructure for electronic business.  The group worked with SAIC to

develop a security and risk management plan for business-to-business
health information networks.  The plan identifies seven levels of increas-

ing health care security, numbered 1 through 7.  CHITA is working with

Seattle-area health care organizations to implement level 6 security prac-
tices (HSL 6) within participating regional organizations.HSL 6 supports remote access to a data repository but not directremote access to the internal network of a health organization.  It includes

specifications for three network-based information services that are
deemed essential to financial and administrative transactions:  (1) authen-

ticated, secure messaging, (2) authenticated, secure file escrow and trans-
fer, and (3) authenticated, role-based access at the level of individual
users.  The security model has been developed and published (SAIC,

1998), and CHITA is in the process of identifying an organization that will
function as a trusted intermediary to oversee a prototype implementa-
tion, followed by a wider pilot project in the region.  Issues to be addressed

include the identification of a certificate authority, which might be a non-
profit organization, the state or federal government, or a private cor-
poration.HCFA is also a strong proponent of EDI but has prohibited the sub-mission of payment information over the Internet owing to concerns about
security and confidentiality.  In January 1999, the agency revised its secu-

rity policies to allow Internet-based transmission of information after it
has been received from outside parties (HCFA, 1999a).  HCFA is not

allowing claims transmission over the Internet except by those Medicare
contractors participating in an interoperability pilot of the HCFA Internet
security policy.  The pilot, which began in September 1999 and was sched-

uled to run through December 1999, tested e-mail, batch, real-time, and
Web-based transmissions, while utilizing various authenticating and
encryption technologies and including digital certificates through cooper-
ating certificate authorities.  Results of the pilot and accompanying rec-

ommendations were anticipated in February 2000.  Depending on the

findings and the cost-benefit analysis associated with the transmission of
claims, HCFA will decide on whether or not and when to allow InternetNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtransmission on an operational basis.21  Acceptance of the Internet by
HCFA could stimulate its wider use for submitting claims because HCFA
processes a significant percentage of the nationÕs health care payments,and its acceptance could signal that such submissions can be handled
securely.Advances in the use of the Internet for financial and administrativetransactions will be accelerated by the HIPAA of 1996 and by the 1997
Balanced Budget Act (P.L. 105-34).  The HIPAA requires providers, pro-

vider organizations, payers, and clearinghouses to adopt uniform trans-
action standards, code sets, identifiers, and electronic signature standards
for electronic transmissions of health care claims.  In addition, HIPAA

prescribes security standards for the protection of all electronic health
information both within and between health care enterprises, and it gave
Congress until August 1999 to pass comprehensive health privacy legisla-
tion.  In the absence of such legislation, the secretary of Health and Hu-

man Services is to promulgate regulations to protect the privacy of per-
sonal health information (Harman, 1998) (see Chapter 5).  Some health

care organizations report that they have been slow to implement pro-
grams for Internet-based submissions of medical claims until the new
regulations are in place.  They fear that they may need to modify their

systems after final regulations are promulgated or that Congress may
pass legislation that supersedes them.  The Mayo Foundation, for exam-

ple, uses dial-up connections and leased T1 lines to submit claims elec-
tronically to government and commercial payers but will not implement
an Internet-based system until security and privacy guidelines have been
adopted by the federal government (McCormack, 2000).A number of obstacles may further delay the widespread use of theInternet for financial and administrative transactions.  While many large

health care organizations are moving toward electronic billing and have
Internet connections, many private practitioners (almost half of all physi-
cians practice independently) lack Internet access and practice manage-
ment systems for electronic billing.  Furthermore, many practice manage-

ment systems are not interoperable with the Internet, requiring users to
download claims information into a separate Internet-based application,
a process that adds unnecessary cost and complexity.  Organizations large

and small that have legacy systems operating for EDI and claims process-
ing may also be slow to replace those systems with Internet-compatible
systems, although in the long run they will need to modernize their sys-
tems.  A lack of standards for electronic claims will continue to impede

efforts at Internet-based exchanges, as many practice management sys-
tems use different formats for data, and payers often cannot accept data in
multiple formats.  Continued standards efforts, including those mandated

by HIPAA and those under way in other regional collaborations, mayNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET93ease this concern, but the decentralized nature of the health care industrypresents a significant impediment.Technical Requirements for Financial andAdministrative ApplicationsBandwidth  +
The bandwidth requirement for most financial and administrativetransactions is modest.  Most transactions consist of short, text-based

messages.  In some cases payers may request care providers to transmit

large diagnostic images in support of claims for payment, but such images
need not be delivered rapidly, so even in these cases, bandwidth is not a
significant consideration.Latency  +
Latency is also not a significant factor in financial and administrativetransactions.  In some cases, such as checking on the terms of a patient
Õscoverage for certain procedures and eligibility for reimbursement, timely
responses are desirable.  If an organization
Õs servers are far too small andthe system response time gets long, there could be problems, but those
would be problems not with the Internet itself but with the individual
nodes on the network. For many transactions, such as submission of
claims for payment, latency is not an issue at all as the payment process
tends to be slow.  Granted, improvements in technology and processes

could eventually allow for near-real-time review of claims and electronic
payment for procedures, but response times and latency would not be a
driving consideration in such systems.Availability  +++
The importance of availability in financial and administrative trans-actions is relatively high, depending on the specific use.  The routine uses

of payers require no more than a moderate level of availability.  System

outages could be compensated for by waiting to send a payment request.
However, the preapproval of immediate care for beneficiariesÑfor exam-ple, the approval of pharmacy claimsÑwould demand greater availabilitysince there is greater need for a rapid response.  Care providers and

payers are unlikely to use the Internet for such transactions if it is not
reliable.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETSecurity  ++++
Security of Internet communication of health-related data is a sinequa non of the InternetÕs greater use for financial and administrative trans-actions.  Many of these transactions contain sensitive, personal informa-

tion on the types of health care services that were provided to a particular
patient or the diagnosis of a condition.  Hence, they are almost as sensi-

tive as clinical records.  Both care provider organizations and payers also
have strong incentives to demand that data integrity be maintained, to
ensure that information is not corrupted during transit or when stored in
computers attached to the network.  As with clinical transactions, provid-

ing such security entails both technological mechanisms and confidentiality
policies that govern disclosures of information by health organizations.
Care providers and payers with established relationships can make use of
existing technology for securing information during both transmission
and storage, but more advanced technologies for authenticating users
would enable transfers of information among a larger number of payers
and providers.Ubiquity  ++
Requirements for ubiquity of access would be high if the objective isthat all providers, including individual physician offices, routinely sub-
mit claims and quality improvement information, eligibility checks, and
other information via the Internet.  In the short term, claims administrators

could use the Internet for communications with institutional providers,
reducing the degree of ubiquity required.PUBLIC HEALTHPublic health workers promote health and the quality of life bypreventing and controlling the spread of disease, injury, and disability.
Public health officials collect statistics on the occurrence of diseases, dis-
seminate guidelines to health care practitioners and the public, fund
research on ways to improve public health, and deliver health care to
underserved  populations.  A number of these activities could be enhanced

by an Internet that is better attuned to public health needs, that provides
sufficient security to protect sensitive medical records, that is accessible to
all public health workers and the public at large, and that remains opera-
tional even in times of natural or man-made disasters.  Public health

surveillance, in particular, stands to benefit from Internet-based trans-
actions to assist in collecting data about the health of individuals, per-
sonal risk factors, and medical treatments, as well as data about potentialNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET95sources of disease and injury in the environment and resources that canbe used to take effective action.In recent years, attention has turned to making certain that publichealth officials at local, state, and regional levels have adequate connec-
tivity and expertise to use the Internet for their work.  Several reports

have reflected on the need for new relationships and better collaboration
between public health officials and individual health care providers.22The National Library of Medicine (NLM), in conjunction with several
other public health organizations, has initiated a program, Partners in
Information Access, designed specifically to help public health officials
gain access to the Internet and to relevant health information.23  Since
October 1998, 20 awards totaling just under $1 million have been made
for programs in 20 states.  The goals of this program are fourfold:  (1) to

increase public health professionalsÕ awareness of the services of the NLM,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the National
Network of Libraries of Medicine (NN/LM), (2) to assist public health
professionals in getting connected to the Internet, (3) to train public health
officials in the use of information technology and information services,
and (4) to increase awareness of public health information needs and
resources among NN/LM members.  Individual projects will attempt to

provide modems and connections to Internet service providers for public
health departments lacking such capabilities; support access to public
health information and related biomedical topics via local medical librar-
ies; survey the information needs of public health officials; and train pub-
lic health officials to use the Internet and specific information resources,
such as PubMed and CDC WONDER.These efforts reflect the growing awareness of the linkages betweenpublic health and the care of individuals.  Recent changes in the ecology

and epidemiology of disease and the organization of health care delivery
systems have led to a convergence of these two components of health
care.  For example, the AIDS pandemic forced many to realize that high

socioeconomic status did not confer immunity from epidemic infectious
diseases.  Second, it has become increasingly clear that the major control-
lable causes of disease involve the traditional interests of public health:
smoking, alcohol and drug abuse; injuries; and nutritional problems,
including obesity.  Finally, the advent of managed care and capitation has

made payers responsible for protecting the health of populations.  This

convergence of public and private health interests represents a historical
opportunity to bring public health thinking into the daily practice of medi-

cine.  It makes public health surveillance a more compelling application

of the Internet.  By some estimates, only about 10 percent of all early

deaths in the United States can be prevented by medical intervention;
population-based approaches could prevent up to 70 percent of them byNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtargeting underlying risks such as tobacco, drug and alcohol abuse, dietand sedentary lifestyles, and environmental, occupational, and infectious
risk factors (McGinnis and Foege, 1993).Public Health SurveillanceThe public health system in the United States is hierarchically orga-nized around community (city, county, or other local jurisdiction), state,
and federal efforts.  Each of these jurisdictions is chartered to collect dif-

ferent sorts of data and share them in different ways.  The federal public

health centers must recognize large-scale trends in the occurrence of dis-
ease and allocate resources to minimize the damage to the public health.
Community public health offices must process information about indi-
vidual patients and local outbreaks in order to recognize and respond to
the needs of the community.  For historical reasons, the three levels of

public health monitoring and surveillance have developed very different
organizations and communication mechanisms.  However, there are fairly

well defined communication points where the systems interact with one
another.  For example, physicians and medical laboratories must report

the occurrence of certain conditions to local health departments, depend-
ing upon the reporting requirements.  Certain conditions must also be

reported to state public health offices, which in turn file reports with the
federal CDC.  Although the sets of data reported to CDC are uniform

across the states (and updated regularly), each state and county health
department can require that any condition it deems significant must be
reported (rural counties, for example, have different interests from urban
ones).An important mechanism for collecting information of great signifi-cance to public healthÑand one that is ripe for the InternetÑis automaticreporting by medical laboratories of test results for some communicable
diseases, such as tuberculosis.  Such systems promise both to improve

reporting of adverse events and to lower the costs of collecting and main-
taining such data.  Testing laboratories are required to report certain diag-

noses to their local health offices so that public health officials may ensure
that adequate treatment is delivered and that spread of disease is con-
tained.  Currently, most such reporting is done on paper, with laboratory

results being sent by mail or fax to the public health office.24  Officials
from the county public health office then follow up with the local physi-
cian and/or patient to investigate possible causes of the condition, paths
of contagion, and needed interventions.  This reporting system is fraught
with errors and delays, as reports are transmitted in a range of forms
(mail, fax, etc.), following different sets of rules, to different county offices.

Not surprisingly, reports are often incomplete or are sent to the wrongNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET97county health department because testing laboratories cannot determinein which county the patient resides.The Internet offers a way to streamline this system, ensuring thatreports are sent in a timely manner to the correct local public health office
and to the state for analysis.  The Washington State Department of Health,

for example, has begun to develop its Electronic Laboratory Reporting
System, to support Internet-based submission and notification of cases of
reportable diseases within the state, which total about 100,000 annually.
The system uses the Internet to allow testing laboratories to report condi-
tions directly to the Department of Health, which forwards the informa-
tion to the appropriate local health department.  It is intended to hasten

the filing of reports, reduce the burden of reporting for laboratories and
health agencies, improve the stateÕs ability to track disease outbreaks thatcross county lines, and ensure that reports are transmitted to the correct
county health office.  The system takes advantage of the broad reach of

the Internet to establish connectivity among the health departments and
private testing laboratories.  In preliminary tests with the Group Health

Cooperative of Puget Sound, the system improved the rate of reporting of
health conditions at both the state and local levels, especially for smaller
counties whose paper-based reports were more prone to be lost or misdi-
rected.  The time to file a report with the counties improved moderately
Ñto less than one dayÑwhile the time to transmit reports to the state im-proved dramaticallyÑfrom a mean of 40 days with a paper-based systemto just a day with the Internet-based system.25The Internet also offers unprecedented opportunities for planningand resource allocation at the community, state, and federal levels, poten-
tially improving care and reducing costs.  Especially in a setting of limited

resources, mechanisms for identifying the need for resources and deploy-
ing them rapidly to affected populations are of critical importance.  Auto-

mated systems for tracking the outbreak of diseases both acutely (on the
scale of hours) and subacutely (on the scale of days to a week) would
allow for dynamic allocation of resources, such as medicine, non-
pharmaceutical medical supplies, donated organs, blood products, and
even medical personnel, based on needs.  Consider an outbreak of illness
caused by a pathogenic bacteria contaminating hamburgers sold by a
chain restaurant.  Early detection of such an outbreak could lead to rapid
notification of local and state public health officials so they could begin to
track down the source of the infection.  At the same time, pharmaceutical

suppliers could be notified that an extra supply of certain types of
antibiotics or rehydration intravenous fluids would be required in the
region.  Finally, hospital personnel could be alerted to the fact that these

cases were appearing and could be briefed on the signs and symptoms to
make them more prepared for emergency room visits related to the out-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETbreak.  At the federal level, information about these outbreaks could con-
tribute to decisions on the cost-effectiveness of setting up new regula-
tions, their enforcement, or their propagation and dissemination within
the health enterprise.  Clearly, application software must be developed to

assist decision makers in allocating resources and in identifying and
responding to trends in disease, but the Internet would provide the infra-
structure necessary to gather the data upon which these decisions will be
based.Integrating Data Sources for Improved Decision MakingBy allowing automated queries to disparate databases, the Internetcould also help public health officials better integrate the available data to
improve data analysis and health monitoring.  Currently, a number of

political and bureaucratic boundaries impede the use of the Internet for
public health purposes.  Most importantly, federal and state public health

agencies are organized in vertically integrated, disease-specific systems.
One rationale for this structure is that vertically integrated data and com-
munications systems best serve the traditional public health functions for
a given disease.26  Thus, dozens of systems support individual diseases
(such as AIDS) or disease groups (e.g., hospital-acquiredÑnosocomialÑinfections).  The result is massive duplication, and a patient
Õs clinicalinformation could reside in several different systems that do not intercon-
nect.  The Internet could be a powerful technical tool (and political moti-

vator) to realign these programs and allow better integration of data for
monitoring public health.  Doing so would require that public health

offices and their databases be connected to the Internet and that mecha-
nisms be put in place for protecting the security and confidentiality of
data that contains personally identifiable health information.Beyond integrating databases within the public health sector, the
Internet offers the opportunity for public health officials to collect data
from private sources that might be important in their surveillance efforts.
School attendance records and sales of prescription drugs or nonprescrip-
tion remedies could signal the outbreak of a disease in its early stages,
before symptoms reach the level at which people visit a doctor.  Indeed,

the New York City Department of Public Health arranged to receive such
data from one local drugstore chain to improve its surveillance activities,
recognizing that abnormal sales of antidiarrheal medicines could indicate
a wide-ranging but low-level epidemic of food poisoning or problems
with the water supply.  Being able to access such information quickly

through the Internet could allow health care providers to respond rapidly
to disease clusters and reduce the exposure of the population to disease.
Much of this information is available today in electronic format, and withNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET99proper protections for proprietary and confidential information, it couldbe made available to public health officials via the Internet.Responding to Bioterrorist AttacksHow to detect and respond to a bioterrorist attack (e.g., an intentionalrelease of poisonous gases or tainting of the public water supply) has
become a growing concern for the public health community.  The use of

biological weapons by terroristsÑeven an individual terrorist actingaloneÑcould inflict life-threatening illnesses on a large scale and, unlikeexplosions or chemical releases, could easily escape immediate notice.
Many biological agents would not produce symptoms in their victims for
days, weeks, or longer, and initial reports of illnesses might not appear
unusual, delaying recognition of a widespread problem.In the case of bioterrorist attack, each of the phases of the publichealth process would depend on a successful infrastructure:  recognizing
a trend, identifying the cause of the trend, formulating a strategy for
responding to it, allocating resources for the response, deploying the
response, and monitoring its success.  Initial clinical reports, which might

come from doctorsÕ offices and emergency rooms over a large area, would
need to be aggregated at a high enough level for a geographical pattern to
emerge and a problem to be detected.  Local public health officials in the

affected areas would need to confer with one another to plan a coherent
response to the attack and allocate resources to address immediate medi-
cal needs.  Data would need to be provided to public health teams charged

with identifying the pathogen and formulating and implementing a
response.  The ability to keep information from the public in order to

avoid panic could also be important, depending on the situation.The CDC found in a 1998 study that most local health departmentslacked the capabilities to adequately detect and respond to a report of
bioterrorism.  It found that most such departments lack basic information

and communications systems and cannot communicate reliably with
CDC, state health departments, or emergency response agencies in a cri-
sis.  Half lacked Internet access, 20 percent lacked suitable computer ca-

pacity, and 70 percent lacked training in the use of electronic informa-
tion technologies for conventional health purposes (CDC, 1998).To remedy this problem, CDC is developing a national Health AlertNetwork that will facilitate the collection of information from testing labo-
ratories, the sharing of information among public health officials, and
consultations among them regarding needed responses.27  A total of
$28 million was allocated to this task in FY99.28  The network will use
desktop personal computers and laptops connected to the Internet with
sufficient bandwidth to handle the transfer of laboratory reports, interac-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtive collaboration among public health officials, and multimedia distancetraining. It will make use of public key encryption for secure communica-
tions and authentication.  Because of its critical nature and the need for its

continuous availability, the network will be designed with sufficient
redundancy to provide backup operations in case of a link failure and
disaster recovery plans to allow rapid restoration of service in case of
other component failures.29  Videoconferencing capabilities are seen as
important, for they would allow public health officials to communicate
more effectively during a crisis than they could with either text or audio
alone.  Mechanisms may be needed to accommodate (possibly by diver-

sion) high volumes of traffic in an emergency.Technical Requirements for Public Health ApplicationsUse of the Internet for public health surveillance would require tech-nical advances in a number of areas.  Of primary interest are ubiquity and

security, but availability is also of concern.  Other technical parameters,

such as bandwidth and latency, are less important in most public health
applications, although the desire for videoconferencing in widespread
emergencies would increase the need for bandwidth and for low latencies
to support real-time, interactive video.  Solutions to these technical prob-
lems could greatly expand the use of the Internet in support of public
health.Bandwidth  +
In general, the information transmitted for the purposes of publichealth requires relatively low bandwidth.  Public health data rarely

involve images or other large data objects, although videoconferencing
among public health officials would require higher bandwidth from at
least some computers and locations.  Of course, there is also the potential
for many data objects to be transmitted through the network, raising the
bandwidth requirement by virtue of aggregated traffic levels rather than
large individual files.Latency  +
Few of the applications of the Internet in public health are sensitive tosmall delays (i.e., of seconds to minutes) in the transmission of data, so
that latency is less important.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET101Availability  +++
For public health, the availability of the network is of moderateimportance.  Although short downtimes can normally be tolerated, the

minute-to-minute monitoring of outbreaks of acute disease (especially in
the case of bioterrorism) would not tolerate extended periods of network
failure.  If the Internet were to be used for detecting bioterrorist attacks, it

would have to be reliable and resistant to hostile attacks (which could
accompany a bioterrorist attack).  Because data collection and aggrega-

tion take place continuously, loss of network might lead to loss of data
and failure to respond in a timely fashion.Security   +++
The security of data on the Internet is of paramount importance topublic health applications.  Data reported by testing laboratories contain

identifying information that is used by public health officials to map dis-
eases and conduct interviews with affected patients.  The public health

system depends on the publicÕs trust that sensitive health data are beingused for the benefit of the public only.  Such data must be protected both
in transit and while stored in computers in public health offices.  Sharing
public health information at the community, state, and federal levels

requires the development of advanced technologies for intelligently strip-
ping data of identifiers so that personal identities cannot be reconstructed
from the data.  Although certain local public health functions (treatment

and prevention of tuberculosis, for example) require knowledge of the
patient and his or her home situation, it becomes less necessary to have
identifying information at the state and federal levels, where general
trends are of interest.  Even with these technologies, it is critical to have

technologies for authenticating data and users.  Also important is the

ability to protect sensitive institutional data and sensitive information
relating to bioterrorist attacks.  Such protection would require policies to

determine who may access which data, as well as technologies to protect
the confidentiality of the information and its integrity.Ubiquity  ++
The success of the public health system requires that reporting andsurveillance networks have widespread connectivity that includes local
(e.g., community) health departments, testing laboratories, and the pro-
vider organizations that order the tests.  To serve the entire nation in a

cost-effective, standardized way, it is critical that the public health infor-
mation infrastructure extend to every community, state, and federal publicNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNEThealth agency.  Information gaps would be a  great burden on the nation,since they would require creation of a secondary, mostly redundant
mechanism for data collection and dissemination.  As in many other areas

of information technology, a few exceptions threaten to make the entire
enterprise too expensive.  At the same time, the benefits of a ubiquitous

network to community, state, and federal agencies would be substantial
and would probably improve public health greatly.  Public health organi-

zations often run on tight budgets, so the cost of access to networking
technologies must be reasonable. In any event, fewer distinct entities
would probably need to be connected for public health applications than
for consumer health, clinical care, or financial and administrative
applications.PROFESSIONAL EDUCATIONDespite advances in technology and the Internet, the education ofhealth professionals is practiced much the way it has been for decades.
Students of medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and allied health disciplines set
out on a course of graduate and postgraduate education, with much of
this training occurring in classrooms or lecture halls.  The emergence of

the Internet and Internet-based technologies has the potential to trans-
form health professional education at all levels.  Educational systems that

were once teacher-centered and geographically limited can now become
learner-centered and unconstrained by geography.  If the Internet is to

support this transformation, the demands on it will be substantial.Graduate EducationGraduate education is provided by 124 accredited four-year medicalschools in the United States in two phases:  basic science education and

clinical education.  Basic science courses, such as anatomy, physiology,

and pharmacology, are taught in a traditional lecture format supple-

mented by reading and hands-on laboratory sessions.  Significant chal-

lenges exist in providing basic science education, including the large
amount of information that needs to be transmitted, the fast pace of
change in the information base, and a lack of tools that would allow
students to index what they learn and to retrieve it later in their training.
In contrast, clinical education uses different methods.  Knowledge about

the diagnosis, treatment, and care of patients is transmitted mostly using
an apprenticeship model, whereby the student learns from taking care of
patients under the guidance of more senior clinicians.Significant efforts have been made over the last decade to make basicscience education less didactic and more problem-oriented.  These efforts
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET103have led to new teaching methods and materials, some of which usecomputers and the Internet, and new courseware.  The advent of online

textbooks, journals, and interactive courseware shared across institutions
could accelerate this trend so that students spend less time reading books
and attending lectures and more time researching topics online.  Another

trend in basic science education is the use of sophisticated simulations to
demonstrate anatomical or physiologic concepts.  Such simulations are

three-dimensional, color representations that can be rotated or otherwise
manipulated.   The bandwidth requirement for these applications is high,

straining local networks, especially local access connections to studentsÕhomes.  There are other significant barriers to the routine use of com-

puters and the Internet in basic science education. Not all students have
computers, and few campuses have network connections that allow them
to gain access to the Internet from classrooms, libraries, or other campus
facilities.  Networking bandwidth and servers within the institution can-

not always handle the dozens of students trying to access the same
resources at the same time.The Internet can also reshape clinical education to overcome somelimitations of the apprenticeship model.  First, supervising clinicians may

not themselves be up-to-date on certain issues and thus are not always the
best source of information on these issues.  Second, the location of clinical

education can limit the studentÕs exposure to certain types of patients anddiseases.  For instance, certain infectious disease such as tuberculosis and

AIDS are seen more frequently in urban hospitals.  Students who do their

clinical education in a rural setting might not be properly equipped to
deal with such patients if they later practice in an urban setting.  Struc-

tural changes in the health care industry may also serve to limit the diver-
sity of health problems students gain exposure to during their clinical
education.  The rise of HMOs and specialty clinics makes it far harder for

an intern to see a reasonable variety of patients and diseases just by work-
ing in a hospital.  One effect of the rise of HMOs has been to shift the locus

of care away from hospitals and toward local clinics and outpatient facili-
ties.  As a result, many of the patients interns see in a hospital setting have

already been diagnosed in one of these other facilities, which will tend to
limit the internsÕ experience.
Computer-based tools and the Internet can complement apprentice-ship-based clinical education.  Perhaps the best examples of such tools are

those that allow students and clinicians to search and retrieve the latest
medical literature over the Internet and use the evidence retrieved to
guide clinical decisions.  The process of incorporating knowledge from

the medical literature into patient care decisions is referred to as evidence-
based practice.  Today, students can use the Internet to search MEDLINE,

the bibliographic database containing millions of citations to the bio-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETmedical literature, to read abstracts of journal articles, andÑin somecasesÑto download electronic versions of the original journal article.Similarly, new Internet-based systems are emerging that allow search and
retrieval of textbooks, drug information, medical news, and patient edu-
cation material.  The impact of this trend on local networks and the

Internet could be substantial.  Assuming that some 70,000 medical stu-

dents, 100,000 medical residents, and 150,000 students in allied health
sciences (e.g., nursing, dentistry, pharmacy, public health) in the United
States will regularly be accessing textbooks, journals, and other educa-
tional material from centralized repositories on the Internet, traffic could
increase substantially not only on the Internet but on the LANs of medical
education institutions.30  Although the item bandwidth required to trans-
mit a single data element might be low (e.g., 100 kB for an HTML journal
article with graphics), the total bandwidth requirements could be much
larger owing to the large number of users and the high frequency of
usage.  This may call for a better understanding of network management

and of the trade-offs between increased network capacity and the local
caching of data or its replication on other sites to reduce bandwidth needs.The trend to evidence-based practice will probably continue.  Clinical
students will increasingly be expected to support their patient care plans
with evidence from the medical literature.  To do this, they will become

even heavier users of online literature retrieval systems such as MEDLINE
and electronic journals.  Although bandwidth will become an even larger

network issue because more users than ever will be using these resources
more frequently, the bandwidth needs will not generally be as great as the
bandwidth needs to support real-time video streams for other applications.Another trend in clinical education will be to community-based edu-cation.  Students who trained mainly in academic hospitals will spend

more time training in community hospitals and rural clinics.  This trend

could be accelerated by Internet links between remote areas and academic
medical centers.  Using such links, students can discuss cases with pre-

ceptors (using audio- and videoconferencing), share clinical experiences
with fellow students, and download educational material from university
and other Web sites.  Internet access in all small community and rural

health settings would be important for the success of such communication.The Internet could also allow clinical students to take greater advan-tage of simulations to learn about diseases and situations they would not
otherwise encounter during their training years.  These simulations could

take the form of interactive, multimedia modules retrieved over the
Internet at the time of need.  Modules could include high-resolution

graphics and images, streaming audio and video, and text.  Similar multi-

media content would be required for simulations that test student knowl-
edge for purposes such as allowing advancement through the schoolNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET105TABLE 2.5  Effect of Latency on Interactive Simulations
Round-tripLatency (msec)Effect
25User cannot detect a problem.
50User detects a problem but cannot identify it as latency.
100User recognizes a latency problem and can compensate for it.

200User recognizes a latency problem but cannot compensate for it.
SOURCE:  Colonel Richard Satava, Yale University, presentation to the committee on

March1, 1999, Washington, D.C.
curriculum and granting a license to practice.  Such simulations will
require that the Internet and local networks have adequate bandwidth
and, for interactive simulations, low latency.  Already researchers are

working on systems to allow the simulation of surgical techniques.  These

simulations combine three-dimensional imagery with haptic feedback that
recreates the touch and feel of live surgery.  Such systems require

extremely low latency, on the order of a few hundred milliseconds per
round-trip, to prevent users from perceiving an unnatural lag between
the time they take an action and sense a response (Table 2.5).  They also

require the elimination of mismatches between different data sources:
visual, audio, and haptic information need to be properly synchronized
for a user to properly experience a virtual surgical system.Continuing EducationOnce clinicians are in practice, they are essentially on their own tokeep their knowledge and skills up-to-date.  They do so informally by

reading journals and textbooks, by interacting with consultants, and by
talking with peers.  A formal process, designed to maintain and enhance

clinician knowledge and skills, also exists and is referred to as continuing
education (CE). CE credits are not a national requirement but are required
by some states and subspecialty boards for licensure and board certifica-
tion.  For instance, 28 states require physicians to meet minimum CE

requirements for licensure, and 9 specialties require it for board certifica-
tion (AMA, 1996).  The CE requirements vary, but they usually call for

completing 150 hours of courses over a three-year period. Three of the
eleven states with the largest concentration of physicians have no CE
requirements (New York, New Jersey, and Illinois).Traditional CE consists of a time-based system of credits that areawarded for attending conferences, workshops, or lectures.  Typical CE
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETcourses are teacher-initiated, use passive educational models such as lec-ture, and are often sponsored by the health care industry.  Systematic

reviews of CE interventions have shown that traditional CEÑshortcourses, conferences, and seminarsÑare largely ineffective in improvingknowledge or health care outcomes (Davis et al., 1995).  Two newer

approaches, academic detailing (targeted visits by physician educators
such as pharmacists) and computerized reminders, have, on the other
hand, been found to have a positive effect on knowledge and outcomes.
The general success of interventions such as computerized reminders sug-
gests that knowledge delivered in the context of daily patient care and for
the purpose of assisting in problem solving is where CE should focus in
the future.  If this suggestion is acted on, the Internet and systems that

integrate patient data with general medical knowledge will probably play
a central role in transforming postgraduate education.The main trend in postgraduate education will be continuous (asopposed to continuing) education.  Instead of being concentrated in a

weekÕs worth of off-site conferences, education will be provided usingmultiple modalities available at different times during daily practice.
Although traditional CE classrooms and conferences will still exist, virtual
conferences will become more common.  Using the Internet, clinicians

will be able to choose from libraries of video and audio lectures, inter-
active courseware, and live discussions among colleagues from around
the world.  For the educational tools that are not live, clinicians will have
great flexibility where and when they use them.  CE credits, once awarded

for sitting in lectures, will be awarded based on time spent and informa-
tion learned using these online resources.  To make virtual conferences a

reality for all practicing clinicians, the clinicians will need high-speed
Internet access from their health care sites and from their homes.In addition to learning in virtual conferences, clinicians will do muchof their learning of new diagnostic and therapeutic measures in the con-
text of daily patient care.  This new learning modality will be fueled by

two converging trends:  (1) the emergence of patient records in electronic
form and (2) the availability of medical literature over networks.  In this

new modality, behind every abnormal test result, unfamiliar diagnosis, or
new drug in the electronic medical record will be a link to the best avail-
able knowledge on that topic.  Instead of having to initiate a search for

information when a question arises, the answer will be anticipated and a
link to the answer created within the patient record.  As they use this up-
to-date knowledge at the point of need, clinicians will also be able to
fulfill CE requirements, because the time they spend using the resources
and the effect the knowledge has on the patient care process will be logged
and reported automatically.31  Of course, such capabilities also raise issues
of privacy.  Will care providers be able to peruse outside information
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET107sources and pursue learning opportunities without being monitored?  Will
the use of such resources be viewed positively (e.g., the provider is trying
to expand his or her knowledge) or negatively (e.g., the provider does not
understand some new procedure or diagnostic method)?  Such issues will

need to be addressed in order to ensure acceptance of these technologies
(see Chapter 3 for a discussion of technologies to protect online anonym-
ity).  In this vision of integrated patient data and knowledge sources,

computer networks will play a vital role.  Because of the time-critical

nature of the knowledge delivery during the patient care process, reliabil-
ity of the network and information servers will be vital.  Because queries

posted to knowledge sources will be based on patient characteristics,
security of the network will also be important.Technical Requirements for Health Professional EducationBandwidth  +++
The bandwidth requirements for health professional education aremoderately high.  Whether large numbers of people frequently use low-

bandwidth applications, such as literature searching, or infrequently use
high-bandwidth applications, such as teleconferencing or simulations,
bandwidth will be important and sometimes a limiting factor.  The devel-

opment of virtual classrooms and interactive surgical simulations could
drive bandwidth requirements even higher.Latency  +++
In general, applications to support health professional education donot require instantaneous delivery, and so the latency requirements of the
Internet are not great.  However, interactive simulations (such as those for

teaching surgical techniques) and conferences would suffer from long
latencies.Availability  ++
In general, the availability of the network for health professional edu-cation is of moderate importance.  Many educational activities are not as

time-critical as patient care activities and can tolerate low-level data losses
or occasional unavailability.  However, as the Internet becomes more and

more of a tool for education, as students and instructors come to rely on it
more as a communication medium, and as education becomes more inte-
grated with patient care activities, the need for availability will increase.
As computer-generated reminders and links to external resources becomeNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETmore closely integrated into medical records, availability will becomemore important.Security   +
For the most part, health professional education is based on publicdomain information, so the security requirements for the network are not
great.  However, with the interplay between patient data and medical

knowledge required to support new modes of education, security will
become critical.  Tools for protecting anonymity may also become impor-

tant to the extent that clinicians want to be able to consult online resources
anonymously.Ubiquity  +++
For health professional education, the ubiquity of the network is ofgreat importance. Improvements in clinician knowledge and clinical out-
comes will partially depend on the extensive deployment of new learning
techniques and tools.  Without access to the Internet from potential sites

of care delivery and from their homes, clinicians practicing in poor or
remote areas will not be able to benefit from these new capabilities.  As a

larger number of medical students do internships in remote locations, the
need for access will also increase.BIOMEDICAL RESEARCHBiomedical research attempts to understand the mechanisms under-lying human health and disease.  It ranges from basic investigations of the

molecular details of biological systems to the study of clinical implica-
tions of new scientific findings.  In basic biology, the work tends to focus

on (1) the biological sequencing of DNA and proteins, (2) the three-
dimensional structures of anatomical parts and biochemical molecules,
and (3) the determination of metabolic pathways.  Progress in biomedical

research has recently been fueled by an explosion of biological data avail-
able for analysis, as evidenced by the growth in the number of DNA bases
(chemical units) that have been sequenced, from next to none in 1982 to in
excess of 3 billion in 1999.  The Internet has been widely accepted within

the biomedical community and greatly facilitates the research enterprise
by helping integrate disparate databases for improved analysis, allowing
linked simulations, and enabling remote control of biomedical research
apparatus.  Each of these applications poses a range of technological

challenges.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET109Biomedical DatabasesThe most important reason for the adoption of Internet technologieswithin the biomedical community has been the development of publicly
available databases containing biological information.  Many major bio-

logical databases are available at no charge on the Web and offer rapid
access and query capability (Table 2.6), and research laboratories are
beginning to release primary data onto their Web sites so colleagues can
use them for reanalysis or testing new hypotheses.  Some databases are

extremely popular:  each day some 600,000 searches are run from 120,000
different addresses against PubMed, a Web-based service hosted by the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) with abstracts and
some full articles from MEDLINE plus additional journals in the life sci-
ences.  These figures grew at an annual rate of 50 percent over the last 3

years.32Such high rates of use create a number of problems for the host sites.The network bandwidth required for any individual database request
may be small (a few kilobytes of data per query), but the aggregate effect
of this traffic on bandwidth going into the database server can be signifi-
cant, overwhelming capacity.  Because databases such as MEDLINE and

GENBANK are intended to serve a multitude of users in a timely fashion,
they are designed for individuals to use in an episodic manner; they
cannot routinely allow companies or institutions to perform many queries
in a short period of time, such as to run automated queries of a program
that is searching systematically through the literature as part of some
data-mining application.  Commercial online databases have similar prob-

lems (Box 2.5).  For this reason, many users prefer to obtain a local copy of

the databases so that they can subject them to high levels of use withoutTABLE 2.6  Examples of Online Databases of Interest to the Biomedical
Research CommunityDatabaseContent
MEDLINEIndex of  the entire biomedical serial literature.  Contains
basic reference information since 1966 and limited full-text
reference information from the National Library ofMedicine.  Contains more than 9,000,000 references from a
list of 3,900 periodicals.GENBANKDatabase of DNA sequences.
SWISS-PROT and PIRDatabase of protein sequences.
Protein Data BaseThree-dimensional macromolecular structures.

OMIMInformation about human genetic diseases.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 2.5Bandwidth Concerns of a Commercial Content ProviderOvid Technologies, Inc., is an aggregator of information on science, technology,and medicine.  The company provides centralized access to resources such as
bibliographic databases and full text journals via individual CD-ROMs, servers
located on local area networks, and the Internet.  The entire Ovid database con-
tains about 200 gigabytes (GB) of text and images, about 5 to 10 GB of which isupdated each month.  On average, each subscriber (there might be 100 to 250

individual users) downloads 300 MB of data per month, which translates to 70 kBof data per individual per day.  Some large academic institutions have 100 concur-
rent users who download 30 GB of data per month.  Usage rates triple every year.
Ovid Online is based in Utah and is connected to the public Internet via threeT1 lines.  This bandwidth is sufficient for most North American users, but some 13
large universities, consortia, and corporations have established dedicated connec-
tions to the database (typically via frame relay connectionsÑsee Chapter 3) withspeeds of 56 to 256 kilobits per second (kbps).  These dedicated connections also
allow pharmaceutical companies to prevent competitors from finding out what infor-
mation they are seeking.  Other users have established hybrid connections in
which certain databases (e.g., MEDLINE) are loaded onto a local server andupdated weekly, but other large databases (e.g., those containing full text journals)
are accessed via the Internet or a dedicated line.Because of inadequacies in Internet bandwidth to locations overseas, the com-pany has established additional servers in the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan,Hong Kong, and Australia onto which Ovid products have been loaded via CD-ROM.  The company recently contracted with a service provider that will provide

guaranteed bandwidth and quality of service for transoceanic downloading ofupdates.  Updating the entire database demands kilobytes per second of band-
width, but it is difficult and expensive to update six to eight regions of the world
simultaneously.  Ovid would like more bandwidth and improved quality of service
in order to conduct network-based updates.  Alternatively, it could redesign its
system to send just the 5 to 10 GB of changed information.  The trade-off is a

matter of cost as much as of technical capability.SOURCE:  Based on a presentation by William Detmer, vice president, Ovid Technolo-gies, Inc., to the committee on March 2, 1999, Washington, D.C.monopolizing public resources.33  Doing so also allows companies to usethe databases without fear that their searches will be watched by competi-
tors.  Knowing the kinds of information that companies are searching for
can yield clues about the projects they are working on.  Local replication

would be unnecessary if trusted security services were available across
the Internet that could guarantee that queries and results from a Web site
remained anonymous and confidential or if the servers could supportNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET111individual use as well as heavy automatic use by computer programsemploying data-mining techniques.While increasing the bandwidth into biomedical research databases isone way of alleviating bottlenecks, the rate-limiting factor in some systems
is the computational server, not the communications bandwidth.  The

NCBI, for example, uses a T3 line for connectivity to the Internet, which
provides it with 45 Mbps of bandwidth.  As of mid-1999, NCBI was utiliz-

ing only about one-third of that capacity.34  The computational server has
become the bottleneck, because NCBI is receiving more requests to com-
pare large data sets with one another and with data sets provided by
users.  The volume of requests for large data set comparisons is still small,

but NCBI has developed some governors to limit requests from particular
sites so that other users can access the system.Network limitations also pose difficulties for users of biomedical data-bases.  Some algorithms that act upon databases require that every single

element of the database be compared with every other element.  Thus, if

there are 1,000,000 entries in the database, then 1,000,000,000,000 possible
comparisons must be computed, requiring very fast computation if solu-
tions are to be found in reasonable amounts of time.  In many cases,

investigators transfer their data sets to remote supercomputing sites (such
as the sites sponsored by the National Science Foundation in San Diego
and Illinois) so that the processing will not be slowed by data transfer
rates over the Internet.  Such remote processing has limitations, especially

in providing real-time feedback to the researchers.A data source commonly requiring extensive computational analysisis the output of high-resolution imaging devices.  High-resolution images

containing millions of elements cannot be transferred rapidly enough to
allow researchers to manipulate them in real time.  Thus, accurate visual-

ization requires that the image be rendered by a local computer with
sufficient computational capabilities or by the efficient transfer of infor-
mation from an image server to a display device on the Internet.  Further-

more, the size of the databases makes transfers slow, and replicating them
makes it hard to keep them current during a computation.This process can also be facilitated by improved networking capabili-ties.  Replication of databases would not be necessary if researchers had

higher bandwidth networks that could transfer a terabyte (TB, or 1012bytes) of data in a few minutes.  But doing so requires networking capa-

bilities of tens of gigabits per second (downloading a 1 TB database in 10
minutes demands a network capable of 13 Gbps).  Short of such band-

width, techniques for rapid streaming of data would allow simulations to
ÒpretendÓ that the data is already local, even though it is being streamed
from a remote database.  This capability is difficult to achieve routinely
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtoday.  Although it is possible, it is not generally implemented, and local
replication could be easier.Linked SimulationsSome biomedical investigations require multiple simulations to berun simultaneously.  For example, attempts to understand the physiology

of vision might require simulations of both macroscopic and microscopic
behaviors, including the quantum mechanics of photoreceptors, the molecu-
lar dynamics of macromolecules that respond to light, the populationdynamics at the cell membrane as it signals the detection of photons, and
the neural network of cells that convey these signals to the brain.  These

models are all highly interactive and need to share data with one another.
The output of one model must be fed into another model.  The amount of

data transferred between simulations may be large or small, but the effects
they induce on subsequent levels of simulation can be substantial.  Each

of these simulations may itself require significant computation.Technologies that would facilitate distributed simulations includethose for creating uniform techniques for accessing disparate data sources
(static, preexisting data, as well as dynamically created data) on the
Internet.  Many important biomedical questions can be answered only by

querying  multiple databases, extracting subsets of data, and combining

them to determine the final answer.  A major software innovation that

promises to make biomedical researchers more effective and efficient will
be the development of intelligent software agents that assist the investiga-
tor in understanding what data are available, what they mean, and how
to use them to test new hypotheses.  As biomedical researchers perform

experiments, such technologies could transfer data directly into a data-
base using the Internet, making them available to other collaborating
researchers or computational processes simultaneously.  Researchers are

creating software to monitor the progress of long, complicated experi-
ments and to alert investigators to unanticipated irregularities in the data
or the progress of data collection.  As technologies are developed for

representing the set of interests  for a biomedical researcher (an 
ÒinterestprofileÓ), intelligent agents could scour the Internet for data of interestand relevance to the researcher, based on this profile.  These agents could

scan newly published biomedical literature, the publicly accessible Web
sites of other scientists, and other Internet information resources, bring-
ing the most relevant sources to the attention of the researcher or abstract-
ing and summarizing them in a manner that is most relevant.  Some early

examples of this technology have long been available through various
journals and online services that notify users when items that match their
personal profiles (based on keywords) are published.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET113The existence of databases on the Internet enables automated (orsemiautomated) data mining to extract new principles from data.  Data-

mining techniques often use statistical associations between variables to
postulate relationships that have not been appreciated previously and
then go to the available databases seeking evidence to support or refute
the association.  For such software agents to be effective and reliable, the

databases need to be accessible continuously.  Even though each indi-

vidual software agent might not require very high bandwidth, a network
experiencing multiple agents operating for millions of individuals will
have a large aggregate requirement for bandwidth.Remote Control of Experimental ApparatusThe Internet provides a means for remotely controlling some of theexpensive experimental equipment used in biomedical research, including
electron microscopes, DNA sequencing facilities, gene chips for analyz-
ing the expression of nucleic acid or protein sequences, nuclear magnetic
resonance spectrometers, and X-ray crystallographic radiation sources.35In such systems, investigators send samples of interest to device opera-
tors, who load the samples and prepare the equipment.  The investigators

can then run their experiments remotely, specifying the desired magnifi-
cation, controlling the focus and field of view, and retrieving images as
desired.  Such systems have proven especially effective in instances

(pathology, for example) where the desired information could not be
gathered from a set of still images but called for moving the sample and
changing the magnification of the microscope (Wolf et al., 1998).The ability to remotely control experimental equipment offers severalbenefits.  First, it could help make unique or expensive equipment avail-

able to a larger number of researchers.  Just as networking has opened up

the nationÕs supercomputer resources to the broader research commu-nity, so it could open up specialized facilities to the biomedical research
community, thereby improving utilization rates.  Second, remote access

could reduce travel costs associated with experiments.  Because sophisti-

cated equipment is scarce, researchers often travel from their home insti-
tutions to remote locations to use it, which consumes both time and
money.  Moreover, the development of appropriate methods for speci-

men preparation and analysis is often an iterative process that is difficult
to complete in a single visit to the laboratory.  Remote access to instru-

ments and computation could allow researchers more control over speci-
men preparation, data collection, and image processing without subjecting
them to the time limits of a visit.  Long-term studies that require multiple

sessions could also be made more practical.  Third, the networking of

experimental apparatus could allow research results to be more easilyNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETshared among collaborating researchers or displayed to a classroom ofstudents for educational purposes.  Most implementations of remotely

controlled equipment to date send imagery back to the researcher via a
Web site.  Any researcher with a password can view the results, and some

systems are being developed to allow collaborators to hand off control of
the equipment during the course of an experiment.Simple telemicroscopy systems create images that can be transmittedacross the Internet with little difficulty.  One system developed in Germany
generated full-screen images measuring 1,024  768 pixels with 8bits of
gray scale, for a total file size of 786 kB.  These images could be transferred

uncompressed over a 28.8 kbps modem in less than 4 minutes.  Using

standard JPEG compression, this same image could be transferred in 20
seconds.  In experiments with the system, overall response times were

dominated by image compression times rather than by delays across the
Internet.  Indeed, the researchers in Germany were able to reduce response

times to 2.5 to 4 seconds across a local area network; the times did not
differ significantly when the microscope was operated through a direct
Internet connection from other sites in Europe (Wolf et al., 1998).Nevertheless, for higher resolution images the Internet can introducesignificant lag times, especially when multiple images must be retrieved.
For example, the National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research
(NCMIR) at the University of California at San Diego houses a state-of-
the-art 400 kilo-electron-volt (keV), intermediate-high-voltage electron
microscope (IVEM) that can be used to create three-dimensional images
from multiple two-dimensional images via a technique known as electron
tomography.36  The slices required for three-dimensional reconstruction
are 1,024  1,024 pixels, with 16 bits of precision per pixel, for an image
size of 2 MB.  A typical data set consists of either 61 or 121 images,

depending on experimental requirements (a total of 121 or 242 MB).  Dur-

ing peak periods, three to four such tomographic data sets might be
acquired in a single day, generating up to about 1 GB of raw data.  The

intermediate image-processing tasks can easily quadruple that storage
requirement and the final tomographic volumes can alone easily exceed
400 MB.  A new, high-resolution camera with an image dimension of

2,560  1,960 14-bit pixels has boosted data storage requirements by a
factor of nearly five.37The Collaboratory for Microscopic Digital Anatomy (CMDA) is build-ing an infrastructure for allowing researchers to use NCMIRÕs IVEM andother imaging instruments from a remote site for the purposes of investi-
gating their biological specimens and analyzing the three-dimensional
structure using tomography.38  Early experiments with remote operationof the NCMIR found that the Internet was too slow to allow visual guid-
ance of the microscope.  As a result, researchers were forced to rely on a
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET115digital survey of the specimenÑconsisting of a large mosaic of low-magnification imagesÑto guide the process.  Features on this survey cali-
brate the spatial coordinates for remote image acquisition.  Researchers

examine the survey with specialized software and issue requests to the
microscope to image certain areas, create image mosaics, or collect a series
of tilted images for tomographic reconstruction.Improvements in information infrastructure and the anticipated avail-
ability of high-speed networks led researchers involved in CMDA to

develop a video-based controller for the IVEM that can run on any Java-
enabled Web browser.  The video controller displays optical and stage

parameters for the microscope, the command being executed, and a live
video image of the specimen being examined to allow more natural, inter-
active control.  Researchers can adjust the focus, brightness, stage posi-

tion, and magnification of the microscope, and they can acquire and view
high-resolution images of the specimen.  Control can be traded among

multiple researchers participating in a session, all of whom can view the
images.  Users can individually set the size of images transmitted to them

and the amount of image compression in order to match the speed of their
Internet connections to the frame rate desired. During sessions, video
streams are generated for 1 to 4 hours.In experiments conducted to date, simple commands to the micro-scope were processed in less than 1 second; automated commands for
focus and exposure setting were performed in approximately 30 seconds.
For users with conventional network connections, video streams were
compressed using JPEG algorithms to create grayscale images varying in
size from 3 to 12 kB per frame.  With these connections, the system per-

formed at a maximum rate of 8 frames per second (96 kB/sec), but aver-
age performance was more often in the 3 to 5 frames per second range.
Higher bandwidth connections can allow the transmission of full-screen
digital imagery to researchers.  Such images require approximately 36.5

Mbps of bandwidth.39  In April 1999, researchers were able to use a com-bination of the vBNS and other networks to allow remote operation of the
microscope from Osaka, Japan.  High-resolution images were acquired

and transmitted in as little as 45 seconds but currently require 36.5 Mbps
(before intraframe compression).The visually guided system has led to a dramatic improvement inremote use of the microscope.  Researchers are now able to scan their

specimen, find areas of interest, and capture high-resolution images with
ease and great precision.  The current network infrastructure is adequate

for low-resolution, low-frame-rate video, which leads to increased control
of the microscope.  At times, frame rates are still too slow or latencies

fluctuate too much (i.e., there is too much jitter) to provide the level of
interactivity required for operations such as manual focusing from a dis-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtance.  Higher speed networks and new transport protocols are needed
for high-resolution video at fullÑand constantÑframe rates.  NCMIR is
on the vBNS and expects that a growing number of its collaborators will
also join the network or other high-speed networks being developed
under the Next Generation Internet or Internet 2 initiatives (see Chapter 1).
With the higher transmission rates available on these networks, visually
guided control may become more feasible.  Use of MPEG compression

may also allow higher frame rates to be transmitted over more conven-
tional network connections.Security, availability, and ubiquity of access are of less concern thanbandwidth in the remote control of experimental apparatus but are still
important.  Security is important for ensuring the integrity of data

returned to the investigator and, depending on the nature of the experi-
ments, for maintaining the confidentiality of the data once collected.

Reliability is of interest to the extent that researchers want to ensure that
the network is available at the time they have been assigned for their
experiment.  Ubiquity of access is of less concern because experimental

apparatus will be used by a small number of highly specialized researchers,
most of whom have Internet access through their institutions.  However,

the system would be better for educational purposes if smaller educa-
tional institutions could download images or observe ongoing experi-
ments remotely.Publication on the InternetBiomedical research depends on first creating a hypothesis about theworld, then designing and running an experiment to test this hypothesis,
and finally collecting and analyzing data to determine if the hypothesis is
supported or refuted.  Because hard-copy publication is so expensive, the

scientific community has compromised by publishing papers that present
the primary data in summary visual form and that describe the methods
used to collect the data, as guarantees that the reported results are accu-
rately reported.  With the growth of the Internet, it now becomes possible

to consider publishing all scientific data (in its raw form or after some
processing) on the Internet for sharing and analysis by other scientists.
This forms the basis of the E-Biomed proposal advanced by Harold
Varmus, former director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), for the
NIH to house copies of publications and associated primary data sets for
the life sciences (Varmus et al., 1999).  The physics community has per-

mitted the submission of primary data sets for many years, and certain
types of biological data are being released routinely at the time of manu-
script publication (for example, DNA sequencing data (GENBANK) and
macromolecular structure data (PDB)).  The advent of new experimental
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET117technologies (e.g., gene expression  arrays, or 
ÒDNA chips,Ó which record
the level of expression of a gene product within a cell at a particular
moment in time) that produce massive amounts of data makes it attrac-
tive to consider large-scale Internet publication of these data sets.These data sets could be even more useful to the scientific communityif they were linked with other data sources to create a grid of related
biological information.  By having otherwise disconnected data types

linked together, computer programs could propose scientific hypotheses
based on the data in one set of databases and then test them based on the
data in another set of databases.  The NCBI has already created a reposi-

tory of roughly 10 databases that link biographic information, data on
genetic sequences and structure, and data on human diseases.  Other

technologies are being developed for the similar linking of data (e.g., SRS,
BioKleisli, and KEGG).40The support of large-scale deposition, storage, and retrieval of pri-mary biomedical data on the Internet calls mainly for availability and
security, with moderate emphasis on bandwidth.  It is critical that the

data be reported accurately on networked resources and that the creators
of the data be identified and authenticated; it is also critical that all data be
captured and available, in order to avoid losses of valuable scientific data.
Latency and ubiquity are less important, since the retrieval of these data is
often asynchronous with their collection and is done by specialized
researchers.The success of online publishing of biomedical research findings (bothprimary data and the conclusions drawn from them), and the much larger
audience that such publications may draw, could strain the existing model
for scientific peer review.  Peer review is essential to ensuring the validity

of information published by the scientific community, but too many docu-
ments are released for public consumption for them all to be reviewed.
Methods will be needed to track which documents have been read,
reviewed, and revised by authors in response to critiques and which have
not.  Many social issues remain to be resolved (e.g., control of publication

and dissemination, interaction between peer groups and publishers, and
the very definition of peer groups), but technologies are also needed to
support the outcome of the social negotiations.  For example, methods are

needed for (1) providing an enduring stamp of approval for documents
on the network so that those that have been reviewed can be identified
securely, (2) allowing peer groups to be defined and maintained,
(3)searching the Internet to retrieve documents of interest, and (4) validat-

ing the authenticity of online documents by, for example, digital water-
marking.  In this context, it is important to note that the idea of peers can
be generalized beyond the current  idea that they are a group of scientific

investigators from a particular field.  Already, other groups have emerged
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETthat may wish to provide a stamp of approval, including disease-specificactivist groups, consumer groups, political groups, and others.  There is

no reason technologies cannot be used by all these groups to label and
distinguish documents of interest to their members, using their own
criteria.Collaboration Among ResearchersThe Internet could also prove to be a useful medium for enhancingcollaboration among biomedical researchers in different locations.  The

remote control of experimental apparatus is one example of this capabil-
ity, but others are also possible.  For example, envision the following

scenario:Biomedical researchers in three distant cities are interested inthe structure and biological function of a new transporter protein
whose structure has just been reported in a journal as a result of
the Human Genome Project.  They believe this newly discovered
transporter is expressed in abnormal amounts in a debilitating
disease that affects many older individuals within the popula-
tion.  The researchers individually have studied various aspects

of the biochemistry associated with this particular disease but
think their work could be advanced considerably if they could
collaborate with one another. Use of the Internet and specialized
network-aware molecular modeling software could enable them
to carry on their collaborative research from afar.  They could

conduct a virtual meeting from their respective offices using the
Internet and specialized conferencing and interactive modeling
software.  Each scientist could display and interactively manipu-

late three-dimensional molecular models on his or her local work-
station as well as the remote workstations of the other collabora-
tors.  By using the workstation mouse, one collaborator could,

for example, point out the putative binding site on the protein
while another suggests a small molecule that he or she thinks
might be good at inhibiting the function of this protein.  Together,

the scientists function as a group and can accomplish much in a
short time.Such scientific collaborations are common and convenient when theytake place within an institution, but when the participants are far apart,
schedules must be coordinated and travel arranged to a single location.
With enhanced Internet services and software, such collaborations couldNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET119be performed at a distance as well.  If the scenario described above is
extended to a larger group, where one of the participants is an instructor
and the others are students, the ability of the students to question the
instructor interactively (e.g., to use the mouse to point to a portion of the
protein in the above example and ask why this portion of the protein
doesnÕt contribute to binding) adds an extremely important quality tothe educational experience:  the ability to enter into dialog with the

instructor.These kinds of applications would require that the Internet providesufficient bandwidth to enable real-time multimedia communication
among participants.  To the extent that participants need to engage in

real-time manipulation of biological images, the network would also need
to support low latencies.  Both distant scientific collaborations and inter-

active distance learning could benefit substantially from multicast proto-
cols that allow sending network packets to multiple destinations simulta-
neously and efficiently.  In fact, any time multiple recipients are involved,

multicast protocols may substantially reduce the impact computer appli-
cations have on the network.Another form of remote collaboration is virtual conferences.  A criti-
cal element of scientific progress is the ability of scientists to gather at
conferences to share new ideas, the latest results, and the latest theories.
It is widely recognized that in addition to the formal proceedings at such
conferences, the conversations that take place in side rooms are often just
as critical for ensuring scientific progress.  Thus, there would be some

advantage in allowing remote participants not only to attend formal
presentations but also to make contacts with their colleagues and have
private conversations.  Whether the cost of enhancing the Internet to pro-

vide such capabilities would exceed the benefit is not yet clear.  Building

in an infrastructure for ubiquitous real-time videoconferencing would be
very expensive.  Today, a researcher can attend a remote conference using

technologies like RealVideo that produce quite good sound and passable
video over the Internet, and when this is coupled with a shared
whiteboard or shared applications, there is a good approximation to being
thereÑexcept for the real-time interaction.  Latencies across such net-
works are typically a few seconds, but that should not keep remote par-
ticipants from listening to the speaker and viewing their slides.  Some

systems allow questions to be sent by e-mail or an electronic whiteboard,
also with some time delay.Biomedical research is an international enterprise, and language isstill a barrier to communication.  Although English is recognized as the

dominant language for scientific communication, there are still some
applications (especially for informal collaboration) where support for
multilingual interactions would accelerate progress.  Indeed, language
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETtranslation capabilities could be of great help in the consumer health andclinical care arenas. One of the main reasons for the poor access to health
care in this country as it becomes increasingly diverse is the number of
non-English-speaking persons encountering an English-only-speaking
health care system.Clinical ResearchClinical research involves both clinical trials to establish the efficacyof a drug or a device and the subsequent monitoring of the effectiveness
of a product in general (rather than in controlled circumstances) after it
has entered into widespread usage.41  Additional elements of operations
management and organizational policy also have heavily clinical research
overtones.  The Internet can contribute to a number of these activities, as

manifest in clinical trials. As computer-based health records become more
widely available, health services researchers will likely use them to explore
dimensions such as effectiveness and patient satisfaction via the Internet.
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, as well as the NIH (and
NLM), is likely to become more interested in the potential of the Internet
to achieve better quality outcomes and cost management.Clinical trials are an essential activity in the creation and testing ofnew drugs and devices for medical diagnosis and therapy.  The U.S. Food

and Drug Administration requires careful and statistically valid testing
by human volunteers before it gives marketing approval.  With the map-

ping of the human genome and the rise of pharmacogenetics, clinical
research and clinical trials could become even more prevalent.  Knowl-

edge of the availability of clinical trial opportunities, and guidance to
conduct them in a timely and accurate fashion, present a significant
knowledge distribution and management challenge for which the Internet
is a useful infrastructure.  Clinical research in human health and disease,

such as that supported by the NIH via federal grants and contracts, has
similar information management requirements.  The Internet provides

the capability to enroll patients, validate eligibility, collect data, and dis-
seminate results to and from widely distributed urban and rural sites.
Internet-based clinical trials may be extremely important to progress on a
number of rare diseases that require large populations of patients in order
to make clinical research feasible.In the area of clinical research and clinical trials of drugs and devices,a growing number of companies and academic centers are using the
Internet to recruit volunteer participants.  Pursuant to the FDA Modern-

ization Act of 1997, a congressionally mandated national clearinghouse
and directory of clinical research studies for serious diseases is being
developed as an Internet-accessible resource by the NLM in collaborationNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET121with other federal health and science organizations.  There is interesting
work at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) on cancer trials using net-
worked information facilities and proposals to mount collaborative
national (and international) databases for other clinical trials that might
reduce cost or increase effectiveness.  Commercial companies are building

and making available similar Òone-stop-shoppingÓ information resources
for patients interested in participating in clinical studies.  Since clinical

research requires detailed compliance with complex diagnostic and treat-
ment schedules (called clinical protocols), there are both commercial and
academic efforts under way to develop detailed, participant-specific pro-
tocol guidelines that can be transmitted from a central data management
unit via the Internet to participating clinical investigators.  Encounter-

specific guidance and secure data capture via wide-area computer net-
works promise to improve the speed with which clinical trials can be
completed, as well as to reduce errors of omission and commission in the
conduct of clinical research.  Current estimates indicate that each day of

delay in introducing a new drug to the marketplace costs pharmaceutical
companies $1 million in lost revenues (CyberAtlas, 1999).Security is an extremely important technological consideration inclinical trials. In addition to concerns about the privacy of patients
involved in the trials, there will probably be significant commercial inter-
est in some of the resulting data sets, making security and control of the
raw data a serious consideration.  Tools will need to be in place to authen-

ticate the source of information, protect the confidentiality of information
collected, and protect its integrity.  Ubiquity of access is important to the

extent that it will allow researchers to draw upon larger population bases
for their studies.  Depending on the protocol for the trials, access at a

physicianÕs office or public kiosk may or may not suffice, and in somesituations, access may be needed from the home.Technical Requirements for Biomedical ResearchBandwidth  ++++
The bandwidth requirements for many biomedical research applica-tions are high.  Teleconferencing and high-resolution, real-time transfer

of images (during remote instrument manipulations, for example) have
very high requirements for bandwidth.  There is also a trend in the

research community toward increasing dependence on the Internet for
communicating data and scientific models.  It is impossible to predict the
long-term needs of biomedical research, but it is likely that the needs for
bandwidth will increase as researchers invent new methodologies for the
large-scale collection of data about entire genomes, organisms, and com-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETmunities of organisms.  These data may be collected at points all over the
world at very high rates.  Aggregated traffic back to individual research

centers could be very high.Latency  +++
In general, biomedical research is not a time-critical enterprise.  There
are exceptions, of course, such as the use of the Internet to drive biomedi-
cal research instruments (as, for instance, in remote telemicroscopy),
where feedback is critical for positioning samples or for adjusting the
settings of the instruments.  Large distributed simulations also require

low latency to improve the speed of their calculations.Availability  ++
For biomedical research, the availability of the network is of moderateimportance.  Research efforts are not often time-critical and can tolerate

low-level losses of data or network unavailability.  Obviously, long

stretches of such poor performance would be unacceptable, but the needs
for availability are not as great in this domain as they might be in clinical
care or business applications.  Nonetheless, as the Internet plays an ever

larger role in research (that is, as it becomes the primary means for access-
ing primary data, publications, and professional colleagues), it is likely
that availability will become more important and even mission-critical for
the biomedical research enterprise.  Most importantly, only if they per-

ceive an available Internet will reticent adopters of Internet technologies
embrace these technologies fully.Security  ++
For the most part, biomedical research deals with public domain infor-mation, so the security requirements for the network are not stressed.
Since most studies can be done on aggregate data in which no individual
patient is identified, issues of privacy are not paramount.   If the research
deals with patient information (clinical or genomic), however, then secu-
rity requirements of the Internet jump to the highest levels.Ubiquity  ++
For biomedical research, the ubiquity of the network is not a criticalfactor.  Most major medical centers and research institutions have net-

work connectivity and are motivated to maintain first-class resources toNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET123support their investigators, making the issues of universal access lessrelevant.  One exception to this might be an epidemiological study in

which data are collected from people over the Internet.  In that case, the

network would need to be accessible to all patient populations of rel-
evance to the study.SUMMARYInternet applications promise to improve the quality of, and access to,health care while simultaneously reducing its costs.  Realizing these

applications requires overcoming a number of technical and nontechnical
obstacles.  For example, quality of service across the Internet must be

improved to provide the bandwidth and latency required for applications
such as video consultations and remote surgery.  Reliability must be

improved to ensure that failures of critical network connections occur
only infrequently and impose minimal consequences, especially where
human life is at stake.  Security capabilities must ensure the confidential

transmission of health information across the Internet while vouching for
the integrity of the information.  Access controls must take into account

the different access privileges of different kinds of health care workers.
And, to achieve its most far-reaching effects, all care providers and
patients must have access to the Internet.  Additional detail on these

needs is provided below.  Chapter 3 goes on to examine technical chal-

lenges in further detail, while Chapters 4 and 5 provide additional insight
into the organizational and policy issues that must be resolved.BandwidthHigh bandwidth is important for a number of health applications,especially those relying on the transmission of real-time video or large
medical or biomedical images.  Beyond high bandwidth for specific data-

intensive applications there is a need for high aggregate bandwidth to
support a high volume of moderately data-intensive applications, such as
transfers of large medical records.  But bandwidth is not the most impor-
tant capability for all health care applications.  Many consumer health

and public health applications, for instance, can currently be supported
by the bandwidth available on todayÕs Internet.  Bandwidth is particu-
larly important in a number of biomedical research applications, espe-
cially in the rendering of three-dimensional images of biomedical struc-
tures.  It could also be important in professional education, where it would

support a virtual reality system for simulated surgeries and other forms
of training.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETLatencyCertain highly specialized health applications, such as remote controlof experimental equipment or simulation of surgical procedures for edu-
cational purposes, require much lower latency than is available on todayÕsInternet.  However, many other health care applications, such as search-

ing for information on the Internet, do not require instantaneous delivery
of information and therefore will not be adversely affected even by the
latency of todayÕs Internet.AvailabilityBecause health care can be a life-and-death matter, the availability ofmany Internet applications related to its provision and the network across
which these applications run is paramount.  If time-critical information is

not available for decision making because data have been lost in transfer,
then the safety and quality of patient care can be compromised.  Although

some health care applications might have lower requirements for net-
work reliability, the most demanding applications still require a higher
level of availability than most consumer applications.  If health care orga-

nizations are to use the Internet for important patient care tasksÑwhetherretrieving medical records, accessing decision support tools, or conduct-
ing telemedicine sessionsÑthey need to know that the network will beavailable a large percentage of the time.SecurityBecause of the highly personal nature of health information and thedetrimental effects inappropriate releases of such information could have
on social standing, insurance eligibility, and employment, the level of
protection required for some health information is extremely high.  Such

protection must be afforded by security protocols embedded in the rel-
evant applications and in the computers connected to the Internet, as well
as in the network itself.  It will be as much a matter of the rules governing

appropriate releases of information as it will be of technical security
mechanisms, such as encryption.  Equally or perhaps more important

from a quality-of-care standpoint is the need to protect the integrity of
data and software and the availability of critical services.UbiquityThe continuing trend toward patient empowerment is being fueledby the greater access of patients to general and personal health informa-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET125tion.  The Internet is already playing a large role in improving access to
this information, but unfortunately not all Americans are able to benefit.
Socioeconomic status and geographic location are still strong determi-
nants of whether a person has access to the Internet.  If it is a societal goal

to give all persons access to Internet-based health care information and
services, then near-ubiquitous access to the Internet will be required.Use of the Internet in support of health care financial and administra-tive transactions, public health, professional health education, and bio-
medical research presents a number of technical challenges that rival those
presented by the provision of health care (Table 2.7). Security is of utmost
concern in financial and administrative uses, as well as in public health,
both of which require access to health records containing patient-specific
information.  Availability is, in general, of lesser concern than in other

health care applications of the Internet, if only because human life is not
immediately at stake.  Nevertheless, financial and administrative trans-

actions, public health, and biomedical research all require high degrees of
system availabilityÑespecially public health, where the network wouldhave to continue to function even in the wake of a large-scale disaster.
Ubiquity is important in all these applications, although fewer people
would need access to the Internet for non-care-related activities than for
those directly related to health care.Beyond these demands for technical capabilities, applications of theInternet in health care financial and administrative transactions, public
health, professional education, and biomedical research demand atten-
tion to a number of organizational and policy issues.  Most importantly,
TABLE 2.7  Relative Importance of Technical Needs of the Internet by
Health-Related ApplicationsApplicationBandwidthLatencyAvailabilitySecurityUbiquity
Consumer health+++++++++++++
Clinical care+++++++++++++++++

Financial and+++++++++++
administrativetransactionsPublic health++++++++++
Professional education+++++++++++
Biomedical research+++++++++++++
NOTE:  Plus signs (+) denote the relative importance of the technical feature within the
designated application area.  The scale ranges from a single plus sign, which denotes mini-
mal importance, to four plus signs, signifying great importance.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETorganizations engaged in these health-related activities need to recognizethe value of the Internet for their missions.  Second, they need to develop
standards for information exchange, identifying the data elements of
importance and agreeing on a standardized vocabulary for describing
data and a standardized format for exchanging data.  Third, organiza-

tions will need to ensure equitable access to Internet resources.  This issue

may be of greatest importance in the educational arena, where schools
have begun to mandate the purchase of laptops by students but have
found that some students lack high-bandwidth connectivity from their
homes or off-campus work locations.  These issues are explored in greater

detail in Chapters 4 and 5 of this report.REFERENCESAffiliated Health Information Networks of New England. 1999.  Leading the Way to Health
Information Exchange in the Electronic World. Massachusetts Health Data Consortium,Waltham, Mass., April.American Medical Association (AMA).  1996.  
Continuing Medical Education Directory. AMA,Chicago, Ill.Baker, D.B.  1998.  
ÒPCASSO:  Providing Secure Internet Access to Patient Information,
ÓSAIC Science and Technology Trends II.  Science Applications International Corporation,
San Diego, Calif.Biermann, J. Sybil, G.J. Golladay, M.L. Greenfield, and L.H. Baker. 1999. ÒEvaluation ofCancer Information on the Internet,Ó Cancer 86(3):381-390, August 1.
Boodman, Sandra G.  1999.  
ÒMedical Web Sites Can Steer You Wrong,Ó Washington Post,August 10, Health Section, p. 7.Burton, Thomas M.  2000.  
ÒMedtronic to Join Microsoft, IBM in Patient-Monitoring Ven-ture,Ó Wall Street Journal, January 24, p. B12.Carns, Ann.  1999.  
Òwww.doctorsmedicinesdiseasesgalore.com:  Today
Õs Cybercraze IsAny Web Site Devoted to Health or Maladies,Ó Wall Street Journal, June 10, p. B1.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  1998.  
Strengthening Community HealthProtection Through Technology and Training:  The Health Alert Network
. CDC, Atlanta, Ga.Chand, G., B.C. Breton, N.H.M. Caldwell, and D.M. Holburn. 1997. ÒWorld Wide Web-Controlled Scanning Electron Microscope,Ó Scanning 19:292-296.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1997.For the Record: Protecting Electronic Health Information. National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C.CyberAtlas. 1999. ÒOnline Healthcare Market Looks Energized.Ó  Available online at <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/big-picture/demographics/article/0,1323,6061_153701,00.html>.Davis D.A., M.A. Thomson, A.D. Oxman, and R.B. Haynes.  1995. 
ÒChanging PhysicianPerformance:  A Systematic Review of the Effect of Continuing Medical Education
Strategies,Ó Journal of the American Medical Association
 274(September 6):700-705.
Dolin, R.H., W. Rishel, P.V. Biron, J. Spinosa, and J.E. Mattison.  1998. 
ÒSGML and XML asInterchange Formats for HL7 messages,Ó pp. 720-724 in 
Proceedings of the AMIA Sympo-sium, Bethesda, Md.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET127Fridsma, D.B., P. Ford, and R. Altman.  1994.  
ÒA Survey of Patient Access to ElectronicMail:  Attitudes, Barriers, and Opportunities,
Ó  Paper presented at Eighteenth Annual
Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care, Washington, D.C., October
15-19.  See <http://smi-web.standord.edu/pubs/SMI_Abstracts/SMI-94-0524.html>.
Goedert, Joseph, 1999. ÒElectronic Claims Growth Sputters,Ó Health Data Management (Sep-
tember):84-86.Harman, J.  1998. 
ÒTopics for Our Times:  New Health Care Data
ÑNew Horizons for PublicHealth,Ó American Journal of Public Health 88:1019-1021.Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA).  1999a.  
HCFA Information System SecurityBulletin Handbook, Bulletin 98-01, Baltimore, Md., January.Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA). 1999b. ÒTelecommunications Requirements:Migration of Medicare Managed Care Organizations (MCO) to the Medicare Data
Communications Network and the Replacement of the RLINK Software,Ó  Operational
Policy Letter No. 92 OPL99.092, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, May6.  Available online at <www.hcfa/gov/medicare/op1092.htm>.
Hripcsak, G., P.D. Clayton, T.A. Pryor, P. Haug, O.B. Wigertz, and J. Van der Lei.  1990.
ÒThe Arden Syntax for Medical Logic Modules,Ó pp. 200-204 in 
Proceedings of the Sym-posium on Computer Applications in Medical Care
, R.A. Miller, ed. IEEE Computer Society
Press, Los Alamitos, Calif.Huang, H.K.  1996.  
ÒTeleradiology Technologies and Some Service Models,Ó ComputerizedMedical Imaging and Graphics 20(2):59-68.
Huang, H.K.  1999.  
PACS:  Basic Principles and Applications
. Wiley-Liss, New York.Institute of Medicine (IOM), Committee on the Quality of Health Care in America.  1999.  
ToErr Is Human, Linda Kohn, Janet Corrigan, and Marla Donaldson, eds. National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C.Kohane, I.S., P. Greenspun, J. Fackler, C. Cimino, and P. Szolovits. 1996. ÒBuilding NationalElectronic Medical Record Systems via the World Wide Web,Ó  Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 3(3):191-207.Lasker, R.D.  1998.  
ÒChallenges to Accessing Useful Information in Health Policy andPublic Health:  An Introduction to a National Forum Held at the New York Academy
of Medicine,Ó Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine75(4):779-784.Lou, S.L., Edward A. Sickles, H.K. Huang, David Hoogstrate, Fei Cao, Jun Wang, andMohammad Jahangiri.  1997.  ÒFull-field Direct Digital Telemammography:  TechnicalComponents, Study Protocols, and Preliminary Results,Ó IEEE Transactions on Informa-tion Technology in Biomedicine 1(4):270-278.
Mandl, Kenneth D., Isaac Kohane, and Allan M. Brandt.  1998.  
ÒElectronic Patient-PhysicianCommunication:  Problems and Promise,
Ó Annals of Internal Medicine 129:495-500.
McCormack, John.  2000.  
ÒGroup Practices Find Their Way to the Internet,Ó  Health DataManagement 8(1):46-53.
McGinnis, J.M., and W.H. Foege.  1993.  
ÒActual Causes of Death in the United States,ÓJournal of the American Medical Association 270:2207-2212.
Nash, Sharon.  1999.  
ÒThe Doctor Is Online,Ó PC Magazine Online, July 14.Resnick, Paul.  1997.  
ÒFiltering Information on the Internet,Ó Scientific American (March):106-108.Reuters New Service.  1999.  
ÒInternet Could Organize Medical Records,Ó July 27.
Rind, D.M., I.S. Kohane, P. Szolovits, C. Safran, H.C. Chueh, and G.O. Barnett. 1997.  ÒMain-taining the Confidentiality of Medical Records Shared over the Internet and WorldWide Web,Ó  Annals of Internal Medicine 127(2):138-141.
Rybowski, Lise, and Richard Rubin.  1998.  
Building an Infrastructure for Community HealthInformation: Lessons from the Frontier.  Foundation for Health Care Quality, Seattle.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETScience Applications International Corporation (SAIC).  1998.  
Security and Risk Managementfor Business-to-Business Health Information Networks, Final Report, Three State HealthInformation Planning Project. SAIC, San Diego, Calif., June.Science Panel on Interactive Communication and Health (SCIPICH).  1999.  Wired for Healthand Well-Being:  The Emergence of Interactive Health Communication,
 Thomas R. Eng and
David H. Gustafson, eds.  Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., April. Available onlineat <http://www.scipich.org>.USA Today.  1998.  
ÒHealth-Related Activities Conducted Online,Ó July 10.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  1998.  
Healthy People 2010 Objectives.  Draft
for public comment, September 15,  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Washington, D.C.  Available online at <http://web.health.gov/healthypeople>.
U.S. Public Health Service, Public Health Data Policy Coordinating Committee.  1995
.Making a Powerful Connection: The Health of the Public and the National InformationInfrastructure.  July 6. Available online at <www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/staffpubs/lo/
makingpd.html>.Varmus, Harold, David Lipman, and Pat Brown.  1999.  
ÒE-BIOMED:  A Proposal for
Electronic Publications in the Biomedical Sciences,Ó memorandum dated May 5.
Available online at <http://www.nih.gov/welcome/director/pubmedcentral/ebiomedarch.htm>.Wolf, Guenter, Detlev Petersen, Manfred Dietel, and Ever Petersen.  1998.  
ÒTelemicroscopyvia the Internet,Ó Nature 391(February 5):613-614.
World Wide Web Consortium.  1998. 
ÒExtensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0. W3CRecommendation,Ó Report No. REC-xml-19980210, February.
NOTES1.A search using AltaVista on July 29, 1999, returned 40,156 Web pages in response to
the query Òdiabetes mellitus.Ó2.For an example of the criteria according to which health-related Web sites can be
evaluated, see <http://hitiweb.mitretek.org/iq/onlycriteria.html>.3.Information on PICS is available online at <http://www.w3.org/PICS/>.  See also
Resnick (1997).4.For example, a company named PersonalMD.com had stored the health records of
10,000 subscribers online free of charge as of July 1999.  The company sends consumers a

card with a personal access code that allows them to retrieve their records over the Internetor by a fax-back system (Reuters News Service, 1999).  Another group, the Medical Regis-
try, charges $100 to retain medical information online, allowing customers to update it as
often as they wish.5.The Medical Registry, which was started by emergency room physicians, allows
doctors to access a patientÕs record during an emergency by entering their Drug Enforce-ment Act number.  Patients are issued a wallet card and alert bracelet containing the ad-
dress of the Web site, the patientÕs password, and the phone number of a fax-back servicethat can access and download the patientÕs records.6.For more information on PCASSO, see Baker (1998).
7.The National Heart Attack Alert Program is a federal effort that may lead to im-
proved techniques for remotely monitoring patients.  The program has the overall goals of,

first, reducing morbidity and mortality from acute myocardial infarctions (heart attacks)through rapid identification and treatment and, second, heightening the potential for animproved quality of life for patients and family members.  Remote monitoring and collec-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET129tion of patient vital signs is seen as one possible avenue for early detection of heart attacksand for getting patients into the health care system quickly.  Information about the program
is available online at <http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/about/nhaap/nhaap_pd.htm>.8.Data from Michael Kiensle, associate dean for Clinical Affairs and BioMedical Com-
munications, University of Iowa College of Medicine, personal communication, July 12,1999.9.In-home monitoring with a video link offers benefits to patients, but not for diagnos-
tic reasons.  As one reviewer of an early draft of this report noted, the patient needs to see
the care provider to address the problem of noncompliance, which often results when pa-
tients misunderstand instructions and take medications at the wrong time, in the wrongdosage, and so on.  The way to improve compliance is to ensure that the care provider
captures the attention of the patient while delivering instructions.  Video can help ensure

this happens.10.At present, teleconsultations conducted across networks that use the IP require ap-
proximately twice the bandwidth of traditional point-to-point networks.  The reasons are

twofold:  (1) Internet protocols impose some additional overhead functions that require
bandwidth and (2) the devices used to encode video streams into IP packets (coder/decod-ers, or codecs) are much less efficient than their non-IP counterparts.  But IP codecs are less

expensive, in part because they carry less hardware compression, and next-generation IPcodecs are expected to provide better performance and impose less of a penalty on IP-basedsystems.11.East Carolina University recently received a grant from the National Library of Medi-
cine to investigate these requirements.12.Pending further study of the medical efficacy of higher bandwidth for
teleconsultations, an upper limit on bandwidth for video consultations can be estimated byconsidering the need for broadcast quality video.  A video display with 640 
 480 pixels that
is refreshed 30 times per second and has 24-bit color demands 221 Mbps.  With standard
compression technologies, such as that of the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG), re-ductions of 90 to 1 are common, resulting in a need for 2.5 Mbps.  Improved coding may

lower this figure further.  For transmission quality equal to high-definition television, which
is just entering consumer production, 19 Mbps would be required.  These figures represent
the maximum bandwidth that remote video consultations could be expected to use, but, as
the evidence collected by ECU and other practitioners indicates, much less bandwidth issufficient in many applications.13.Information on the National Laboratory for the Study of Rural Telemedicine at the
University of Iowa is available online at <http://telemed.medicine.uiowa.edu/index.html>.14.Anthony Chou, University of California at San Francisco, presentation to the com-
mittee, December 16, 1998.15.As described later in this chapter, attempts are being made to make these specialized
instruments available to a larger number of researchers through the Internet.16.Stentor, Inc., has developed a system that can provide high-resolution images over
lower-bandwidth networks by providing only portions of the overall image at any onetime.17.In addition to the lack of standardization of medical data models, there has been no
widespread adoption of portable decision-support tools, despite the efforts of many inprojects such as the development of the Arden syntax (see Hripcsak et al., 1990).  The
absence of sound, widely accepted automated decision-support tools that are integrated
with each other and with Internet health transactions will undermine the capabilities ofsuch tools to achieve the desired goal of medical error reduction.  For example, if one set of
Internet transactions attempts to optimize for medication orders and another set of Internet
transactions attempts to optimize the ordering of procedures, several possibly dangerousNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETand/or expensive interactions between the two might occur.  In a tightly integrated system,
as compared to disparate and separate Internet-based systems, such interactions might beminimized.  This situation suggests that a near-term challenge will be to ensure quality

control and coordination among the many different Internet-born clinical transactions andto develop robust medical decision-support tools that can serve a wide range of institutionsand patient populations.18.In a survey of 153 chief information officers conducted by the College of Health
Information Management Executives in 1998, 80 percent said they use HL7 and 13.5 percentplanned to implement it in the future.19.All claims data in this paragraph derive from research conducted for Faulkner &
GrayÕs 2000 Health Data Directory, as cited in Goedert (1999).20.For additional information on these efforts, see Rybowski and Rubin (1998) and
Affiliated Health Information Networks of New England (1999).21.Further information on HCFA
Õs pilot program can be obtained from either<www.wedi.org> or <www.afecht.org>.22.For example, the U.S. Public Health Service released a report in 1995 describing the
potential applications of the Internet in public health and identifying technical challenges tobe addressed (U.S. Public Health Service, 1995).  In 1997, the New York Academy of Medi-

cine and the National Library of Medicine cosponsored a symposium on public healthinformatics that called for improved structures and assessment mechanisms for publichealth information (Lasker, 1998).  Slide presentations of several symposium speakers are

available at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ nichsr/nyam/nyam.html>.  The Department of
Health and Human ServicesÕ document Healthy People 2010 (U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, 1998) includes a section on objectives for improving the public health
infrastructure. They include widespread access to the Internet and real-time, on-site accessto public health data for public health workers and individuals. Section 14, objectives 5 and6, is the most relevant example.23.Participating organizations include the National Network of Libraries of Medicine,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Health Resources and Services Admin-
istration, the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials, and the National Associa-tion of County and City Health Officials.24.Reports from physicians
Õ offices and hospitals also tend to be reported on paper.
25.Jac Davies, Washington State Department of Health, presentation to the study com-
mittee, February 11, 1999, Seattle, Washington.26.The traditional public health functions are surveillance, case identification, treat-
ment, prevention, research, guidelines, education and feedback.27.President Clinton
Õs proposal for this program would also create a network of re-gional labs to provide rapid analysis and identification of select biological agents.28.The Health Alert Network is part of a larger antibioterrorism effort that received
$158 million in FY99. Another $72 million was proposed for FY2000, which would raise thetotal to $230 million.29.This information is derived from 
ÒHealth Alert Network Architectural Standards,Ósupplement to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Program AnnouncementNo. 99051.30.The Association of American Medical Colleges reports that total enrollment in full-
time undergraduate medical programs in the United States was 66,900 in the 1997-1998academic year.  There were 99,099 residents being trained in clinical settings (primarily

teaching hospitals).  According to the quinquennial survey, approximately 242,000 students
were enrolled in all health sciences programs during the 1996-1997 academic year.31.The SHINE project at Stanford Medical Center is experimenting with providing CME
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH APPLICATIONS OF THE INTERNET131credit to physicians who request point-of-care information during patient interactions.  In-
formation on this program is available online at <http://shine.stanford.edu>.32.These figures were provided by Dennis Benson at the National Library of Medicine
in a personal communication dated February 11, 2000.33.There have been laboratories whose access to NCBI/PubMed was suspended tem-
porarily when usage rates climbed too high.  One lab at Stanford lost access after a graduate

student wrote programs that were downloading 3,000 abstracts per minute from the Website.  The scientific goals of this student were meritorious, but the resource was not built to
sustain this use (Russ Altman, Stanford University, personal communication, December 22,
1999).34.James Ostell, National Center for Biotechnology Information, presentation to the
study committee on March 1, 1999, Washington, D.C.35.Researchers at the University of Cambridge, the University of California at San Di-
ego (see Box 2.4), and the University Hospital Charit” in Berlin have all developed Internet-
based systems for controlling experimental apparatus (Chand et al., 1997).36.Electron tomography is a technique whereby three-dimensional structure is derived
from a series of two-dimensional projections using advanced image processing steps.  In
the most common form, the specimen is tilted around a single axis and imaged at regular
intervals.  The IVEM at NCMIR is one of a few such instruments in the United States made
available to the biological research community.  Support for NCMIR is provided by the
National Center for Research Resources (NCRR) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).37.This information is taken from a paper entitled 
ÒNCMIRÕs Collaboratory for Micro-scopic Digital Anatomy:  A National Science Foundation National Challenge Project,
Ó which
is available online at <www-ncmir.ucsd.edu/CMDA/>.38.CMDA has already been used by researchers at Montana State University to collect
data on synaptic organization in the sensory ganglia of the insect nervous system and byscientists at the University of Oregon studying neurotransmission (synaptic vesicle release)in vestibular hair cell synapses.  Other users are studying the abnormalities in nerve cells in
AlzheimerÕs disease, the structural relationships of protein molecules responding to cal-cium within nerve cells, and the three-dimensional pattern of branching of the dendrites inneurons that create a highly linked network of cellular communication.39.In the longer term, it is hoped that digital video standards will give good resolution
and smooth motion at 30 frames per second at much lower bandwidth.40.More information on SRS is available at <http://srs.ebi.ac.uk:5000/>. Information on
Biokleisli is available at <http://smi-web.stanford.edu/projects/helix/mis214/bdkowvldb95.pdf>
(a paper).  Information on KEGG is available at <http://www.genome.ad.jp/dbget/
dbget.links.html>.41.Clinical research lies at the juncture of clinical care, biomedical research, and public
health but is somewhat distinct from each of these topics.  It is described in the section on
biomedical research in this report for reasons of editorial convenience and exposition.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1323Technical Challenges
Ongoing efforts to develop and deploy improved networking tech-nologies promise to greatly enhance the capabilities of the Internet.  Pro-

tocols for quality of service (QOS) could enable vendors to offer guaran-
tees on available bandwidth and latencies across the network.  Advanced

security protocols may better protect the confidentiality of messages sent
across the network and ensure that data are not corrupted during trans-
mission or storage.  Broadband technologies, such as cable modems and

digital subscriber line (DSL) services, have the potential to make high-
speed Internet connectivity more affordable to residential users and small
businesses.  In combination, these capabilities will enable the Internet to

support an ever-increasing range of applications in domains as disparate
as national security, entertainment, electronic commerce, and health care.The health community stands to benefit directly from improvementsin QOS, security, and broadband technologies, even though it will not
necessarily drive many of these advances.  Health applicationsÑwhether

supporting consumer health, clinical care, financial and administrative
transactions, public health, professional education, or biomedical researchÑ
are not unique in terms of the technical demands they place on the
Internet:  nearly all sectors have some applications that demand enhanced

QOS, security, and broadband technologies.  Nevertheless, particular

health applications require specific capabilities that might not otherwise
receive much attention.  Use of the Internet for video-based consultations

with patients in their homes, for example, would call for two-way, high-
bandwidth connections into and out of individual residences, whereasNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES133video-on-demand applications require high bandwidth in only one direc-tion.  Human life may be at risk if control signals sent to medical monitoring

or dosage equipment are corrupted or degraded, or if electronic medical
records cannot be accessed in a timely fashion.  Even when no lives are at

stake, the extreme sensitivity of personal health information could com-
plicate security considerations, and the provisions of health care at the
point of needÑwhether in the hospital, home, or hotel roomÑcouldincrease demand for provider and consumer access to Internet resources
via a variety of media.This chapter reviews current efforts to improve the capabilities of theInternet and evaluates them on the basis of the needs of the health sector
outlined in Chapter 2.  Particular attention is paid to the need for QOS, for

security (including confidentiality of communications, system access con-
trols, and network availability), and for broadband technologies to pro-
vide end users with high-speed connectivity to the Internet.  Also dis-

cussed are privacy-enhancing technologies, which are seen by many as a
prerequisite for more extensive use of the Internet by consumers.  The

chapter identifies ways in which the InternetÕs likely evolution will sup-port health applications and ways in which it may not.  It gives examples

of challenges that real-world health applications can pose for networking
research and information technology research more generally.  In this

way, it attempts to inform the networking research community about the
challenges posed by health applications and to educate the health com-
munity about the ways in which ongoing efforts to develop and deploy
Internet technologies may not satisfy all their needs.QUALITY OF SERVICEQuality of service is a requirement of many health-related applica-tions of the Internet.  Health organizations cannot rely on the Internet for
critical functions unless they receive assurances that information will be
delivered to its destination quickly and accurately.  For example, care

providers must be able to retrieve medical records easily and reliably
when needed for patient care; providers and patients must be able to
obtain sustained access to high-bandwidth services for remote consulta-
tions if video-based telemedicine is to become viable.  In emergency care

situations, both bandwidth and latency may be critical factors because
providers may need rapid access to large medical records and images
from disparate sources connected to the Internet.  Other applications,

such as Internet-based telephony and business teleconferencing, demand
similar technical capabilities, but the failure to obtain needed QOS in a
health application might put human life at risk.Compounding the QOS challenge in health care is the variability of aNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNEThealth care organizationÕs needs over the course of a single day.  The
information objects that support health care vary substantially in size and
complexity.  While simple text effectively represents the content of a care
providerÕs notes, consultation reports, and the name-value pairs of com-mon laboratory test results, many health problems require the acquisition
and communication of clinical images such as X rays, computed tomogra-
phy (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  The electronic forms

of these images, which often must be compared with one another in mul-
tiple image sets, comprise tens to hundreds of megabytes of information
that may need to be communicated to the end user within several seconds
or less.  Medical information demands on digital networks are thus notable

for their irregularity and the tremendous variation in the size of trans-
mitted files.  When such files need to be transmitted in short times, very

high bandwidths may be required and the traffic load may be extremely
bursty.No capabilities have yet been deployed across the Internet to ensureQOS.  Virtually all Internet service providers (ISPs) offer only best-effort

service, in which they make every effort to deliver packets to their correct

destination in a timely way but with no guarantees on latency or rates of
packet loss.  Round-trip times (or latencies) for sending messages across

the Internet between the East and West Coasts of the United States are
generally about 100 milliseconds, but latencies of about 1 second do
occurÑand variations in latency between 100 milliseconds and 1 secondcan be observed even during a single connection.1  Such variability is not
detrimental to asynchronous applications such as e-mail, but it can render
interactive applications such as videoconferencing unusable.  Similarly,

the rates of packet loss across the Internet range from less than 1 percent
to more than 10 percent; high loss rates degrade transmission quality and
increase latencies as lost packets are retransmitted.  Furthermore, because

many applications attempt to reduce congestion by slowing their trans-
mission rates, packet loss directly affects the time taken to complete a
transaction, such as an image transfer, over the network.Several approaches can be taken to improve QOS across the Internet,with varied levels of effectiveness.  For example, Internet users can up-

grade their access lines to overcome bottlenecks in their links to ISPs, but
such efforts affect bandwidth and latency into and out of their own site
only.  They provide no means for assuring a given level of QOS over any
distance.  Similarly, ISPs can attempt to improve service by expanding the

capacity of their backbone links.  However, as described below, such

efforts provide no guarantees that bandwidth will be available when
needed and contain no mechanisms for prioritizing message traffic in the
face of congestion.  To overcome these limitations, efforts are under way

to develop specific protocols for providing QOS guarantees across theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES135Internet.  These protocols promise to greatly expand the availability of
guaranteed services across the Internet, but their utility in particular
applications may be limited, as described below.Increasing BandwidthOne approach taken by ISPs to improve their data-carrying capacityand relieve congestion across the Internet has been to dramatically increase
the bandwidth of the backbones connecting points of presence (POPs).2TodayÕs backbone speeds are typically on the order of 600 megabits persecond (Mbps) to 2.5 gigabits per second (Gbps), but some ISPs have
considerably more bandwidth in place.  A number of ISPs today have tens

of strands of fiber-optic cable between their major POPs, with each strand
capable of carrying 100 wavelengths using current wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM) technology.  Each wavelength can support 2.5 to

10 Gbps using current opto-electronics and termination equipment.  Thus,

an ISP with 30 strands of fiber between two POPs theoretically could
support 30 terabits per second (Tbps) on a single inter-POP trunk line.3This is enough capacity to support approximately 450 million simulta-
neous phone calls or to transmit the 40 gigabyte (GB) contents of the
complete MEDLARS collection of databases in one-hundredth of a second.
Even with this fiber capacity in the ground, most ISPs currently inter-connect their POPs at speeds significantly lower than 1 TbpsÑa situationthat is likely to persist for the next few years.  The limiting factors are the
cost and availability of the equipment that needs to be connected to the
fiber inside the POP.  This equipment includes Synchronous Optical

NETwork (SONET)4 termination equipment and the routers or switches
that are required to forward packets between POPs.  The SONET equip-

ment is expensiveÑas are the routers and switches that connect to theSONET equipmentÑso ISPs have an incentive to deploy only enough tocarry the expected traffic load.  More importantly, routers are limited in

terms of the amount of traffic they can support.  As of late 1999, the

leading commercial routers available for deployment could support 16
OC-48 (2.5 Gbps) interfaces, with a fourfold increase (e.g., to 16  OC-192)
expected to be deployable in the next 1 to 2 years.  Terabit and multiterabit

routers with a capacity at least six times greater than a 16  OC-192 router
are under development.  Despite these increases in capability, routers

most likely will continue to limit the bandwidth available between POPs
for the foreseeable future.  The commercial sector understands the need

for faster routers and is addressing it, at least to meet near-term demands
for higher link speeds.  Additional research on very high speed routers

may be justified to provide longer-term improvements in data-carrying
capacity.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETIncreases in the bandwidth of the Internet backbone alleviate some ofthe concerns about QOS but may not completely eliminate congestion.
Demand for bandwidth is growing quickly, and it appears that ISPs are
deploying additional bandwidth just fast enough to keep up.  Current

traffic measurements indicate that some Internet backbone links are at or
near capacity.  Factors driving the growth in demand for bandwidth

include the increasing number of Internet users, the increasing amount of
time the average user spends connected to the Internet, and new applica-
tions that are inherently bandwidth-intensive (and that demand other
capabilities, such as low latency and enhanced security).  Nielsen ratings

for June 1999 put the number of active Web users at 65 million for the
month and average monthly online time per user at 7.5 hours, up from 57
million users and 7 hours per user just 3 months earlier.5  As an exampleof increasing bandwidth demands, medical image files that now contain
about 250 megabytes (MB) of data are expected to top several gigabytes in
the near future as the resolution of digital imaging technology improves.Internet protocols further limit the capability of ISPs to provide QOSby simply increasing bandwidth.  The Transmission Control Protocol

(TCP), which underlies most popular Internet applications today, is designed
to determine the bandwidth of the slowest or most congested link in the
path traversed by a particular message and to attempt to use a fair share
of that bottleneck bandwidth.  This trait is important to the success of the
Internet because it allows many connections to share a congested link in a
reasonably fair way.  However, it also means that TCP connections always

attempt to use as much bandwidth as is available in the network.  Thus, if

one bottleneck is alleviated by the addition of more bandwidth, TCP will
attempt to use more bandwidth, possibly causing congestion on another
link.  As a result, some congested links are almost always found in a

network carrying a large amount of TCP traffic.  Adding more capacity in

one place causes the congestion to move somewhere else.  In many cases,
top-tier service ISPs attempt to make sure they have enough capacity so
that the congestion occurs in other backbone providersÕ networks.  The
only way out of this quandary, apparently, is to provide so much band-
width throughout the network that applications are unable to use it fully.Applications that do not use TCP are not the solution, either, becausethey also tend to consume considerable bandwidth.  Such nonadaptive

applications are typically those involving real-time interaction, for which
TCP is not well suited.  Internet telephony is a good example of such an

application.  Although an individual call might use only a few kilobits per

second, many current Internet telephony applications transmit data at a
constant rate, regardless of any congestion along their path.  Because

these applications do not respond to congestion, large-scale deployment
can lead to a situation called congestive collapse, in which links are so
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES137overloaded that they become effectively useless.  Furthermore, when these
applications share links with TCP-based applications, the latter will
respond to congestion to the point where they may become unusable.
Short of deploying additional bandwidth in the Internet and replacing
nonadaptive applications with adaptive ones, the primary approach to
addressing this problem is either to equip routers with new mechanisms
to prevent congestive collapse or to provide suitable incentives to encour-
age the development of adaptive applications.More fundamental factors also limit the utility of increased band-width as a means of solving the QOS problem.  Adequate bandwidth is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for providing QOS.  No user can

expect to obtain guaranteed bandwidth of 100 Mbps across a 50-Mbps
link; similarly, it is not possible to guarantee 10 Mbps each to 1,000 appli-
cations that share a common link unless that link has a capacity of at least
10 Gbps.6  The simple fact that Internet backbones are shared resources
that carry traffic from a large number of users means that no single user
can be guaranteed a particular amount of bandwidth unless dedicated
allocation mechanisms are in place.  In the absence of QOS mechanisms, it

is impossible to ensure that delay-sensitive applications are protected
from excessive time lags.7In theory, ISPs could attempt to provide so much extra bandwidth tothe Internet that peak demand could almost always be met and service
quality would improve (a technique referred to as overprovisioning, used
with some success in local area networks, or LANs).  However, research

indicates that overprovisioning is an inefficient solution to the QOS prob-
lem, especially when bandwidth demands vary widely among different
applications, as is the case in health care.  Overprovisioning tends not to

be cost-effective for leading-edge, high-bandwidth applicationsÑeventhose that can adapt to delays in the network.  If the objective is to make

efficient use of networking resources and provide superior overall ser-
vice, then mechanisms that enable the network to handle heterogeneous
data types appear preferable to the separation of different types of data
streams (e.g., real-time video, text, and images) into discrete networks
(Shenker, 1995).A number of efforts are under way in the networking community todevelop mechanisms for providing QOS across the Internet.  The two

main approaches are differentiated services (diff-serv) and integrated ser-
vices (int-serv).  Although they are very different, both attempt to manage

available bandwidth to meet customer-specific needs for QOS.  Both diff-

serv and int-serv will enable greater use of the Internet in some health
applications, but it is not clear that these programs will meet all the needs
posed by the most challenging health applications.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETDifferentiated ServicesRecent efforts in the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) haveresulted in a set of proposed standards for diff-serv across the Internet
(Blake et al., 1998).  As the name implies, diff-serv allows ISPs to offer

users a range of qualities of service beyond the typical best effort.  The

ISPs were active in the definition of these standards, and several are
expected to deploy some variant of diff-serv in 2000.Differentiated services do not currently define any mechanisms bywhich QOS levels could be determined for different communications ses-
sions on demand; rather, initial deployment is likely to be for provisioned
QOS that is agreed upon a priori.  As a simple example, a customer of an

ISP might sign up for premium service at a certain rate, say 128 kilobits
per second (kbps).  Such a service would allow the customer to send

packets into the network at a rate of up to 128 kbps and expect them to
receive better service than a best-effort packet would receive.  Exactly

how much better would be determined by the ISP.  If the service were

priced appropriately, then the provider might provision enough band-
width for premium traffic to ensure that loss of a premium packet occurred
very rarely, say once per 1 million packets sent.  This would provide

customers with high assurance that they could send at 128 kbps at any
time to any destination within the ISPÕs network.Many variations of this basic service are possible.  The service descrip-
tion 
above applies to traffic sent by the customer; it is also possible toprovide high assurance of delivery for a customerÕs inbound traffic.  Simi-
larly, an ISP could offer a service that provides low latency.  It is likely

that providers would offer several grades of service, ranging from the
basic best-effort through premium to superpremium, analogous to coach,
business, and first class in airline travel.  A customer might sign up for

several of these services and then choose which packets need which ser-
vice.  For example, e-mail might be marked for best-effort delivery, where-

as a video stream might be marked for premium.  Customers then would

need to develop their own policies to determine which types of traffic
flows would be transmitted at different QOS levels.Although diff-serv is an improvement over best-effort services, it hasseveral limitations that might preclude its use for some health-related
applications.  First, research has shown that simple diff-serv mechanisms
(e.g., those that classify QOS levels at the edge of the network and provide
differential loss probabilities in the core) can be used to provide a high
probability of meeting usersÕ QOS preferences for point-to-point commu-
nications (Clark and Wroclawski, 1997).  However, in the absence of sig-

nificant overprovisioning and explicit signaling to reserve resources, such
guarantees are probabilistic, which virtually precludes absolute, quantifi-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES139able service guarantees.  The QOS provided by diff-serv depends largely
on provisioning of the network to ensure that the resources available for
premium services are sufficient to meet the offered load.  The provision of

sufficient resources to make hard guarantees may be economically feasible
only if premium services are significantly more expensive than todayÕsbest-effort service.  Indeed, ISPs need to have in place some incentive

mechanism (such as increased charges for higher-quality service) to
ensure that customers attempt to distinguish between their more impor-
tant and less important traffic.A second limitation is that diff-serv can be offered most easily acrossa single ISPÕs network.  Current standards do not define end-to-end ser-
vices, focusing instead on individual hops between routers in the net-
work.  There are no defined mechanisms for providing service guarantees

for packets that must traverse the networks of several ISPs.  For many

service providers, offering diff-serv across their own networks is likely to
be a valuable first stepÑespecially for providers with a national presencethat will be able to provide end-to-end service to large customers with
sites in major metropolitan areas.  Services like these are also valuable

over especially congested links, such as the transoceanic links; again, these
types of services could be offered by a single provider.  Nevertheless,

there obviously would be great value in obtaining end-to-end QOS assur-
ance even when the two ends are not connected to the same provider.  To

some extent, the diff-serv standards have laid the groundwork for
interprovider QOS, because packets can be marked in standard ways
before crossing a provider boundary.  A provider connecting to another

provider is in some sense just a customer of that provider.  Provider A can

buy premium service from provider B and resell that service to the cus-
tomers of provider A.  However, the services that providers offer are not

likely to be identical, so the prospect of obtaining predictable end-to-end
service from many providers seems considerably less certain than does
single-provider QOS.Third, diff-serv does not currently allow users to signal a request fora particular level of QOS on an as-needed basis (as is possible with the
integrated services model, described below).  Health care organizations

have widely varying needs for bandwidth over time.  For example, a

small medical center occasionally might need to transmit a mammography
study of 100 MB in a short time intervalÑcreating a need for high band-width over that intervalÑbut it is unlikely to need even close to thatamount of bandwidth on average.  Thus, a dynamic model of QOS would

be preferable.  Diff-serv does not preclude such a model; it simply pro-

vides a number of QOS building blocks, which could be used to build a
dynamic model in the future.  A variety of means for dynamically signal-

ing diff-serv QOS are under investigation by networking researchers.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETFinally, the diff-serv approach may not provide a means of differenti-ating among service levels with sufficient granularity to meet the QOS
needs of critical applications, such as remote control of medical monitor-
ing or drug delivery devices.  In the interests of scalability, diff-serv sorts
traffic into a small number of classes; as a result, the packets from many
applications and sites share the same class and can interfere with each
other.  For example, a physician downloading a medical image could

inadvertently disrupt data flows from in-house monitoring equipment if
they are on the same network and share a diff-serv class.  Although polic-

ing of traffic at the edges of the network helps to ensure that applications
of the same class do not interfere with each other, it does not completely
isolate applications.  Stronger isolation, and thus a larger number of

classes, may be required for some demanding applications.Integrated ServicesIn contrast to the diff-serv model, int-serv (Braden et al., 1994) pro-vides quantifiable, end-to-end QOS guarantees for particular data flows
(e.g., individual applications) in networks that use the IP.8  The guaran-
tees take the form of Òthis videoconference from organization A to organi-zation B will receive a minimum of 128 kbps throughput and a maximum
of 100 milliseconds end-to-end latency.Ó  To accommodate such requests,
int-serv includes a signaling mechanism called resource reservation pro-
tocol (RSVP) that allows applications to request QOS guarantees (Braden
et al., 1997).9  Int-serv provides a service model that in some ways
resembles that of the telephone network, in that service is requested as
needed.  If resources are available to provide the requested service, then

the service will be provided; if not, then a negative acknowledgment
(equivalent to a busy signal) is returned.  For this reason, int-serv already

is being used in some smaller networks to reserve bandwidth for voice
communications.Several obstacles stand in the way of the deployment of int-serv acrossthe Internet.  The major concern is scalability.  As currently defined, every

application flow (e.g., a single video call) needs its own reservation, and
each reservation requires that a moderate amount of information be stored
at every router along the path that will carry the application data.  As the
nework itself grows and the number of reservations increases, so does the
amount of information that must be stored throughout the network.10The prospect of having to store such information in backbone routers is
not attractive to ISPs, for which scalability is a major concern.11Additional impediments arise from difficulties in administering int-serv reservations that cross the networks of multiple ISPs.  Methods are

needed for allocating the costs of calls that are transmitted by multipleNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES141ISPs; new ways of billing users and making settlements among ISPs maybe required.  These are QOS policy issues, discussed below.  It is clear that

the management of reservations that traverse multiple ISPs, each with its
own administrative and provisioning policies, will be quite complex.
Solutions to these problems must address the possibility that one or more
ISPs might experience a failure during the life of a reservation, resulting
in the need to reroute the traffic significantly (Birman, 1999).  Such con-

cerns, if not successfully addressed, could slow or thwart the deployment
of int-serv capabilities throughout the Internet.Alternative Quality of Service OptionsGiven the difficulties of existing approaches, a promising avenue ofresearch focuses on QOS options that lie somewhere between diff-serv
and int-serv.  The goal of such approaches is to provide finer granularity

and stronger guarantees than are provided by diff-serv while avoiding
the scaling and administrative problems associated with int-servÕs per-application reservations.  One such approach, which is being pursued in

the Integrated Services over Specific Link Layers working group of the
IETF, combines the end-to-end service definitions and signaling of int-
serv with the scalable queuing and classification techniques of diff-serv.12Another approach, referred to as virtual overlay networks (VONs),uses the Internet to support the creation of isolated networks that would
link multiple participants and offer desired levels of QOS, including some
security and availability features (Birman, 1999).  This approach would

require routers to partition packet flows according to tags on the packets
called flow identifiers.  This process, in effect, allows the router to allocate

a predetermined portion of its capabilities to particular tagged flows.
Traffic within a tagged flow would compete with other packets on the
same VON but not with traffic from other flows.  An individual user (e.g.,

a hospital) could attempt to create multiple VONs to serve different appli-
cations so that each network could connect to different end points and
offer different levels of service.  Substantial research would be required

before a VON could be implemented.  Among the open questions are how

to specify properties of an overlay network, how to dynamically adminis-
ter resources on routers associated with an overlay network, how to avoid
scaling issues as the number of overlays becomes large, and how to
rapidly classify large numbers of flows.Quality of Service PolicyBecause QOS typically involves providing improved service to somesets of packets at the expense of others, the deployment of QOS technolo-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETgies requires a supporting policy infrastructure.  In some applications, it
is acceptable for QOS assurance to be lost for some short period of time,
provided that such lapses occur infrequently.  In other applications, how-

ever, the QOS guarantee must be met at all times, unless the network has
become completely partitioned by failures. Work is needed to develop
means of providing solid guarantees of QOS for critical information.  Such

mechanisms must scale well enough to be deployable in the Internet and
will involve matters of policy (whose traffic deserves higher priority) as
well as of technology.In the int-serv environment, QOS policy is required to answer ques-tions such as whether a particular request for resources should be admit-
ted to the network, or whether the request should preempt an existing
guarantee.  In the former case, a decision to admit a reservation request

might be based on some credentials provided by the requesting organiza-
tion.  For example, if a particular health care organization has paid for a

certain level of service from its ISP and the request carries a certificate
proving that it originates from that organization, then the request is
admitted.  In the latter case, a request might contain information identify-

ing it as critically important (e.g., urgent patient monitoring information)
so that it could preempt, say, a standard telephone call that previously
had reserved resources.It is difficult to predict all the possible scenarios in which policy infor-mation might play a role in the allocation of QOS.  The RSVP provides a

flexible mechanism by which policy-related data (e.g., a certificate identi-
fying a user, institution, or application) can be carried with a request.  The

Common Open Policy Service protocol has been defined to enable routers
processing RSVP requests to exchange policy data with policy servers,
which are devices that store policy information, such as the types of
request that are allowed from a certain institution and the preemption
priority of certain applications. Policy decisions are likely to be complex,
because of the nature of health care and the number of stakeholders
involved in decision making.  Accordingly, the design of policy servers,

which are responsible for storing policy data and making policy deci-
sions, would benefit from the input of the health care community.Policy also has a role in a diff-serv environment.  For example, if an
institution has an agreement with an ISP that it may transmit packets at a
rate of up to 10 Mbps and will receive some sort of premium service, then
the question of exactly which packets get treated as premium and which
as standard is one of policy.  The institution may wish to treat e-mail

traffic as standard and use its allocation of premium traffic for more time-
critical applications.  There may be some cases in which data from the

same application will be marked as either premium or standard, depend-
ing on other criteria.  For example, a mammogram that will not be read by
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES143the remote radiologist until tomorrow might safely be sent by best-effortservice, whereas one that is to be read while the patient remains in the
examination room could be sent by premium service.  Mechanisms for

enforcing policy in a diff-serv environment are currently being defined at
the IETF.MulticastConcurrent with efforts to implement QOS mechanisms for theInternet, attempts are under way to deploy multicast capability, which
provides a means to make more efficient use of available bandwidth to
simultaneously distribute information from one user to a number of spe-
cific recipients.  Multicast stands in contrast to today
Õs unicast deliverymodel, in which users communicate on a one-to-one basis, and to the
broadcast model of radio and television, in which a single transmitter
sends information out to a large number of unspecified recipients.
Multicast makes large-scale multiparty conferencing possible in a way
that makes efficient use of network bandwidth.  It also provides an effi-

cient mechanism for the distribution of streaming media to many recipi-
ents concurrently.  At the same time, multicast presents new challenges

regarding suitable pricing schemes and ways of protecting ISP networks
from potential abuse.  A related trend is the development of reliable

multicast, which attempts to enable the reliable delivery of data from one
source to many destinations, even in the presence of occasional packet
loss in the network.  A typical application is the timely delivery of finan-

cial information to many recipients.  This technology is receiving a great

deal of attention in the research and development communities and is
likely to become mature within the next few years.Both multicast and reliable multicast are likely to be useful in a rangeof applications, including health.  Multicast technologies could be used to

provide continuing medical education online through the real-time trans-
mission of lectures over the Internet.  It would allow for teleconsultations

among geographically dispersed public health officials responding to a
perceived public health hazard or bioterrorist attack.  Multicast also could

facilitate collaborative consultations among physicians, medical special-
ists, and patients.Health care applications of multicast may emphasize different designand implementation features than would applications in other domains.
For example, users in the health arena may be unlikely to create large
multicast groups consisting of a single primary transmitter of information
and millions of receivers, an approach more suited to the entertainment
industry.  Likewise, health organizations might not adopt the model of

defense simulations, in which thousands of participants send informationNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETto each other on a regular basis to report on their location, speed, andorientation.13  Instead, a health application might involve large numbers
of small multicast groups featuring the formation of dynamic member-
ships to link collaborating physicians.  The technical considerations that

go into designing multicast protocols that can support large numbers of
small groups may differ from those that can support smaller numbers of
large groups.  Health care applications need to be considered soon to

ensure that suitable multicast capabilities are developed.SECURITYSecurity is a top priority for health applications of the Internet.  When-
ever personal health information is transmitted across the Internet or
stored in a device attached to the network, precautions must be taken to
ensure that the information is (1) available to those who need it, (2) protected
against those lacking proper credentials, and (3) not modifiedÑeitherintentionally or unintentionallyÑin violation of established policies andprocedures.  These three requirements
Ñreferred to as availability, confi-dentiality, and integrityÑare of concern in most health care applicationsof the Internet, whether they involve the transfer of personal medical
records between health care providers or a provider and a plan adminis-
trator, video telemedicine consultations, the reporting of information in a
home monitoring situation, or the use of remote equipment in a bio-
medicine experiment (in which the data may be considered proprietary
before formal publication).Strengthening system security to better protect personal health infor-mation entails costs.  Computing resources are needed to implement the

changes, convenience may be compromised if system users are required
to perform added steps (such as typing in additional passwords), and
additional employees may be needed to monitor controls and investigate
alleged violations of confidentiality.  Furthermore, poorly designed secu-

rity controls may actually impede health care delivery in emergencies by
preventing or slowing access to needed information.  It is therefore essen-

tial that system designers balance the potential costs of security mecha-
nisms against their intended benefitsÑa process that requires assessinganticipated threats to personal health information, however dynamic and
diffuse those threats may be.To date, malicious attempts to sabotage the availability or integrity ofelectronic health information have been rare.14  However, the confidenti-ality of electronic medical records has on some occasions been compro-
mised by individuals such as health care providers or administrators who
have legitimate access to some aspect of an electronic record.  Indeed, a

previous study by the Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES145(1997a) found that the most significant threats to patient privacy stem notfrom violations of established confidentiality policies or security practices
but from the routine sharing of patient health information among care
providers, administrators, public health officials, pharmacy benefits man-
agers, direct marketers, and the likeÑmost of which occurs without apatientÕs knowledge or consent.  The effects of such compromises on the
patient or consumer can range from embarrassment to loss of employ-
ment or loss of health insurance.  In general, such concerns cannot be

addressed by the use of security technologies but are the province instead
of organizational policies and government legislation that set forth accept-
able information-sharing practices.Nevertheless, security technologies are increasingly important in anInternet environment.  Health organizations have tended to rely on trust

among health professionals to maintain the confidentiality of personal
health information and have favored broad access to information (with
some form of review of accesses) over strict controls.  Connection to the

larger, public Internet will require a new strategy.  Health organizations

contemplating the Internet as a source of networking infrastructure for
critical transactions will need to be assured that they are protected against
security risks while making their systems and data available to those who
need them.  The increasing interconnection of devices that monitor patients
and devices that deliver treatment to them increases the possibility and
potential consequences of attacks, particularly if the interconnections
traverse the Internet.  The very act of connecting health information sys-

tems to the Internet introduces a number of new vulnerabilities that
malicious attackers can exploit.  For example, data transmitted across the
network can be intercepted and interpreted if it is not encrypted properly.
Executable code downloaded from remote sites (or embedded in seem-
ingly innocuous e-mail messages) can alter or destroy data contained in
information systems.  Denial-of-service attacks can limit system availability.
Elements of SecurityTo ensure availability, confidentiality, and data integrity, a systemrequires a number of supporting security functions, including the following:¥Authentication mechanisms to verify that people or systems arewho they purport to be;¥Access controls to ensure that authorized entities can access and/ormanipulate protected resources only in accordance with a predetermined
set of rules and privileges;¥Encryption to protect data by scrambling it so that it cannot be read
or interpreted by those without the proper decryption key;Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNET¥Perimeter control to manage interconnections between an organiza-tionÕs internal network and external networks (such as the Internet);¥Attribution/nonrepudiation to ensure that actions taken (such assending or receiving a message) are reliably traceable and cannot be
denied; and¥Resistance to denial-of-service attacks.
These functions are not necessarily performed by the network itself,but the need for them is heightened by the interconnection of information
resources to a network, which can expand the scope of potential threats to
information systems.  In fact, the most appropriate place to perform these

functions varies.  For example, encryption by end hosts may be used to

protect the confidentiality and check the integrity of application data.
Other functions, such as authentication of routing updates, need to be
supported by network elements such as routers.  Security features operate

at different network layers (Box 3.1), a variable that affects functionality.BOX 3.1The Open Systems Interconnection Model of Layered NetworksPacket-switched networks like the Internet are often described as using theOpen Systems Interconnection model, which defines seven network layers:1.  The physical layer is concerned with the accurate transmission of bits over
the physical media (fiber, cable, copper wire, etc.).  The Synchronous Optical Net-

work is an important physical-layer technology used for the long-distance trans-mission of both data and voice.2.  The data link layer is concerned with the delivery of packets between nodes.
Point-to-Point Protocol is a well-known data link protocol.3.  The network layer handles the switching and forwarding of packets from one
link to another, enabling large networks to be built.  The most important network

layer protocol is the Internet Protocol (IP).  Devices that forward IP packets are
known as routers, the basic building block of the Internet.4.  The transport layer handles end-to-end delivery of data between applica-
tions, often adding reliability.  The Transmission Control Protocol, the best-known
transport-layer protocol, provides reliable delivery of data for most Internet applica-tions.5.  The session layer provides a variety of control functions used primarily by
multimedia applications.  Many applications bypass this layer.
6.  The presentation layer handles issues of data formatting and standard rep-resentations of multimedia.  Many applications bypass this layer.
7.  The application layer provides application-specific functionality.  Examples
include the Hypertext Transfer Protocol, which is used for moving data across the
World Wide Web, and the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, the basis of electronicmail.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES147The implementation of security requires a mix of technological solu-tions and institutional policies and procedures.  Institutional policies

define the rules to be enforced; these rules then are allocated to adminis-
trative procedures, physical security measures, and technology.  For

example, organizations cannot simply deploy access control technologies
to limit access to online data without first establishing rules to determine
which users have the authority to view and alter information and under
what conditions.  In addition to implementing technologies such as pass-
words and smart cards to authenticate users, organizations also need to
institute procedures for issuing, changing, and revoking passwords, and
policies must be in place for disciplining offenders.TodayÕs Internet provides no security capabilities at the network level.The Internet was originally designed to facilitate information exchanges
among mutually trusting entities (such as collaborating researchers), so
information is encapsulated into packets that are passed through the net-
work from node to node without encryption.  Software programs called

ÒsniffersÓ can be run on any node through which packets pass and can
scan the contents of a messageÑeven if the message contains sensitivehealth information or a userÕs password.  As devices are attached to the
Internet, their vulnerabilities tend to become more accessible.  For

example, weaknesses in operating systems can be exploited quickly over
the Internet by individuals who wish to gain unauthorized access to
resources.  The large installed base of operating systems with known

security flaws means that a large number of end points on the Internet are
potentially vulnerable to attack.15  These shortcomings will become more
significant as the demand for Internet-mediated health transactions grows
and as the number of potential users increases.16Several efforts are under way to improve the security of the Internet.Work continues on firewalls, which attempt to limit and control Internet-
based access to an organizationÕs computing resources and, hence, sup-port the objectives of confidentiality, integrity, and access.  In addition,

new protocols and standards are being developed that will authenticate
end points and provide greater confidentiality of information transmitted
across the network.  These advances promise to provide greatly increased

security across the Internet, but continued work will be needed to ensure
their deploymentÑand the deployment of the complementary capabili-ties needed to ensure their use.  Primary among these complementary

tools are certificate authorities (described below), which will help vali-
date the identity of end users and which pose a number of technical and
organizational challenges.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETFirewallsA firewall is a device that isolates one part of a network from another,typically isolating an organizationÕs trusted internal network from anuntrusted outside network, such as the Internet.  The function of a firewall

is to limit access to the organizationÕs network from the outside by allow-ing only presumably safe traffic to pass through.  Firewalls do so using

one of four basic designs (Box 3.2) operating at three different networking
layers.  (This is significant because firewalls cannot prevent attacks

launched at layers higher than those at which the firewall operates.)  Typi-

cally, firewalls block all traffic from outside the organizationÕs networkby default and then are configured to allow specific, limited access.  For

example, a firewall might be configured to allow e-mail messages from
outside the corporate network to pass through as long as they are des-
tined to the appropriate mail server.  Similarly, a firewall might allow

access to an organizationÕs public Web server but not to other Web serversBOX 3.2Four Basic Types of FirewallPacket filters operate at the network layer, determining whether to pass orblock individual packets based on criteria such as source address, destination
address, and service requested.  Pass/block criteria are not modified dynamically
in response to the content of previous messages.  Not all desired rules can be
included in packet filters because the decision information (e.g., whether the mes-
sage is a request or a response) may not be contained in the packet itself.Circuit relays operate above the transport layer and pass or block entire con-versations without examining the content of packets.  They are generally consid-

ered more secure than packet filters but tend to require changes in applicationprograms or user behavior, a characteristic that makes them unsuitable for someenvironments.Application gateways operate at the application layer and typically use a sepa-
rate program (or proxy) for each application so that different precautions can betaken for each one.  A mail gateway, for example, might rewrite header lines to

eliminate references to internal machines and keep a log of senders and recipi-ents.  Application gateways are well suited to sites that must authenticate outgoing
messages and are considered highly secure.Dynamic packet filters combine the packet filter and application gateway func-tions.  Most packets are accepted or rejected based on information in individual
incoming packets, but some packets cause modification of the rules that will be
applied to subsequent packets.SOURCE:  Based on material in CSTB (1999).
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES149that are used for proprietary, internal information.  Thus, a company can
maintain a public presence on the Internet without opening up its entire
network to unlimited access by outsiders.Despite their popularity, firewalls have several limitations.  One prob-
lem is that they must be deployed at all places where an organizationÕsnetwork connects to the outside world.  Although such networks often

are designed to limit such external connectivity to one or two points, it is
difficult to prevent unauthorized connectivity at other points.  Individual

users may establish dial-up modem connections to the Internet without
the knowledge of the network administrators, creating a back door into
the corporate network.  If the network can be compromised at such a

point, then firewalls provide no protection.  Malicious intruders can gain
access to the organizationÕs network and the computers attached to it andmay even acquire control of desktop computers.17   In addition, because
each of the specific filtering functions of a firewall must be configured, the
issue of correctness of configuration is critical; the mere presence of a
firewall is not an assurance that any given set of protections has been
established effectively.Even properly configured firewalls in networks without back doorshave limitations.  First, many firewalls are constructed as applications

sitting atop a standard operating system, so they are vulnerable to attacks
against that system.  A few firewalls use custom-built operating systems

that avoid the vulnerabilities inherent in other systems, but these custom
systems can introduce new vulnerabilities that have not been detected
and remedied through the usual process of widespread use.  Second, as

noted earlier, a firewall cannot prevent attacks launched at layers higher
than those at which the firewall operates.  For example, a packet-filtering
firewall cannot protect against attacks conveyed as e-mail attachments
because it cannot understand attachment types and their risks.  Third,

firewall function is limited by the use of end-to-end cryptography.
Firewalls cannot examine any fields in packets that have been encrypted
or modify packets that must be cryptographically authenticated.  Hence,

many systems tend to decrypt at the firewall or use a layered approach in
which some encryption or decryption takes place at the firewall and some
inside it.Fourth, firewalls tend to limit the external electronic communicationsof those behind the firewall.  By filtering out (i.e., blocking) incoming

messages that do not meet the specified access provisions, firewalls pre-
vent internal users from receiving messages from some sources.  Such a

trade-off is inherent in the design of a firewall, which must use some
fairly static rules to filter incoming messages.  Fifth, firewalls increasingly

are challenged by the advent of higher-speed Internet connections, which
require the examination of packets at an ever-increasing rate.  Sixth, and
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETperhaps most importantly, firewalls are effective only against externalthreats to an organizationÕs data networks; they do not address threatsposed by internal users who may intentionally or unintentionally violate
security and confidentiality policies.  Organizations that focus their secu-
rity efforts too narrowly on external threats may not adequately protect
themselves from insiders.  In many industries, including health care, the

insider threat historically has been of greater concern.Security ProtocolsAs the scope and use of Internet applications grow, increased atten-tion has been devoted to the development of protocols for user authenti-
cation and protection of messaging traffic.  The protocols available today

operate at a number of layers in the network.  Whereas early protocols

used in the military tended to provide link-level security, more recent
protocols, such as Internet Protocol Security (IPSec), Transport Layer
Security (TLS), and Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), tend to operate at the
network, transport, and application levels, respectively.  All of these are

proposed IETF standards and all can be expected to see more widespread
application.  All use encryption as the basis for authentication and confi-

dentiality.Encryption TechnologiesEncryption technologies generally are classified as either symmetrickey systems (also called private key cryptography) or asymmetric key
systems (also called public key cryptography), both of which may be used
during the course of a single session between communicating parties.
The two technologies differ in a number of respects, including the time it
takes to encrypt and decrypt messages and ease of administration.  As a

result, they tend to be best suited to different types of applications.  Sym-

metric encryption, for example, tends to work better when communicating
parties have a preexisting relationship.  Asymmetric systems, in contrast,

work well between parties that have not communicated before, as in many
electronic commerce applications; however, revocation of credentials can
be more difficult than with symmetric encryption systems.Symmetric encryption uses a single key to encrypt and decrypt data.Parties wishing to exchange information securely must ensure that they
both have access to the key, meaning that mechanisms must be in place
for distributing keys to pairs of users before secure transmissions can
begin.  This process sometimes involves physically distributing disks con-

taining the key, but this approach is slow and can be used only if the
communicating parties can be identified in advance.  A number of mecha-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES151nisms, including online key distribution centers,18 have been established
to facilitate the electronic distribution of symmetric keys on an as-needed
basis.  Many such mechanisms rely on asymmetric key cryptography to

authenticate parties and distribute keys before they exchange sensitive
information.  In either case, care must be taken to ensure that keys are not

divulged to others, are changed periodically, and are revoked as needed.Asymmetric (public key) cryptography is an important component ofInternet security because it provides a way in which strangers can estab-
lish the necessary set of shared information to support authentication and
encryption.  This means it could be useful in exchanges of patient health

records between two unaffiliated hospitals.  In an asymmetric key system,

a given user (e.g., an individual or corporation) has a pair of keys, one of
which is private (known only to the key owner) and one of which is
public and may be shared with anyone (or posted in a directory).  Data

encrypted using the private key can only be decrypted using the public
key; and data encrypted with the public key can only be decrypted with
the private key.  Private keys also can be used to support authentication in

the following way:  If a recipient can decrypt a message using the sender
Õspublic key, then the original message could have come only from the
holder of the private key.  Conversely, a user wishing to send a message

to be read only by its intended recipient can guarantee confidentiality by
using the recipientÕs public key to encrypt the message; the resulting datawill be readable only by the owner of the private key.  Asymmetric

encryption systems require keys about 10 times longer than those of sym-
metric encryption systems and run considerably more slowly.  For this

reason, asymmetric cryptography is used only to authenticate the partici-
pants in an information exchange and to distribute symmetric keys, which
then are used to protect messages exchanged during the remainder of the
session.Distribution of Encryption KeysA major challenge in using asymmetric cryptography is the distribu-tion of public keys.  A person who wishes to use a certain public key for

either encryption or authentication needs to know for certain that the key
belongs to the appropriate entity; otherwise, authentication is not pos-
sible, and encrypted data may be read by an unintended recipient.  This

problem usually is handled by having some sort of certification authority
(CA) issue certificatesÑdigitally signed documents that state Òpublic keyX belongs to entity Y.Ó  A certificate can be trusted only if the reader
knows the public key for the CA.  Thus, if a user obtains a single authori-
tative public key (that of the CA), any other entity that needs to proveNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETownership of a certain public key to that user can do so by providing acertificate for the key.One difficulty involved in issuing certificates is scale:  Large numbers
of certificates need to be given to all potential participants in various
types of transactions.  Health care would benefit greatly from the issuance

of certificates to all health care consumersÑthe entire U.S. population.Such widespread deployment of certificates would enable consumers to
gain authenticated access to sensitive health care information (e.g., lab
test results) from any provider.  Thus, a public key infrastructure (PKI)

suitable for health care would need to have the capacity to operate on a
scale of hundreds of millions of users.  Good initial progress has been

made in issuing certificates to Internet vendors of goods and services, but
the process has not been extended to individual consumers.  One way to

make the process more scalable is to arrange CAs in a hierarchy, with the
root CA certifying lower-level CAs that issue certificates to even lower-
level entities, and so on down to the level at which certificates for indi-
vidual users are issued.  In this case, the process of proving that one is the

owner of a certain public key may involve providing a hierarchical chain
of certificates that leads from the root down to the owner of the key.  The
term PKI often is applied to the general problem of distributing keys and
certificates to a large population in a scalable way.The task of building a hierarchy of CAs presents its own challenges.19Most notable of these is the establishment of consistent policies for issu-
ing certificates.  One CA, for example, might give certificates to anyone

who requests one by e-mail, whereas another might require recipients to
sign an affidavit and provide a birth certificate and passport before pro-
viding a certificate.  In the system used to support PGP for secure e-mail,
any user with a public key can issue a certificate, creating a Òweb of trustÓamong particular groups of users rather than a strict hierarchy.  PGP also

allows users to decide how well they trust a certain certificate based on
who it is from and how many corroborating certificates the user holds.  In

a hierarchical model, if just one CA in the hierarchy uses weak procedures
to establish an individualÕs identity (e.g., issuing certificates to individualswithout seeing them in person with positive proof of their identity), then
the whole certification system is compromised, because anyone might be
able to get a fake certificate from that CA.  Such policy differences make it

difficult for users and applications to interpret certificates and determine
which ones meet their criteria of proof of identity, effectively undermin-
ing the goal of enabling broad deployment of asymmetric cryptography.
One way to address this issue (proposed in the Privacy Enhanced Mail
architecture but not widely deployed) is to have the top-level CA certify
the policies used by lower-level CAs, so that weaker policies can be readily
identified.  However, it is clear that variability of policies among CAs will
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES153add complexity to the system and is likely to weaken the overall level oftrust that can be placed in public keys.Another challenge is certificate revocation, which may be required ifthe owner of a public/private key pair believes that the private key has
been compromised.  Revocation typically is handled by a combination of

expiration dates on certificates and revocation lists, which are published
lists of certificates that are to be considered invalid, signed by the issuing
CA.  To be sure that a certificate is valid, therefore, it is essential to have

the most up-to-date revocation list from the CA that issued the certificate.
The use of expiration dates on all certificates ensures that revocation lists
do not grow infinitely large, but it requires all users to undergo periodic
recertification, thus increasing the workload on the CAs.  An effective PKI

must have an efficient means for disseminating up-to-date revocation
lists.The certificate model also raises issues of personal privacy.  The CA
models developed to date bind a public key to a particular identity,
whether an organization or individual.  The use of that key, therefore, can

be linked to the activities of that organization or individual.  Some work

has been initiated on key-centric systems, in which names associated with
public keys are not bound to a particular individual but have, rather, only
local significance for the convenience of users.  The Simple Public Key

Infrastructure working group of the IETF is attempting to develop an
Internet standard that incorporates these ideas, but no related commercial
products are available.Internet Protocol SecurityInternet Protocol Security is an architecture and set of standards thatprovides a variety of services, such as encryption and authentication of IP
packets, at the network layer (Kent and Atkinson, 1998a,b,c).  IPSec can

protect traffic across any LAN or wide-area-network technology and can
be terminated at end systems or security gateways (e.g., firewalls).  Now

being standardized at the IETF, IPSec has been deployed initially in vir-
tual private networks (VPNs) that use the Internet as the underlying
medium but establish an encrypted tunnel across it.  An encrypted tunnel

can be created between a pair of IPSec gateways, which might be located,
for example, at two geographically separated offices of a single company.
Each gateway encrypts the data and sends them to the other gateway.
The receiving gateway then decrypts the data before passing them on to
the final recipient at the site.  Because the data are encrypted using a key

known only to the two gateways, the message cannot be read by anyone
else while crossing the Internet.  Furthermore, the receiving gateway can

authenticate the data as having come from the sending site and not someNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETother source on the Internet.  An attractive feature of this technology is
that a configuration of one device at each site can protect traffic between
those sites against eavesdropping and corruption.  Protection does not

extend beyond the ends of the tunnel.Virtual private networks have several limitations.  First, VPNs based
on tunnels do not scale well.  Increasing the number of participants in a

VPN increases the number of points at which the system can be compro-
mised and makes the process of key management much more difficult.
Second, IPSec tunnels frequently require a priori knowledge of where
connectivity will be required, because the gateways must be configured
with appropriate keys (in the absence of an automated key management
infrastructure) and routing information may need to be modified to force
traffic to use the appropriate tunnel.  This characteristic makes IPSec a

viable alternative for information exchanges between organizations with
well-established relationships but less effective for unexpected or transi-
tory exchanges of information.  In health care, VPNs might be useful for

secure communications among elements of an integrated delivery system
or between health care providers and the Health Care Financing Admin-
istration (HCFA), which processes Medicare claims, but they could not
readily support exchanges of patient records between unaffiliated hospi-
tals in an emergency situation.Third, IPSec tunnels do not necessarily protect data during the entiretransit between sender and receiver.  Many enterprises encrypt data only
between VPN gateways, which are devices that sit at the boundary
between the public Internet and the corporate network and encrypt data
traversing the Internet.  This configuration simplifies the key manage-

ment problem because it requires encryption keys for the gateways onlyÑnot for all the computers connected to themÑand averts the need tomodify end usersÕ machines.  At the same time, it leaves data unencrypted
as they pass between the usersÕ computers and their respective gateways,
meaning that someone with physical access to the data lines could, in
theory, intercept and read the messages.  Some users note that, in practice,

the expectation of security in a VPN can lull them into failing to encrypt
data passed across it.  Often, unencrypted data are sent over a LAN until

reaching a VPN gateway; in other cases, as with frame relay, the data are
not encrypted and are subject to misrouting.Transport Layer SecurityAn alternative mechanism for providing encryption and authentica-tion across the Internet is transport layer security, which is widely used
across the Internet in the form of the Secure Socket Layer (SSL) system
(Dierks and Allen, 1999).  This technology is widely used for transmitting
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES155sensitive information (such as credit card numbers) between Webbrowsers and servers.  Transport layer security uses asymmetric encryp-

tion to authenticate the server (and, optionally, the client) and symmetric
encryption to protect communications between the end user and the Web
site.  An organization that requires encryption for transactions processed

through its Web site obtains a certificate from a CA (e.g., Verisign,
CyberTrust, CertCo, or DST).  When a user connects to the organization
ÕsWeb site, the site provides its certificate.  Modern Web browsers come

equipped with the public keys of the major CAs so that the browser can
verify the public key of the Web site and thereby authenticate it.Secure Socket Layer can support encryption in both directions (to andfrom the Web site), but as commonly used today it provides authentica-
tion of only the host organizationÕs Web site.20  The bidirectional authen-tication function is generally not invoked; it would require the client (as
well as the server) to have a certificate, which is not generally the case.  As

a result, users can readily verify the identity of the organization with
which they are communicating, but the server site typically cannot verify
the identity of the person using asymmetric encryption techniques.  Exist-

ing transport layer security, therefore, has been used for credit card trans-
actions in which authentication of the user is not performed cryptographi-
cally but rather by some other means (e.g., verification of card number,
expiration date, and billing address or a name and password) in which
the misidentification of a client has a known cost (e.g., unrecoverable
accounts receivable).  In the absence of client certificates, SSL is not well-

suited to applications in which the costs of misrepresentation of identity
cannot be quantified and in which secure passwords are not considered
sufficient for authentication.  In the health domain, such applications

might include the delivery of health care via the Internet or real-time
patient monitoring.Although an individual can obtain a certificate in much the same waythat a corporation running a Web site does, the issuance of certificates to
many individuals requires methods that are more scalable than those
available today and that ensure greater compatibility in the criteria used
to issue them.21  Organizations that maintain a presence on the Internet
generally find it possible to obtain a certified public key from one of the
small number of CAs, but there is no infrastructure in place to enable
individuals to obtain certificates on a large scale.  Such problems are

likely to inhibit the use of applications in which authentication of the
consumer is as important as authentication of the vendor.Several initiatives are under way to deploy CAs for health applica-tions.  In October 1999, Intel announced that it would work with the

American Medical Association to provide digital certificates to physicians
in the hope of enabling doctors to transmit information such as test resultsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETto patients and other health care workers.  Healtheon/WebMD has agreed
to provide the product to physicians, while other health Web sites, including
WellMed and Franklin Health,  intend to provide access to the product on

the consumer side (Reuters, 1999).22  The Robert Wood Johnson Founda-
tion has also awarded a $2.5 million grant for a five-state HealthKey
initiative that will explore ways to facilitate electronic exchanges of infor-
mation among companies in the health sector while protecting the confi-
dentiality of the data.23  PKI is one of the solutions being considered.
The financial industry has found SSL suitable for many of its consumer-oriented activities, such as online banking and stock trading, but the limi-
tations of this system in the health domain are apparent.  At present,

financial institutions rely primarily on certificates for server authentica-
tion and on passwords for client authentication.  As users obtain more

online accounts, they need more passwords.  To help themselves remem-

ber all these passwords, users take many steps that reduce security, choos-
ing passwords that are easy to recall (and easy for others to guess), reusing
passwords already in place for other accounts (thus making all of their
accounts vulnerable to the compromise of a single password), and writing
down passwords (making them easier for others to find).  Furthermore,

financial organizations usually issue passwords by mailing them to the
address of record for the account.  This process introduces significant

delay in password assignment, making the process inappropriate for
health applications in which an emergency room physician may need
access to a patient record at a remote hospital.  The distribution process is

also limited in that a mailed password can easily be intercepted by the
wrong member of a householdÑa vulnerability that may have more
serious consequences with health data than with financial information.
Hence, the trade-offs that are acceptable for applications in the financial
sector do not seem suitable for health care.Confidential E-mailSoftware to encrypt e-mail has been available for many years, but itsuse has been limited because, until recently, it had not been integrated
well into standard e-mail applications.  PGP is a well-developed collec-

tion of encryption software that is commercially supported and available
free of charge for noncommercial use (Zimmerman, 1994).  Although it

supports a variety of functions, it is used most often to digitally sign and/
or encrypt e-mail.  To send an encrypted e-mail message, the sender must

gain access to the public keys held by the intended recipient(s), who must
have obtained PGP public/private key pairs in advance.24  An e-mail
message to be sent to several recipients is encrypted using a symmetric
algorithm with a new (secret) session key.  This key is then encrypted
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES157using the public key of each of the recipients, and the results of thisencryption are included in the header of the transmitted message.  Soft-

ware run by each recipient uses the recipientÕs private key to retrieve thesession key.The emerging standard for commercial e-mail systems is Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (S/MIME).  MIME is an extension

to standard e-mail formats that supports the transmission of data, such as
video and audio, that are not usually represented as ASCII text.  S/MIME

supports the transmission of signed and/or encrypted data in e-mail mes-
sages in much the same way that PGP does.  However, S/MIME uses

certificates based on an international standard called X.509 version 3 and
generally embraces the hierarchical model for CAs, as opposed to PGPÕswebs of trust.Access ControlsAccess controls are an important element of computer systems secu-rity.  They consist of a range of techniques for controlling the capability of

active entities (such as computers, processes, or users) to use passiveentities (such as computers, files, directories, or memory).  For example,

access controls can prevent certain users from viewing a particular data-
base, modifying information that they can view, or running certain pro-
grams and functions.  Because they operate at the level of bits, access

controls can be used to permit users to access portions of an encrypted file
while still protecting the overall confidentiality of the information.  Access

controls can operate at virtually all layers in a networked applicationÑfrom the physical layers defining the communications medium itself
through the application layer consisting of software programsÑand canextend access privileges based on various characteristics, such as the userÕsidentity or role in the organization (Box 3.3).Health care poses an especially difficult challenge with respect toaccess controls because of the difficulty of balancing the need to protect
confidential information from unnecessary dissemination against the need
to ensure adequate access to enable the provision of care.  It is often

difficult in a clinical setting to determine a priori who should or should
not be granted access to a particular patientÕs medical record.  Many
clinicians may interact with a patient during the course of treatment, and
all are likely to need access to the medical record.  During a typical hospi-

tal stay, numerous health care workers, including dieticians and pharma-
cists who must consider potential drug and food interactions, will need
access to the record.  A study by the Institute of Medicine (1997) identified

33 different types of individual users of patient medical recordsÑinclud-ing care providers, health plan administrators, researchers, educators,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 3.3Types of Access ControlAccess controls can be based on labels, identity, capability, or location.  In
label-based access control, access decisions are made by comparing a label
stored in the data with a label stored with the subject attempting to access thedataÑthe subjectÕs identity is irrelevant.  In identity-based control, access deci-
sions are made by comparing the identity of the subject with a list of individual
users and groups of users who are allowed to access the object.  As such, identity-
based access controls depend on accurate authentication of the identity of theuser.1  In capability-based control, access decisions are made by checking a so-
called permission ticket attached to the object.  Location-based access controls
are typically used in conjunction with the other three forms of access control toallow different levels of access depending on the userÕs physical location.  For

example, a terminal in a patientÕs hospital room might be configured to allow anyauthenticated care provider to access that patientÕs record, whereas remote accessmight allow providers to view records of only their own patients.2These approaches can be combined to produce different forms of access con-trol.  In health care, many access controls are role-based
, using a combination oflabel, identity, and capability-based controls.  Role-based systems grant permis-

sion for a particular individual to access particular data or capabilities based on jobfunctions.  For example, administrative workers might be granted access to billingrecords but not to clinical databases containing medical records of patients.  Phy-

sicians and nurses might both be granted access to the clinical database, but onlyto records of patients directly under their care.  Similarly, distinctions might be
made with regard to which care providers can view information and which onescan enter treatment orders and/or prescriptions.  Roles can be defined broadly
(e.g., physician, nurse, administrator) or narrowly (e.g., cardiologist, neurologist,
intensive-care nurse, pediatric nurse, human resources administrator, billing clerk),depending on the granularity of the meaningful distinctions among workers in aparticular organization and the level of differentiation required.1Some types of smart cards that are used for authentication contain information on useraccess privileges, providing a physical example of the close linkages between these two
functions.2Virtual private networks and firewalls can also be considered forms of high-level accesscontrol that limit user access to a network or a portion thereof.  A firewall might use

identity-based controls (such as the userÕs IP address), whereas a VPN might use acombination of identity-based control (using the identity contained in a certificate) andcapability-based control (based on the possession of an encryption key).accreditation boards, and policy makersÑand 34 representative types ofinstitutions.  Each of these users needs different information, and their

access privileges could be markedly different, compounding the diffi-
culty of developing effective access controls and confidentiality policies
(upon which access controls are based).Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES159Also important are tools that support rapid access for authorizedindividuals.  In some cases, military or commercial secrets may require

protection over a span of decades or more (e.g., the formula for Coca-Cola
or technical details of nuclear weapons).  Patient records can contain data

equally sensitive from the standpoint of the individuals concerned, requiring

lifetime protection, yet they also must be available in emergency situa-
tions to a much larger class of people.  Furthermore, many different users

may have occasional permission to view or modify portions of records.
For example, a major public benefit of increased automation of health care
information systems should be the availability of the data for research
studies.  Unless the subjects of the studies can be assured that their infor-
mation will be protected, through either the clear enforcement of appro-
priate release policies or the ÒanonymizationÓ of the records, this benefit
will be limited.Because they need to ensure adequate access to health information inemergencies, many health care organizations either (1) routinely give
physicians access to information on all patients within the organizationÕscare or (2) routinely give them access to information on only those patients
directly under the physicianÕs care but provide emergency overrides toallow access to the records of other physiciansÕ patients if needed.  The
organizations then rely on the use of audit trails to review accesses after
the fact.  Such audits are intended to deter the abuse of access privileges,

but their effectiveness depends on the availability of tools for automati-
cally detecting anomalous accesses to medical records.  Some work is

under way on such tools, but they are still in their infancy.  More work is
needed to develop sophisticated audit analysis tools that take into account
expected usage patterns and auxiliary information, such as appointment
schedules and referral orders, to more accurately identify potential viola-
tions of confidentiality policies.The introduction of networking (e.g., the Internet) compounds theaccess control problem by facilitating the exchange of electronic medical
records among different users of health information.  Standard access

controls can limit the use of information within a single organization but
cannot control how information is used once transferred to another orga-
nization.  Some work is under way to develop technologies that could

control such secondary uses.  Cryptographic envelopes and associated

rights-management languages, such as those developed by IBM, Xerox,
and InterTrust Technologies, enable content owners to send data in an
encrypted form to users outside their organizations and to specify the
actions that different users can undertake with protected data, perhaps
allowing them to view it, for example, but not to print or redistribute it.
Such tools may also allow auditing accesses of health records across insti-
tutional boundaries.  Cryptographic envelopes are still relatively new and
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETwere developed primarily to protect copyrighted material and ensureproper payment for viewing or copying it.  Additional work is needed to
extend this model into the health sector and develop rules for sharing
information among different types of health care organizations.Network AvailabilityNetwork availability is another essential element of information sys-tems security.25  Availability is the probability that the network (i.e., the
Internet) will be operational at a particular point in time and accessible to
those who need it.  High availability is a key requirement for mission-

critical and time-critical applications of the Internet, including many in
health care.  If the availability of the Internet is uncertain, then health care

providers cannot rely on it for the provision of remote patient care or
access to electronic medical records in the emergency room, although
they may still be able to use it (with some degree of frustration) to submit
bills and allow consumers to select physicians.Network availability can be compromised by a number of factors,including hardware or software failures, operator errors, malicious
attacks, or environmental disruptions (e.g., lightning strikes, backhoes
cutting fiber-optic cable) that cause particular links or entire sectors of the
network to fail.  Availability is closely related to both QOS and security in

that the failure of a link connecting two routers across the Internet can
affect the capability of an ISP to meet its QOS guarantees, and security
measures that protect a network from malicious attacks (whether actual
network intrusions or denial-of service attacks) can help ensure its avail-
ability.  In addition, security measures such as ensuring software correct-

ness and ensuring software integrity (avoiding viruses, worms, Trojan
horses, etc.) will address some issues of availability.  However, such

mechanisms do not necessarily protect a network from accidental operator
errors or physical damage or ensure network survival in the face of hos-
tile attacks.By virtue of its design, the Internet is reasonably resistant to manyforms of failure.  Its web-like interconnections among routers ensure the

existence of multiple routes for channeling messages across the network.
If one link fails, then traffic can be routed along an alternative pathway.
In most cases, the network can converge on a new path that avoids the
failed link within a matter of seconds, providing sufficient reliability for
many, if not most, Internet applications.  Nevertheless, service outages do

occur.  ISPs and Web hosting facilities operate their network infrastructures
with cutting-edge technology but, despite the adequacy of the equipment
and redundant fiber links, outages lasting for hours occur several times a
year.  The causes vary.  Faulty routers can announce incorrect routes andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES161cause disturbances to propagate throughout a providerÕs network, forexample, or an upgrade can cause unexpected problems when a network
is large, despite extensive testing.To counteract these problems, many end-user organizations maintainredundant links from different ISPs.  To do so, an organization needs to

run its own Internet routers and announce and manage its own routes
across the Internet.  The management overhead involved in deciding how

to balance traffic between the links and when to switch all traffic to one
link is significant and error-prone.  Indeed, many of the difficulties that

arise today are directly related to the complexity of this problem.  The

number of routes, the size of the resulting data structures, the inherently
distributed nature of routing algorithms, and the constraints applied by
administrative/business requirements all contribute to this complexity.
A continued strong research effort is required to improve the reliability
and performance of Internet routing protocols.Additional efforts are needed to consider means of responding todisaster scenarios in which large portions of the network fail, resulting in
major outages.  Such disasters could be confined to the network, in which

case mechanisms are needed for ensuring continued transmission of a
variety of network traffic, or they could be more widespreadÑfires, earth-quakes, or stormsÑand thus might call for ways of mobilizing health careresources despite widespread network outages.  In both cases, mecha-

nisms are needed to ensure adequate network availability for mission-
critical applications and to handle high-priority traffic.  Many policy is-

sues would need to be addressed to help balance the networking needs of
health care organizations against those of other critical communications.
Additional work is needed in the area of survivability to ensure that the
network can maintain or restore an acceptable level of performance dur-
ing failure conditions by applying various restoration techniques.Some work is under way in the Department of Defense to developtechniques for prioritizing network traffic in case of degradations that
limit network capacity, but such work may need to be extended to con-
sider the requirements of health care.  As an example, in disaster situa-

tions, telephone service providers can block incoming calls to the affected
region at their source (by providing a busy signal) so that limited link
capacity can be used for more urgent outgoing calls.  Congestion control

on the Internet is problematic because no mechanisms exist to manage
traffic based on user, connection, source, or destination.  Routers do not

store information about users and connections, and doing so would require
significant memory and management mechanisms and would also raise a
host of privacy concerns that would need to be addressed.  Some newer

algorithms for congestion control have been designed to work at the IPNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETlevel, but more research is needed, especially in the area of defining andenforcing flexible and varied policies for congestion control (CSTB, 1999).BROADBAND TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE LOCAL LOOPBefore the health community and health care consumers can benefitfrom future Internet applications, they must gain access to sufficient band-
width in their local connections to ISPs to handle the anticipated traffic
loads.  Health care organizations that intend to transmit detailed radio-

graphic images to remote specialists for near-real-time interpretation, for
example, will need Internet connections capable of transmitting hundreds
of kilobits per second, if not megabits per second.  Biomedical research

institutes conducting distributed simulations will also need high-bandwidth
connections.  Organizations will meet many of these needs by leasing

communications lines with the needed capacity.  Alternatively, some

organizations that provide content over the Internet and expect high
demand for their services may attempt to offload some of their functions
to third parties that can acquire the needed capacity, although there may
be limitations to this model in health applications (see Box 3.4).BOX 3.4Web Hosting for Health Applications?Web hosting is one approach taken by some organizations to overcomingbottlenecks in local access technologies.  This term refers to an arrangement in
which an organization hands off the management of its Web server to another
party, such as an Internet Service Provider, while continuing to provide the con-tent.  The responsibility for maintaining performance, reliability, redundancy, and
network bandwidth rests with the hosting company, which potentially can reap
economies of scale by performing the same service for many Web content pro-viders.  Companies that host Web sites can contract for large amounts of band-
width and spread the costs over many customers.  Web hosting is popular in many

business settings because of the challenges involved in administering a Webserver and the cost of the high-bandwidth connections that are often requiredbetween a Web server and the Internet.Despite its advantages, Web hosting is not well suited to many health applica-tions.  First, the sensitivity of the information may preclude its transfer to a third
party in unencrypted form.  Second, Web hosting works well when the Web server

provides content that may not change very rapidly.  This condition may not hold
true in an environment in which health care companies endeavor to provide ser-vices over the Internet.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES163TABLE 3.1  Technologies for Wireline Connections to the Internet
TechnologyaMaximum Data RatebDS-056 kbps
DS-1 dial-up56 kbps to 1.344 Mbps
DS-1 private line (T1)1.544 Mbps

DS-3 private line (T3)45 Mbps
OC-3155 Mbps
OC-12622 Mbps

OC-482.5 Gbps
OC-19210 Gbps
aDS, digital service; OC, optical carrier.bkbps, kilobits per second; Mbps, megabits per second; Gbps, gigabits per second.SOURCE:  B. Davie, Cisco Systems, presentation to the committee on September 9, 1999,
Washington, D.C.Many businesses already connect to the Internet over dedicated linesat speeds ranging from 1.5 Mbps (T1 lines) to 155 Mbps (OC-3 access).
The various possibilities are listed in Table 3.1.  A few organizations lease

OC-12 lines capable of transmitting 622 Mbps, but these tend to be limited
to a few high-profile Web sites that expect large amounts of traffic.  Alter-

natively, large organizations can subscribe to services that provide high-
bandwidth access over a shared medium.  Frame relay, for example, is a

packet-switched connection typically sold at speeds ranging from 56 kbps
to 1.5 Mbps; packets from various subscribers are mixed together across
the underlying links.  Frame relay is less expensive than a dedicated line

but introduces some uncertainty about instantaneous capacity as other
organizations contend for bandwidth.  Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)

is another  service that is starting to supplement frame relay as a switched

alternative to leased lines.  In addition to offering higher speeds (e.g., 155

Mbps), ATM offers a wider range of QOS options than frame relay does
and was designed to handle mixed voice, data, and video.Although leased lines, frame relay, and ATM are viable alternativesfor a variety of institutional users, they are generally too expensive for
residential users and small businesses (such as private practioners).
Leased lines can cost from hundreds to thousands of dollars per month,
depending on the bandwidth provided, and a 56-kbps frame relay con-
nection can cost $150 per month after installation.  The overwhelming

majority of residential users today connect to the Internet using a modem
connected to a conventional telephone line.  Such connectivity is almost

universally availableÑaccessible from any location with a telephonelineÑbut is limited in bandwidth.  The fastest modem connections todayare capable of providing 56 kbps, but many residential users connect atNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNET28.8 kbps or less.  These low connection speeds are suitable for many of
todayÕs health applications, such as downloading online information andparticipating in chat groups, but they can be bottlenecks for large files
(whether text, video, or audio) and real-time video.Future health applications of the Internet may demand more band-width to residential and small institutional users than conventional
modems operating over telephone lines can provide.  For example, if

online health records become more widely used and begin to contain
more medical imagery (e.g., X rays, CT scans, MRIs), then greater band-
width will be needed to download the images quickly.  If rural health

clinics begin sending radiographic images to remote specialists for near-
real-time interpretation, then they will need significant bandwidth.  More

significantly, applications such as video-based teleconsultations and
teleradiology will require as much bandwidth out of the home or small
office (upstream to the ISP) as into it (downstream into the home or office),
because images will be transmitted in both directions.This requirement for symmetry in upstream and downstream band-width allocation represents a significant shift from most current consumer
Internet applications, which assume the majority of information will flow
from the Internet to the consumer.  Two of the more popular technologies

currently available for broadband access in the local loopÑmodems usingcable television lines and digital subscriber line (DSL) technologies (Box
3.5)Ñallocate bandwidth asymmetrically, providing more bandwidthdownstream than up (Table 3.2).26  Cable modems, for example, enable
users to receive data at speeds as high as 10 Mbps but transmit data at
only 384 kbps.  Bandwidth is shared with neighboring residences (up to

several hundred), so the exact amount of bandwidth available to an indi-
vidual at a given point in time depends on his or her level of activity.27Most deployments of DSL technology support up to 1.5 Mbps down-
stream and 768 kbps upstream.  Unless high-quality videoconferencing or

distributed simulation games become popular with consumers and drive
the need for downstream video, the health sector could become a driver
for this capability.It is possible to reconfigure DSL symmetries with a technology avail-able today, discrete multitone (DMT).  But this can be done only if an

upcoming standards decision for very-high-speed DSL (known as VDSL)
favors the DMT approach.  Some VDSL technologies provide data speeds

up to 26 Mbps downstream and 3 Mbps upstream over copper wire at
distances of up to 3,000 ft.  The use of DMT makes it possible to achieve

more symmetric bandwidth allocations of up to 10 Mbps in each direction
at distances of up to 5,000 ft.  If this approach is not standardized, then

asymmetric technologies will be locked in much more strongly and diffi-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES165BOX 3.5Technical Alternatives for Wireline Broadband AccessCable modems allow residential users to connect to Internet service providers
over a hybrid fiber-coaxial (HFC) network that is currently installed to deliver cabletelevision signals.  Fiber-optic lines run from the cable operator
Õs central facility (orhead-end) to local neighborhoods (or nodes), where they connect into the existingnetwork of coaxial cables that extend to individual homes.  One or more of the 80
to 120 channels carried over a typical HFC network can be allocated to data trans-
fers for Internet access.  Each channel is 6 megahertz (MHz) and offers 30 mega-
bit per second data rates shared with other users in the local neighborhood.  The
head-end assigns time slots to users on the same network and achieves utilization
rates of approximately 85 percent.  All transmissions are encrypted between the
head-end and user, and encryption keys change frequently.  Uplink capacity in
cable systems is typically limited to roughly 384 kilobits per second by channel
spectrum.  Cable systems transmit information to the home in channels spread
across the 50 to 700 MHz spectrum (50 MHz is the equivalent of channel 2, whichis where cable companies were required to start for compatibility reasons).  Data

must be sent upstream over the 5 to 42 MHz spectrum, which offers lower datarates.Digital subscriber line (DSL) technology runs over the existing twisted-pair cop-
per wire that is used for telephony, but at the central office the twisted pair isconnected to a DSL modem rather than a conventional telephone switch.  The
system uses multilevel coding of information to obtain high bandwidth across lim-ited lengths of wire.  A technique called Discrete Multitone in effect divides the
bandwidth of the telephone wire into 256 separate subchannels, each with 4 kHz
capacity.  Because many service providers are interested in supporting video-on-
demand for entertainment purposes, most of these channels have been allocatedto downstream capacity, resulting in a proliferation of asymmetric digital subscriber
line offerings, with roughly 6 MHz of downstream capacity and 600 kHz of up-stream capacity.  The signal coding is an international standard.
SOURCES:  Milo Medin, Excite@Home Corp., presentation to the committee on De-
cember 17, 1999, Stanford, Calif.; Hawley (1999).TABLE 3.2  Wireline Technologies for Residential Broadband Access
TechnologyDownstream Data RateUpstream Data Rate
Dial-up modemUp to 56 kbpsUp to 56 kbps
Asynchronous digitalUp to 10 Mbps;Up to 768 kbps;
subscriber linetypically 1.5 Mbpstypically 384 kbps
Cable modemUp to 10 Mbps384 kbps
NOTE: kbps, kilobits per second; Mbps, megabits per second.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETcult to dislodge in the future.  Many companies have strong vested inter-ests in existing asymmetric technologies and might resist the use of DMT.Another drawback to cable and DSL networks is that they are notcurrently accessible from all locations within the United States.  Cable

systems pass through approximately 80 million U.S. homes but tend to be
concentrated in densely populated, not rural, areas.  They also tend to

pass through residential neighborhoods instead of business districts (an
artifact of the focus on entertainment applications), a pattern that may
impede the use of these technologies by some health facilities.  In addi-

tion, some older cable networks cannot support cable modems.  The

deployment of cable modem service is accelerating, but cable companies
are expected to focus on upgrading their infrastructure in densely popu-
lated areas, where the greatest revenue can be realized from high-speed
data services.The availability of DSL services and the amount of accessible band-width are highly sensitive to the distance of a residence from the central
office and to the quality of the copper wiring.  Asymmetric DSL (ADSL)

services typically can support data rates up to 1.5 Mbps downstream and
384 kbps upstream over twisted pair up to 18,000 ft, which would reach
almost 80 percent of U.S. households, according to the ADSL Forum.  For

example, one DSL provider offers services at 384 and 768 kbps in metro-
politan areas only and expects to be able to reach 65 percent of the resi-
dences in those areas.  The remaining 35 percent of residences would not

be accessible with the current technology because of either their distance
from the central office or the low quality of the telephone lines.  Deploy-

ment in remote or impoverished areas is not likely to proceed quickly.Another means of Internet access is wireless technologies, which (atleast theoretically) could be used virtually anywhere and also ease the
providerÕs burden of laying down wires, fibers, and cable.  Low-speed
wireless services (e.g., approximately 30 kbps) are currently available in
only a few parts of the country but are likely to become more widespread.
High-speed wireless is also likely to become an alternative for connecting
to the Internet, initially for businesses but perhaps also for consumers
who are not well served by cable or DSL.  Local multipoint distribution

system (LMDS) technology uses high-frequency microwaves for two-way
communications at data rates of up to 155 Mbps.  It operates within areas

(or cells) 2 to 5 miles in diameter.  Performance is limited by rain and by

the need to maintain a line of sight between the transmitting and receiv-
ing stations.Satellite-based systems using either geostationary or low Earth orbit(LEO) satellites boast maximum transmission speeds twice as fast as
LMDS, 3 to 6 times faster than cable, and up to 12 times faster than DSL.
Such systems are likely to cost hundreds of dollars per month for serviceNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES167plus $500 to $1,000 for the antenna (Skoro, 1999).  Geosynchronous sys-
tems are limited by significant propagation delays (i.e., latency), which
may preclude their use in some interactive applications; furthermore, their

data-carrying capacity is distributed among a large number of users.  LEO

systems overcome some of the problems with delay, but the satellites
move fast and have smaller coverage areas, meaning that large numbers
of satellites are needed to provide global coverage and techniques are
needed to manage the handoff of connections between satellites.  High-

power transmitters are needed to achieve high data rates, which implies
large antennas and/or high-frequency operation.  At higher frequencies,

signals degrade more quickly in rain and other adverse weather con-
ditions.Overall, the deployment of broadband Internet services has been slow,albeit increasing, in the United States.  Only about 1 percent of all U.S.

households with Internet access had broadband connections in 1999
(Clark, 1999).  A number of factors are at play, including technology,

economics (both the cost of building broadband networks and the costs of
service), and policy.  Most U.S. households have yet to subscribe to broad-

band services because these connections are not offered in their geo-

graphic area, or because they are too expensive or not viewed as useful.
The spotty coverage and high cost of high-bandwidth access technologies
mean, unfortunately, that those who could benefit most from the health
care applications of the InternetÑsuch as people in rural areas with lim-ited access to medical specialistsÑare the least likely to have high-speedInternet access.Work in many areas, both technical and policy-related, will be requiredto enhance network access for health applications.  In some cases, technical

work will be pursued by the computing and communications industries
without the participation of the health community.  Even so, by voicing

its needs, the health community will help ensure that they are met.  In

other cases, the requirements of the health care community may motivate
research.  Again, the articulation of specific needs will be necessary, and

participation in research may be needed as well.  The following section

identifies several needs that are of particular interest to the health care
community.PRIVACY-ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIESA popular cartoon depicts a dog sitting in front of a computer moni-tor and is captioned, ÒOn the Internet, nobody knows youÕre a dog.Ó At
one level, this statement is trueÑan ordinary Internet user can choose acryptic pseudonym or screen name so that a typical e-mail recipient or
chat room participant cannot easily identify the individual behind theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETname.  But, unless users encrypt e-mail before sending it, every router
that forwards the message will be able to read it.  Even if the message is

encrypted, each router in its path knows the network address from which
it was sent and its destination.  The user
Õs ISP knows the name and addressof the individual who is paying for the service.  If the user sends the

message from a workplace, then the employer has the right to read it;
even a free, public access system is not entirely safe because others may
be looking over the userÕs shoulder.  If the user browses the Web, then the
Web server reached will very likely be able to learn a lot about the userÕscomputer system, including the make, operating system, and browser.
Accordingly, a user querying a database for information on a sensitive
disease or condition might wish to take precautions.There are powerful incentives for Web servers to monitor their visi-tors, because the data extracted have commercial valueÑthey allow busi-nesses to know which parts of their Web site are interesting to which
visitors, thus supporting targeted advertising.  Consumers may benefit

from such advertising because they learn of new products in a manner
that coincides with their tastes, but the implied lack of privacy can be a
deterrent to the use of the Internet in certain health care applications.
Patients express considerable concern about health information.  To pro-

tect their privacy, some patients withhold information from their care
providers, pay their own health expenses (rather than submit claims to an
insurance company), visit multiple care providers to prevent the develop-
ment of a complete health record, or sometimes even avoid seeking care
(Health Privacy Working Group, 1999).  The Internet may ease some such

concerns because it enables consumers to find health information without
visiting their care providers, and it may eventually allow them to seek
consultation from, or be examined by, multiple providers in different
parts of the country.  But without additional privacy protections, a host of

new companies could collect information about personal health interests
from consumers who browse the Web, exchange e-mail with providers,
or purchase health products online.  Profiles of patients
Õ online activities
can divulge considerable information about personal health concerns.
Patients have little control over how that information might be usedÑorto whom it may be sold.Concerns about anonymity extend beyond consumer uses of theInternet.  Care providers and pharmaceutical researchers, too, express

concerns about the privacy of their Internet use.  Some care providers

wonder if their use of the Internet to research diagnostic information
might be construed as a lack of knowledge in certain areas.  If such infor-
mation were tracked byÑor made available toÑemployers or consumergroups, then it could hurt providersÕ practices.  Pharmaceutical compa-
nies are concerned that the use of online databases by their researchersNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES169may divulge secrets about the companyÕs proprietary research.  These
concerns can be addressed in a number of ways, both technical and policy-
oriented, but they need to be put to rest if the Internet is to be used more
pervasively for health applications.Some mechanisms are available that users can exploit to reduce theirexposure to prying eyes on the Internet.  Most attempt to protect the

anonymity of users, so that the sender of a message or a visitor to a Web
site cannot be identified by the recipient or the Web server.  Encryption is

the basic engine that underlies all of these mechanisms.  Until now, most

research on anonymous communication has been carried out informally
and without specific attention to health care applications.  Most of the

existing mechanisms were designed and built in the context of the
Internet, and the future development of Internet infrastructure may be
intertwined with their use.  The benefits and dangers of supporting anony-

mous communication mechanisms have been the subjects of recurrent
(and appropriate) discussions.Health care offers one of the most compelling cases for the benefits.Such mechanisms could make people feel safe in seeking out information
about their own health problems, thereby leading to earlier diagnosis and
better treatment.  They could also be used to solicit reports about the

spread of, for example, sexually transmitted diseases and other health
problems that individuals may prefer to report anonymously.  In addi-

tion, anonymous communication mechanisms can help users limit the
capabilities of others to build databases of their behavior or can reduce
the extent to which they are the targets of undesired commercial solicita-
tions.  For all of these reasons, it would be appropriate for the funders of

health care research to support investigations into anonymous communi-
cation technologies for future Internet architectures.Anonymous E-mailEncryption of e-mail can prevent intermediaries in the network fromreading the messages but cannot prevent them from knowing that the
sender and receiver are communicating; likewise, it cannot necessarily
hide the identity of the sender from the receiver.28  The first mechanismsdeveloped to support anonymous e-mail messages were called re-mailers.
These mechanisms would permit a user to register a pseudonym with the
server.  Mail coming from the user would then be re-mailed by the server,

which would strip out identifying material in headers and make it appear
that the mail originated at the re-mailer.  The re-mailer could forward

replies sent to Òpseudonym@remailerÓ to the registered user.  For addi-
tional protection, the user could encrypt traffic sent to the re-mailer, so
that a wiretapper with connections to the re-mailerÕs inputs and outputsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETcould not easily defeat the mechanism.  The wiretapper still could prob-
ably identify which user was sending mail to which destination by looking
at the timing and lengths of messages sent and forwarded by the re-mailer.A single re-mailer remains a point of trust and vulnerability, becauseit knows the mapping between identities and pseudonyms.  This vulner-

ability has been exploited in legal attacks:  for instance, the operator of a

widely used Finnish re-mailer discontinued operations when he found
that, under Finnish law, he could be forced to reveal the identities of his
subscribers.  Some U.S. companies have revealed pseudonym-identity

mappings when subpoenaed in civil cases.To provide stronger protection, David Chaum (1981) proposed a net-work of re-mailers, called mixes.  In this scheme, each e-mail message

traverses a sequence of mixes and then is reencrypted for transit across
each link.  In addition, each mix collects a set of messages over a period of

time and reorders the set before forwarding them, so that even an observer
who could trace the sequence of arrivals and departures from all mixes
would be unable to trace a message through the network.  Ad hoc net-

works of re-mailers that incorporate some of these approaches are now
operating on the Internet.  A commercial service, Anonymizer.com, pro-

vides an anonymous re-mailing facility that permits a sender, free of
charge, to specify a chain of re-mailers.Protected Web BrowsingBecause forwarding of e-mail does not require a real-time connectionfrom sender to receiver, it is reasonably easy to protect sender anonymity,
at least partially.  Web browsing, because it depends on a reasonably

prompt interaction between client and server, is more difficult to protect.
The timing of message arrival and departure may make it obvious to an
observer that two parties are communicating, even if the message con-
tents and addresses are obscured.  The problem of how to hide the iden-

tity of a user browsing the Web from a server that it accesses can be
broken into two parts:  first, how to prevent an eavesdropper from being

able to trace the path of the traffic and, second, how to prevent the server
from sending traffic over the path that causes the client (against the userÕswishes) to reveal information that could identify the user.29  Most of the
techniques developed for protecting Web browsing have been, or could
be, adapted to support anonymous e-mail and other functions (e.g., file
transfer, news, VPNs) as well.A straightforward approach to providing anonymous Web browsinguses a trusted intermediary, analogous to a simple re-mailer.  The user

forwards the universal resource locator (URL) of interest to the intermedi-
ary, which strips any identifying information from the requests, perhapsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES171even providing an alias, and forwards the request to the intended server.To the server, the request appears to have come from the intermediary.30The intermediary also forwards any data returned to the appropriate
requester.  Anonymizer.com, the Rewebber (formerly Janus), and Proxymate

(formerly Lucent Personal Web Assistant) all provide services of this sort.
The communication between the client and the trusted intermediary can
be protected from simple eavesdropping by using SSL over this link.  The

Rewebber also supports anonymous publishing by providing encrypted
URLs.  A user wishing to retrieve data from an anonymous server obtains

an encrypted URL for that server (this encrypted version may be freely
distributed).  The Rewebber then decrypts the URL, forwards the request

to the hidden server, collects the reply, and returns it to the user.Technology to hide the communication path, based on an enhance-ment of ChaumÕs Mix networks, has been developed and prototyped bythe Naval Research Laboratory in its Onion Routing Project (Reed et al.,
1998).  This scheme creates a bidirectional, real-time connection from client

to server by initiating a sequence of application-layer connections within
a set of nodes acting as mixes.  The path through the network is defined

by an ÒonionÓ (a layered, multiply-encrypted data structure) that is cre-
ated by the user initiating the connection and transmitted to the network.
Only the onionÕs creator knows the complete path; each node in the pathcan determine only its predecessor and successor, so an attack on the
node operators will be difficult to execute.  This strategy also limits the

damage that a compromised onion routing node can do; as long as either
the first or last node in the path is trustworthy, then it is difficult for an
attacker to reconstruct the path.  All the packets in the network have a

fixed length and are mixed and re-encrypted on each hop.  In the event

that the submitted traffic rate is too low to assure adequate protection,
padding (dummy packets) is introduced.  These defenses can be expected

to make it extremely difficult to use traffic analysis to deduce who is
talking to whom, even if an eavesdropper can see all links.Onion routing needs a separate screening mechanism to anonymizethe data flowing between client and server, so that the server is blocked
from sending messages to the client that will cause client software to
reveal its identity.  Although the Onion Routing Project has implemented

an anonymizing proxy to perform this type of blocking, a server can play
any of an increasing number of tricks to determine the clientÕs identity.Other projects, such as Proxymate, have specifically concentrated on hid-
ing the identify of the client from the server and have devised more robust
techniques for doing so than those developed under the Onion Routing
project (Bleichenbacher et al., 1998).  These techniques can be combined

with onion routing to provide strong protection against both traffic
analysis and servers that might try to identify their clients.  A system for
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETprotecting personal identity on the Web that appears to be closely basedon onion routing is being offered commercially by Zero Knowledge
Systems (1998) of Montreal.A different approach has been prototyped by AT&T researchers intheir Crowds system (Reiter and Rubin, 1998).  Instead of creating a sepa-

rate network of mixes to forward traffic, each participant in a Crowd runs
a piece of software (called a jondo) that forwards traffic either to other
nodes in the Crowd or to its final destination.  In effect, when a member of

a Crowd receives a packet, it flips a weighted coin.  If the coin comes up

heads, then the participant decrypts the packet and sends it directly to its
Internet destination address.  Otherwise, it forwards the packet to another

randomly chosen jondo.  The Web server receiving the packet can only

identify the jondo that last forwarded the packet; it cannot deduce the
packetÕs true origin.  Return traffic follows the same randomly generatedpath in the reverse direction.Anonymous PaymentIn the physical world, individuals who do not want stores to tracktheir purchases can pay cash.  The standard approach for buying items on

the Internet, however, is to use a credit card, which is guaranteed to
reveal the purchaserÕs identity.  Several schemes based on cryptographic
mechanisms can enable anonymous payment over the Internet.  Chaum

(1989) pioneered research in this field, but the rise of e-commerce has
triggered much additional work in recent years.  The basic idea is to

create the electronic analog of a coinÑa special number.  The merchant
must be able to determine that the coin is valid (not counterfeit) without
requiring the identity of the individual presenting it.  Because computers
can copy numbers so easily, a basic problem is to prevent a coin from
being spent twice.  Although Chaum and others have invented schemes

that solve this problem and yet provide anonymity (at least for users who
do not try to commit fraud), it has proven difficult to transfer these solu-
tions into the world of commerce.  Law enforcement authorities express

concern over such technologies because of the potential for their use (or
misuse) in money laundering and tax evasion.Anonymous Data Released from Sensitive DatabasesFor many years, the U.S. Bureau of the Census has been charged withreleasing statistically valid data drawn from census forms without per-
mitting individual identities to be inferred.  The problem of constructing

a statistical database that can protect individual identities has long been
known to researchers (Denning et al., 1979; Schlırer, 1981; Denning andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES173Schlırer, 1983).  To limit the possibility of identification, statisticians have
developed several techniques, such as restructuring tables so that no cells
contain very small numbers of individuals and perturbing individual data
records so that statistical properties are preserved but individual records
no longer reflect specific individuals (Cox, 1988).  Medical records have

often been disclosed to researchers under the constraint that the results of
the research not violate patient confidentiality, and, in general, researchers

have lived up to this requirement.Recently, researchers have shown how easily even data stripped ofobvious identifying information (name, address, social security number,
telephone number) may still disclose individual identity, and they have
proposed both technical approaches to reduce the chance of confidential-
ity compromises and guidelines for future release policies (Sweeney,
1998).  The benefits of having full access to relevant data for research

purposes and the difficulty of rendering data anonymous without distort-
ing it are likely to require a continuing trust between researcher and
subject.  An earlier report by the Computer Science and Telecommunica-

tions Board (1997a) discussed systemic flows of information in the health
care industry and proposed specific criteria for universal patient identifiers.
In particular, the report called for technical mechanisms that would help
control linkages among health care databases held by different organiza-
tions, reveal when unauthorized linkages were made, and support appro-
priate linking.  Because Internet connectivity greatly facilitates such link-

ages, it is appropriate to renew the call for research into such mechanisms
in the present report.CONCLUSIONAs the discussion in this chapter demonstrates, ongoing efforts toenhance the capabilities of the Internet will produce many benefits for the
health community.  They will provide mechanisms for offering QOS guar-

antees, better securing health information, expanding broadband access
options for consumers, and protecting consumer privacy.  At the same

time, the technologies expected to be deployed across the Internet in the
near future will not fully meet the needs of critical health care applica-
tions.  In particular, QOS offerings may not meet the need for dynamically

variable service between communicating entities.  Security technologies

may not provide for the widespread issuance of certificates to health careconsumers.  
And the Internet will not necessarily provide the degree ofreliability needed for mission-critical health applications.  Although much

can be done with the technologies currently planned, additional effort
will be needed to make the Internet even more useful to the health com-
munity.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETOne way to ensure that health-related needs are reflected in network-ing research and development is to increase the interaction between the
health and technical communities.  As researchers attest, most network-

ing research is conducted with some potential applications in mind.  Those

applications are shaped by interactions with system users who can envi-
sion new applications.  To date, interaction between health informatics

professionals and networking researchers has been limited.  By contrast,

the interests of industries such as automobile manufacturing and banking
are well represented within the networking community, in part because
of their participation in the IETF and other networking groups.  The health

community may need to better engage these groups to ensure that health
interests are considered.BIBLIOGRAPHYBirman, K.P.  1999.  
The Next Generation Internet:  Unsafe at Any Speed?
  Department of
Computer Science Technical Report, Draft of October 21. Cornell University, Ithaca,N.Y.Blake, S., et al.  1998.  
An Architecture for Differentiated Services.  IETF Request for Comment
(RFC) 2475, December.Bleichenbacher, D., E. Gabber, P. Gibbons, Y. Matias, and A. Mayer.  1998.  
ÒOn Secure andPseudonymous Client-Relationships with Multiple Servers,Ó  pp. 99-108 in Proceedingsof the Third USENIX Electronic Commerce Workshop, Boston, September.Braden, R., S. Shenker, and D. Clark.  1994.  Integrated Services in the Internet Architecture: AnOverview. IETF Request for Comment (RFC) 1633, June.Braden, R., L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, and S. Jamin.  1997.  
Resource ReSerVation Proto-col (RSVP): Version 1 Functional Specification, IETF Request for Comment (RFC) 2205,September.Chaum, D.  1981.  
ÒUntraceable Electronic Mail, Return Addresses, and Digital Pseudonyms,ÓCommunications of the ACM 24(2):84-88.
Chaum, D.  1989.  
ÒPrivacy Protected Payments:  Unconditional Payer and/or Payee
Untraceability,Ó pp. 69-93 in 
Proceedings of SMARTCARD 2000, D. Chaum andI. Schaumuller-Bichl, eds.  North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Clark, D.  1999.  
ÒThe Internet of Tomorrow,Ó Science 285(July 16):353.
Clark, D., and J. Wroclawski.  1997.  
An Approach to Service Allocation in the Internet.  IETF
Draft Report, July.  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.  Avail-
able online at <http://diffserv.lcs.mit.edu/Drafts/draft-clark-diff-svc-alloc-00.txt>.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1994.  Realizing the Information Future:  The Internet and Beyond.
  National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1996.  The Unpredictable Certainty:  Information Infrastructure Through 2000
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1997a.  For the Record: Protecting Electronic Health Information.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES175Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1997b.  Modeling and Simulation:  Linking Entertainment and Defense.  National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999.  Trust in Cyberspace.
  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Cox, L.H.  1988.  
ÒModeling and Controlling User Inference,Ó pp. 167-171 in 
Database Secu-rity: Status and Prospects, C. Landwehr, ed.  North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Denning, D.E., and J. Schlırer.  1983.  
ÒInference Controls for Statistical Databases,Ó  IEEEComputer 16(7):69-82.Denning, D.E., P.J. Denning, and M.D. Schwartz.  1979.  
ÒThe Tracker:  A Threat to Statisti-
cal Database Security,Ó ACM Transactions on Database Systems 4(1):76-96.
Dierks, T., and C. Allen.  1999.  
The TLS Protocol Version 1.0.  IETF Request for Comment
(RFC) 2246, January.Ellison, Carl, and Bruce Schneier.  2000.  
ÒTen Risks of PKI:  What You
Õre Not Being ToldAbout Public Key Infrastructure,Ó Computer Security Journal 16(1):1-7.
Goldberg, I., and D. Wagner.  1998.  
ÒTAZ Servers and the Rewebber Network:  Enabling
Anonymous Publishing on the World Wide Web,Ó First Monday 3(4).  Available onlineat <http://www.rewebber.com>.Halabi, B.  1997.  
Internet Routing Architectures.  Cisco Press, Indianapolis, Ind.
Hawley, G.T.  1999.  
ÒBroadband by Phone,Ó Scientific American 281(4):102-103.
Health Privacy Working Group.  1999.  
Best Principles for Health Privacy.  Institute for Health
Care Research and Policy, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.Huitema, C.  1995.  
Routing in the Internet.  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Institute of Medicine (IOM).  1997.  
The Computer-Based Patient Record:  An Essential Technol-
ogy for Health Care, rev. ed.  Dick, R.S., E.B. Steen, and D.E. Detmer, eds. National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Jacobson, V.  1988.  
ÒCongestion Avoidance and Control,Ó Computer Communication Review18(4):314-329.Kent, S., and R. Atkinson.  1998a.  
Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.  IETF Requestfor Comment (RFC) 2401, November.Kent, S., and R. Atkinson. 1998b.  IP Authentication Header.  IETF Request for Comment(RFC) 2402, November.Kent, S., and R. Atkinson. 1998c.  IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). IETF Request for
Comment (RFC) 2406, November.Marbach, W.D.  1983.  
ÒBeware:  Hackers at Play,
Ó Newsweek 102(September 5):42-46.
Paxson, V.  1997.  
ÒEnd-to-End Routing Behavior in the Internet,Ó IEEE/ACM Transactionson Networking 5(October):601-615.
Perlman, R.  1992.  
Interconnections: Bridges and Routers. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.Peterson, L., and B. Davie.  2000.  
Computer Networks: A Systems Approach. MorganKaufmann, San Francisco.Reed, M.G., P.F. Syverson, and D.M. Goldschlag.  1998.  
ÒAnonymous Connections andOnion Routing,Ó IEEE Journal of Selected Areas in Communication 16(4):482-494.
Reiter, M.K., and A.D. Rubin.  1998.  
ÒCrowds: Anonymity of Web Transactions,Ó ACMTransactions on Information Systems Security 1(1):66-92.
Reuters.  1999.  
ÒAMA, Intel to Boost Online Health Security,Ó October 13.
Schlırer, J.  1981.  
ÒSecurity of Statistical Databases: Multidimensional Transformation,ÓACM Transactions on Database Systems 6(1):95-112.
Shenker, S.  1995.  
ÒFundamental Design Issues for the Future Internet,Ó IEEE Journal ofSelected Areas in Communication 13(7):1176-1188.  Available online at <http://ana-
www.lcs.mit.edu/anaweb/pdf-papers/shenker.pdf>.Skoro, J.  1999.  
ÒLMDS:  Broadband Wireless Access,
Ó Scientific American 281(4):108-109.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETSweeney, L.  1998.  
ÒDatafly: A System for Providing Anonymity in Medical Data,Ó in
Database Security XI:  Status and Prospects
, T.Y. Lin and S. Qian, eds.  Chapman & Hall,
New York.Zero Knowledge Systems, Inc.  1998.  
The Freedom Network Architecture, Version 1.0.  Avail-
able from ZKS, 3981 St. Laurent Blvd., Montreal, Quebec, Canada. December.Zimmerman, Philip.  1994.  
The Official PGP Users Guide, Technical report.  MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.NOTES1.Evidence of such latencies can be seen in data collected by the National Laboratory
for Applied Network Research, which are available at <www.nlanr.net>.2.ISPs typically have POPs in major urban areas; a large provider might have 30 or
more POPs in the United States.3.The 30 Tbps figure was calculated by multiplying the number of strands per fiber
(30) by the number of wavelengths that can be transmitted over each fiber (100) and thecapacity of each fiber at each wavelength (10 Gbps).  A terabit is 10
12 (one thousand billion)
bits per second.4.SONET is a standard developed by telephone companies for transmitting digitized
voice and data on optical fibers.5.See <http://209.249.142.16/nnpm/owa/NRpublicreports.usagemonthly>.

6.The 10 Gbps figure results from multiplying 10 Mbps by 1,000 applications (10 Mbps
 1,000 = 10 Gbps).
7.For example, even if available bandwidth were 10 times greater than the average
required, the load on certain links over short time periods could be large enough to imposelarge delays over those links.8.IP is a connectionless, packet-switching protocol that serves as the internetwork layer
for the TCP/IP protocol suite.  It provides packet routing, fragmentation of messages, and
reassembly.9.Because of its reliance on RSVP, the int-serv model sometimes is referred to as the
RSVP model.10.With RSVP, the load on the router can be expected to increase at least linearly as the
number of end points increases.  Growth may even be quadratic
Ñrelated to the square ofthe number of end points (Birman, 1999).11.An example of a scaling issue for today
Õs ISPs is the size of routing tables, whichcurrently hold about 60,000 routes (address prefixes) each.  Entries in the routing table
consume memory, and the processing power needed to update tables increases with theirsize.  It is important that such tables grow much more slowly than do the numbers of users

or individual applications, making it infeasible to store RSVP information if it grows indirect proportion to the number of application flows.12.The charter of the Integrated Services Over Specific Link Layers working group of
the IETF is available online at <http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/issll-charter.htm>.13.The Department of Defense has a long-standing interest in using multicast technol-
ogy to support distributed simulations.  See CSTB (1997b).
14.One of the more notorious cases occurred when the 
Ò414Ó group broke into a ma-
chine at the National Cancer Institute in 1982, although no damage from the intrusion wasdetected.  See Marbach (1983).
15.Unix
Õs Network File System (NFS) protocol, commonly used to access file systemsacross an Internet connection, has weaknesses that enable a Òmount pointÓ to be passed to
unauthorized systems.  Surreptitious programs called Trojan horses can be exploited to

perform actions that are neither desired by nor known to the user.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES17716.Most U.S. health care providers continue to maintain patient records on paper, but
current trends in clinical care, consumer health, public health, and health finance all indicate ashift to electronic records.  Without such a shift, the health community
Õs ability to take fulladvantage of improved networking capabilities would be severely limited.  With such a shift,the need for convenient, effective, and flexible means of ensuring security will be paramount.17.Tools such as Back Orifice can enable a hacker using the Internet to remotely control
computers using Windows 95, Windows 98, or Windows NT.  Using Back Orifice, hackers
can open and close programs, reboot computers, and so on.  The Back Orifice server has to
be willingly accepted and run by its host before it can be used, but it is usually distributed
claiming to be something else.  Other such clandestine packages also exist, most notably Loki.
18.For a discussion of key distribution centers, see CSTB (1999), pp. 127-128.
19.For a discussion of some of the limitations of PKI systems, see Ellison and Schneier
(2000).20.It should be noted that when using SSL, data are decrypted the moment they reach
their destination and are likely to be stored on a server in unencrypted form, making them
vulnerable to subsequent compromise.  A number of approaches can be taken to protect
this information, including reencryption, which presents its own challenges, not the least ofwhich is ensuring that the key to an encrypted database is not lost or compromised.21.Whereas one organization may issue a certificate to anyone who requests one and
fills out an application, another may require stronger proof of identity, such as a birthcertificate and passport.  These differences affect the degree of trust that communicating

parties may place in the certificates when they are presented for online transactions.22.Additional information on the Intel initiative is available online at <http://
www.intel.com/intel/e-health/>.23.Participating organizations in the HealthKey initiative are the Massachusetts Health
Data Consortium, the Minnesota Health Data Institute, the North Carolina Healthcare In-formation and Communications Alliance, the Utah Health Information Network, and theCommunity Health Information Technology Alliance, based in the Pacific Northwest.  Ad-
ditional information on the program is available online at <www.healthkey.org>.24.Users can do this, for example, by registering their public keys with a public facility,
such as the PGP key server at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.25.Computer scientists generally consider system (or network) availability to be an
element of security, along with confidentiality and integrity.  As such, availability is dis-
cussed within the security section of this chapter.  Other chapters of this report discuss
availability as a separate consideration to highlight the different requirements that health
applications have for confidentiality, integrity, and availability.26.Cable modems and DSL services are typically not attractive to businesses, either
because the number of connected hosts (IP addresses) is limited or the guaranteed mini-
mum delivered bandwidth is low.  In the San Francisco Bay Area, asymmetric DSL delivers
anywhere from 384 kbps to 1.5 Mbps, depending on many factors.  In other areas, DSL with
256 kbps/64 kbps down/up link speed costs approximately $50 per month, but the costs
skyrocket quickly to roughly $700 per month for 1.5 Mbps/768 kbps down/up link speeds.27.Quality of service mechanisms, such as integrated services, might help ameliorate
contention for cable bandwidth, but only if the technology is widely deployed.28.There is at least one way to hide the identity of the sender:  All e-mail applications
can be spoofed.29.Intel Corporation introduced an identifying number into its Pentium microprocessors
to help servers identify client machines in the hopes of facilitating electronic commerce.Public concern over the privacy implications of this capability caused the company to takethe additional step of providing a means to prevent the number from being revealed.30.This is essentially what a filtering firewall does:  hides the identities (IP addresses) of
those behind it.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1784Organizational Challenges to the
Adoption of the InternetHealth care organizations have had to adapt to many changes in theworld around them, from advances in diagnostic and therapeutic proce-
dures to the emergence of administrative innovations such as managed
care and the invention of new information technologies.  The Internet

represents a particularly profound change that will enable or force signifi-
cant changes in organizational form and processesÑa transformation as
profound as any that have gone before.  The InternetÕs capability to

empower consumers, support dynamic information exchanges among
organizations, and ÒflattenÓ organizational hierarchies promises to result
in new operational strategies, business models, service delivery modes,
and management mechanisms.  The changes will have such far-reaching

implications that health care organizations need to start preparing now to
adopt the advanced Internet applications that are expected to appear in
the near future.  Organizations need to evaluate the potential and impli-

cations of new Internet technologies, adapt them to local needs and condi-
tions, minimize the risks associated with new product and service deploy-
ment, and plan to demonstrate the value of their efforts.This chapter examines challenges to the adoption of Internet-basedtechnologies by health care organizations.  It attempts to identify funda-

mental impediments to greater use of the Internet that may be expected to
persist for some time.  The first section of the chapter provides a context

for the analysis by reviewing the experiences of other industries that have
achieved some success in changing business practices by adopting
Internet technologies.  The second section discusses in general terms why
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET179more health care organizations should be interested in adopting theInternet:  because it can advance their strategic interests.  The third section

deals with organizational barriers that hinder Internet use.  The discus-

sion there addresses internal and external factors, such as policy and
technical barriers, that influence and constrain the form and extent of
Internet use, as well as the range of uncertainties that inhibit decision
making regarding the Internet.  The last section addresses the importance

of organizational leadership.The chapter focuses primarily on Internet adoption by care providerorganizations.  To be sure, Internet technologies will need to be adopted

by a number of different players in the health care arena, including con-
sumers, physicians, and administrators.  But because they are likely to

bear many of the implementation costs and will have to address issues of
acceptance by consumers and care providers, health care organizations
are a suitable focus for this analysis.1  The discussion recognizes that
health care organizations come in many formsÑcommunity-based healthfacilities, managed care organizations (MCOs) and health maintenance
organizations (HMOs), integrated delivery networks (IDNs), and
nonacute facilitiesÑeach of which may adopt the Internet for differentapplications, whether management and administration, communications
among health care professionals, consumer education, or patient manage-
ment.  The specific factors that facilitate or impede Internet applications

will differ from one organization to the other, but the discussion that
follows is broadly applicable because it identifies common challenges
faced by a variety of health care organizations as they attempt to imple-
ment a range of applications serving different types of end users.LESSONS FROM OTHER INDUSTRIESInternet technologies offer a range of potentially useful applicationsto organizations in many different industries.  Simple Internet applica-

tions such as electronic mail (e-mail) can facilitate communication within
distributed multinational corporations.  Related networked applications

can simplify flows of information among elements of a single organiza-
tion and among multiple organizations.  Real-time teleconferencing tech-
nologies can support meetings involving individuals located in different
cities.  Direct capture of sales information can enable retailers to stream-

line the delivery of inventory and forecast purchasing patterns.  New

automation systems can allow for distributed management of supply
chains, support of human resource functions, and exchange of contact
and other sales information.  Although the deployment of these systems

is still in an early stage, Internet technologies appear to have enhanced
organizational performance by lowering costs, increasing efficiency, dif-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETferentiating products and services, or creating broader markets.  Leadingusers of these technologies have found that the value of the Internet lies
not simply in automating existing business processes but in creating new
means of interaction between suppliers and consumers of products and
services, often with significant implications for industry structure.Industries differ in many respects, and their degree of successachieved in applying the Internet varies as well,2 but the experiences of
leading companies in different industries in which Internet use is com-
mon suggest a number of general trends.  The Internet clearly is trans-

forming the retail marketplace.  Online retailers such as Amazon.com and

Barnes and Noble have changed the nature of the book industry by creat-
ing direct relationships between book buyers and book suppliers that
have significantly reduced inventory costs and eliminated many middle
layers in the distribution chainÑa process called disintermediation.3Manufacturers of personal computers, such as Dell and Compaq, increas-ingly use the Internet to market their wares directly to consumers, enabling
the consumers to customize their orders and enabling the firms to control
inventory at the lowest possible levels.  Online auction sites, such as eBay,

have pioneered new ways to link buyers and sellers in a virtual market-
place, with some companies expanding on the auction concept to exploit
spot markets for last-minute airline tickets, car rentals, hotel rooms, and
other services.Internally, the effective use of information technology (IT), includingInternet technologies, can have a profound impact on organizational struc-

ture and function.  As information is distributed efficiently to those who

need it when they need it, lines of control and influence become clearer,
and individual units often self-organize in new and more effective ways.
The impact may be multifaceted, not only flattening organizational struc-
tures but also changing the skill mix of employees.  Early evidence sug-

gests that online sales of automobiles reduce the set of skills needed by
salespeople (McGarvey, 1999).  In contrast, some stock brokerage firms

report that online trading requires brokers to have a broader set of skills,
although the total number of brokers needed may decline because much
of the effort of executing a stock transaction can be passed on to the
consumer.Online interactions boost consumer expectations.  Many traditional
storefront industriesÑfrom retail to manufacturing to newsÑare nowopen around the clock, competing in a highly visible and competitive
environment.  Consumers conduct many transactions at night or on holi-
days, when many traditional merchants shut their doors, and buyers often
compare the prices of many Internet vendors before making purchases.
In fact, many Internet companies encourage consumers to discuss topics
or items of particular interest.  Internet book merchants, for example,
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET181allow readers to contribute reviews and rate the quality of an offering.Internet-based vendors of financial information sometimes support client-
generated discussion groups on specific equities or investing techniques.
These techniques are intended to assist consumers in making educated
decisions and, simultaneously, attract them to particular sites.Internet technologies also allow merchants to develop a deeper under-standing of consumers.  By automatically recording consumer choices

and preferences, merchants can offer both goods and advertising that
have a high likelihood of reaching a desired consumer audience.  If applied

successfully, these technologies enable merchants to develop a sense of
one-on-one personalized service for thousands or even millions of cus-
tomersÑa process sometimes called mass customization.  Vendors can
also allow consumers to preview, or experiment with, products prior to
purchase.  The film industry now routinely provides previews of upcom-

ing movies on company sites on the Web.  The music industry also dis-

tributes promotional material online in the hopes of generating tradi-
tional sales.  Online mortgage vendors allow consumers to simulate the

cash-flow implications of various mortgage packages.Most importantly, the customer relationships established by success-ful Internet companies are not static.  Rather, the companies evolve as

their customersÕ needs and sophistication evolve.  The active empower-
ment of consumers forces companies to provide highly targeted services
and a degree of variety commensurate with the buyersÕ needs.  During
this period of rapid Internet evolution, companies are literally reinvent-
ing their online demeanor on a  weekly basis in response to changing

perceptions developed through continued experimentation with the
Internet.  In essence, merchants and consumers are engaged in a consen-

sual exploration of the means by which this technology can more effec-
tively satisfy perceived mutual needs.ADVANCING THE STRATEGIC INTERESTS OF HEALTH CAREJust as it is transforming other industries, the Internet could enableprofound changes in the nature and structure of the health care industry
and, ultimately, the delivery of health care services.  The health care

industry isÑand will continue to beÑdiverse, with individual organiza-tions facing different environmental pressures, pursuing different mis-
sions, and cultivating different cultures, but the Internet appears capable
of supporting at least a handful of common strategic interests.  It could,

for example, help organizations to do the following:¥Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of processes that cus-tomers use to judge organizational performance (e.g., scheduling anNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETappointment) or processes that form the core of the organizationÕs busi-ness (e.g., medical management);¥Develop partnerships with related organizations in an effort toleverage respective strengths (e.g., MCOs partnering with pharmaceutical
companies to develop disease management programs or regional alli-
ances of providers partnering to form a continuum of care);¥Reach consumers directly to solidify brand names and eliminateintermediaries (disintermediation);¥Improve, differentiate, and deliver new services to key customers;and¥Improve organizational decision making.The Internet already is empowering consumers to become moreinvolved in and take greater control of their own health and care.  Patients

are coming into doctorÕs offices armed with information downloaded fromthe Internet and suggestions for diagnoses and treatments.  They may

soon be able to access information on the quality of care delivered by
different health care providers or facilities in their geographic region. The
relationship between health care organizations and consumers could change
even further when an organization uses networks effectively to expand
its customer base beyond a specific geographic region.  The assumption

that just because a patient lives near a particular hospital he or she will
opt to be treated at that hospital is challenged by the ease with which
networks afford patients access to clinical specialists worldwide.The Internet also offers institutions the capacity to separate their busi-ness operations from the operations of the physical plant.  The effective

use of computer networks could change the fundamental nature of a
health care organization:   from a unified entity providing a specific, fixed

set of resources and services to a broker entity that acquires services and
resources and offers them on an as-needed, on-demand basis.  For example,

physician practice groups could use the Internet to acquire necessary
expertise on demand and deliver health care from a distance or to gain
access to distributed decision-support systems and high-end applications
offered by application service providers, contracting for specific medical
services from remote practice groups rather than investing in an expen-
sive, but seldom used, on-site resource.  The use of network technology to

reach customers in their homes, schools, and workplaces would extend
the opportunity for the delivery of services and products at locations
away from a health care organizationÕs physical site (e.g., clinic, hospital,or campus).The Internet also allows the integration of clinical data from affiliatedorganizations (such as two hospitals that contract with the same MCO),
enabling the assembly of a medical record that is more complete thanNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET183before and ensuring greater continuity and documentation of care.  This
is a useful feature because the increased specialization of clinical treat-
ment has contributed to a differentiation of health care services.  Special-

ization has led patients to acquire health services from different organiza-
tions (e.g., hospitals, physicianÕs offices, dentists, laboratories), with theresult that the clinical records of most individuals are scattered across
several institutions.  Other opportunities exist for hospitals to use the

Internet to improve internal operations.  They could communicate, in a

just-in-time fashion, with distributors of suppliesÑperhaps diminishingthe need for an inventory management departmentÑand with each otherto share patient records.  They could reduce their reliance on local special-

ists by centralizing specialty services and offering them remotely via

teleconsultations.  Care providers and payers could link together to con-

solidate utilization review activities.The Internet also could affect the nature of health care research.Network-enabled ÒcollaboratoriesÓ could allow individual research opera-
tions 
within a particular health organization (such as a research hospital)to interact with research groups at other organizations, creating a com-
plex set of interacting research groups that share information and results
across multiple organizations and even national borders.  Private research

institutes, either free-standing or organized as research and development
arms of pharmaceutical companies, could enhance their scientific collabo-
rations with academic medical centers.  The Internet also would enable

schools and universities to educate not only the students who arrive on
their campuses but also authorized learners anywhere in the world who
have access to computers and Internet connections.The contours of such change are beginning to emerge.  Health care
organizations are beginning to experiment with Internet-based systems to
serve a variety of functions.  Many MCOs, for example, are developing

Web sites to provide consumers with health-related information, the abil-
ity to select physicians or schedule appointments, and the tools to evalu-
ate their immediate health care needs.  Other organizationsÑboth MCOsand new Internet start-upsÑoffer personally tailored health informationover the Web, matching profiles of a patientÕs health status with existingnetwork-based health information resources.  They also offer specific

programs for monitoring personal health status and can support e-mail
exchanges between patients and designated providers.  Still other firms

focus on the administrative side of health care, using secure communica-
tions channels to deliver a broad array of services required in a managed
care environment, with an emphasis on linking different types of health
care organizations.  Offerings include products for enrolling in and man-
aging personal health care plans; information services and portals
designed for consumers, providers, and physicians; systems for viewingNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETlaboratory and other clinical data; and methods for referring patients tospecialists, ordering medications, and performing other clinical tasks.The returns to health care organizations on investments in Internet-based applications are not yet clear, but the early evidence is encourag-
ing.  Kaiser-Permanente of Northern California, for example, reports that
a pilot program to test a consumer-oriented Web site for 100,000 members
reduced the number of visits to physiciansÕ offices by 11 percent, reduced
the number of calls to nurses by 46 percent, and allowed 14 percent of the
patients to treat their illnesses at home.  The result was not only signifi-

cant cost savings for the organization but also improved consumer percep-
tions of Kaiser-Permanente and better understanding of health concerns.
Partners Healthcare System, an integrated delivery organization based in
Boston, reports that Internet-based systems reduced the time needed to
return a radiology report to a health center from 72 hours to 4 hours.  The

organization expects to realize a 20 percent reduction in the cost of spe-
cialist dermatology by using telemedicine.More study is required to fully evaluate the benefits of Internet-basedapplications in health care, but the evidence cited above offers hope for
improvements in customer satisfaction and reductions in cost.  Given the
potential of the Internet and the economic and other pressures facing the
health care industry, it would be reasonable to expect significant invest-
ment in Internet technologies and applications by more health care orga-
nizations.IMPEDIMENTS TO ADOPTING INTERNET APPLICATIONSDespite the promise of many Internet-based applications, health careorganizations can be expected to encounter many obstacles as they
attempt to apply these technologies to realize their strategic visions.  They

will face barriers to, and constraints on, organizational change, as well as
uncertainty about the efficacy and effects of Internet-based applications.
A resistance to change might come from denial of the need to change, the
inability to manage change, uncertainties about the types of changes
needed and how best to make them, mistaken assessments of optimal
changes, and failures in executing changes.  These issues are not unique

to the adoption of the Internet and could arise in many other areas of
organizational change, including those driven by other types of informa-
tion technology.4  What makes Internet-driven change different is its
magnitude and the high degree of uncertainty.  Organizations that have

difficulty making the necessary investments in, and managing, informa-
tion technology in general will have even more difficulty adapting to the
Internet.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET185Barriers to ChangeBarriers to change can assume many forms, from characteristics of themarketplace to organizational capabilities.  The discussion below classi-

fies barriers into two broad categories:  (1) external factors that define the

environment in which an organization operates and (2) internal factors
that define the ability to implement change.  External factors are often

difficult for an individual organization to address directly because they
demand collective action.  Internal barriers are easier to overcome but in

many cases still present significant difficulties, even if the need for change
is recognized as urgent.External BarriersExternal factors define the environment in which health care organi-zations operate and shape their ability to capitalize on the Internet.  The

barriers here assume many forms, including market forces, policies and
standards, finances, and technology.Market Forces.  Changes in the health care marketplaceÑsuch as an agingpopulation, escalating health care costs, and changes in consumer prefer-
encesÑcan have positive and negative effects on health care organiza-tions and the viability of different Internet-based applications.  Often the

effects cannot be anticipated.  For example, an aging population can be

expected to create a growing demand for health services, a trend that
could benefit local hospitals but could raise costs for MCOs, which would
need to provide more care on a per capita basis.  An aging population also

could boost demand for Internet-mediated care, but at the same time as
this would allow the patients to avoid travel, it would raise challenging
interface considerations.  To the extent that changes in the marketplace

signify to organizations a need to change, they can be considered stimuli
for transformation; to the extent that they work against organizations,
they can be considered barriers.Other market forces also affect the ability of health care organizationsto adopt Internet technologies.  Many health care organizations have seen

shrinking operating margins over the last several years, along with a
marked increase in regulatory compliance requirements (such as those
related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996Ñsee Chapter 5) and in competing programmatic needs (Glaser andHsu, 1999).  The lack of coherent business models at work in many of the
new Internet-based health companies (drugstore.com, Healtheon/
WebMD, drkoop.com, etc.), along with their lack of demonstrated strongNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETfinancial returns, does little to persuade established health care organiza-tions to aggressively shift to an Internet-based strategy.Policies and Standards.  State and federal laws and regulations, profes-
sional standards, and technical standards, which remain largely outside
the exclusive control of the health care industry, are among the policy
barriers that can impede health care organizations.  These barriers can

interfere with business opportunities enabled by the Internet, reducing
the incentive to undertake initiatives that would benefit the nationÕs healthcare system and citizensÕ health.  For example, policies on professional
licensure can impede attempts to deliver health services across state lines
using the Internet; regulations on data security and patient privacy can
create disincentives for the transmission of information across public com-
munication networks such as the Internet (these issues are addressed in
greater detail in Chapter 5).  Policies of third-party payers and health

insurance companies on payment for medical services can also affect a
care provider organizationÕs incentives to develop new Internet applica-tions.  If services rendered cannot be reimbursed, the incentives for

deploying capabilities are reduced.  For HMOs the incentives may be

different, because HMOs that reduce the costs of care can improve their
profitability regardless of payment policies.  As with market forces,

changes in policy can serve either to motivate change or to constrain it.Finances.  Financial barriers arise from the complex and sometimes per-
verse mechanisms for funding health care.  Care providers are often

rewarded for treating disease rather than preventing it, a situation that
can be expected to reduce interest in developing wellness-oriented
Internet material.  MCOs may exhibit a similar lack of interest in wellness

activities if their subscribers are young and transient.  Payment is often

made for each visit to the care providerÕs office rather than for overalltreatment of a particular health problem, with the result that a provider
has little incentive to invest in Internet-based disease management capa-
bilities.  Moreover, providers generally cannot receive reimbursement for

care provided at a distance using electronic communications technologies
(i.e., telemedicine), even if such practice could reduce the cost of care (see
Chapter 5).  Insured consumers do not pay for the vast majority of their

care and are constrained (by insurance companies) in their ability to find
and engage their preferred source and form of careÑchoices the Internetcould facilitate.  In effect, Internet applications, while benefiting the patient

and society, require investments by health care organizations without
providing any balancing revenue.  Furthermore, the economic anomaly

whereby the consumer of care is not the purchaser of that care limits theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET187consumerÕs ability to fully pursue the use of the Internet to support per-sonal health.Technology.  Technology itself can be a barrier to change in organizations.Technological change is especially rapid in information technology, a

supreme challenge for organizations that try to keep up with the pace of
innovation while controlling costs.  Significant technological changes can
create major dislocations, rendering investments in existing technologies
obsolete.  Organizations cannot depreciate prior investments fast enough

to keep up with the rate of change or shift their technical and human
infrastructures rapidly enough without undermining organizational per-
formance.  This process of technological change is particularly challenging

in a health care context, where there is a heightened need to demonstrate
the efficacy of such changeÑa process that can be expensive, time-consuming, and difficult to do wellÑand the wide range of potentialusers involvedÑpatients, physicians, nurses, administratorsÑall ofwhom may have different work flows and skills.  Managers attempting to

learn about the performance, maturity, and potential of new technologies
are often confronted with exaggerated claims.  The distillation of truth

from an overload of information is an error-prone and inefficient process.External barriers present a significant challenge to organizations.Some barriers, such as demographic trends and the complex and politi-
cized decision-making processes in health care, are often out of the con-
trol of organizations, although they can take steps to anticipate and miti-
gate the effects.  Policy barriers, in general, cannot be addressed effectively

by individual organizations but require a coordinated and concerted effort
by multiple players.  Policy barriers can be addressed in a number of

ways, as explained in Chapters 5 and 6 of this report.Internal BarriersInternal barriers can prevent organizations from recognizing the needto change and properly implementing the required changes.  A lack of

organizational self-awareness, responsiveness, and competency, and a
reluctance to changeÑcharacteristics of organizational inertiaÑall impedeattempts to implement necessary change.  Inertia is associated with a

large size, long history, and complicated internal hierarchiesÑcharacter-istics of many health care organizations.  Resilient organizations that over-

come inertia have the capacity to revise their structure and function to
effectively manage external forces; organizations characterized by inertia
are less likely to do so.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETAn organizationÕs ability to change is influenced by many factors,including its competence, sophistication, and history of action with other
technologies.  When basic operating principles must be reinterpreted,

organizations require time to promulgate, implement, and assimilate the
new standards, policies, and guidelines based on the new principles.  The

appropriate use of new technology often requires a degree of process and
role redefinition not usually encountered in health care settings.  It may

pose threats to individual roles or positions, challenge the rationale of
current business or clinical practices, demand rapid political mobiliza-
tion, encounter user resistance, and require additional funding.  Processes

used in implementing new technologies, particularly if reliant on consen-
sus, can slow the effort to adopt them.  New forms of communication can

require new interpretations of basic principles such as the core nature of
an organizationÕs services.  Achieving consensus takes time, perhaps more
time than is feasible given the rapid pace of technological advances.Hesitancy to change may result from legitimate organizational con-cerns as well as organizational inertia.  Organizations may be reluctant to

adopt a new technology because it is a poor fit with the existing strategy
or because they are in a market segment that does not reward innovation.
In addition, change may be hindered by conflicts between the ability of
management to maintain coherent integration throughout an enterprise
and the need for rapid deployment of a new technology in a more local-
ized setting, such as in a particular department or laboratory.Internal barriers must be changed by individual organizations.  At
the very least, organizations need to be aware that these barriers exist and
that their persistence will hinder the efficient and effective use of the
Internet (and a wide range of other technologies and innovations).  An

organization should also be aware of the special problems associated with
its market sector. Barriers actually encountered, and the degree to which
a particular barrier is viewed as problematic, will vary among organiza-
tions.  For example, clinics, particularly small group practices outside

academic health science centers, lack the administrative and financial
resources of larger organizations.  They may face barriers to full Internet

implementation as a result of reimbursement policies that prohibit cost
recovery.  Additionally, they may lack the organizational resilience to

deliberate and manage the uncertainty inherent in investing in technolo-
gies such as electronic medical records or distributed information systems.A hospital, on the other hand, may fail to capitalize on emergingtechnologies because its staff is not competent to understand how such
technologies could benefit the hospital.  Researchers whose collaborators

once worked across the hall now must communicate in an up-to-the-
minute fashion with investigators around the world and are hampered
from doing so by the lack of common standards for reporting.  Knowl-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET189edge providers (e.g., libraries) face intellectual property and ownershipconsiderations that are rapidly changing and for which existing rules no
longer provide adequate guidance.  Professionals (e.g., physicians and

nurses) are both protected by and limited by state-based licensure require-
ments that protect their scope of practice but limit their ability to practice
across state lines.Uncertainties Surrounding Internet StrategiesEven if organizations can identify the need to embrace an Internet-based strategy and can overcome some of the internal and external barriers
to doing so, their progress can be inhibited by considerable uncertainty
about how best to proceed.  Uncertainty could cause an organization to

hesitate to pursue an Internet-based strategy and could result in sub-
optimal, deleterious, or unnecessarily turbulent or inefficient change.
Health care organizations face uncertainty in four areas:  organizational

and industry structures for Internet-based care, internal policies and pro-
cedures to guide Internet use, technological capabilities of Internet-based
systems, and human resource issues.  For each type of uncertainty, examples

of related issues and questions are presented below.  The examples are

not intended to be comprehensive but to illustrate the range and depth of
the uncertainty surrounding organizational Internet-based health care

strategies.Organizational and Industry StructureOrganizations are experimenting with the use of the Internet to extend
or alter current processes.  Patients communicate with providers through

e-mail.  Telemedicine is offered as a means of increasing  referrals from

remote clinics.  Some organizations offer medical content to providers for

a subscription fee.  Others attempt to connect a range of providers and

payers in a region to improve the efficiency of care.  Some pharmaceutical

benefits companies may choose to ally themselves with online pharmacies,
whereas others may open their own online pharmacies.  As these examples

demonstrate, the Internet has the potential to fundamentally alter the
economics, organizational form, and interorganizational processes that
define health care today.  These new arrangements and relationships are

complex and not well understood.  Poor conception of new organiza-

tional forms and poor execution of a form place the transforming organi-
zation at risk.  Faced with such risk, many organizations hesitate to engage

in new forms. Others try different relationships between participants and
different types of services until one or more successful models emerge.The effectiveness of many new health care processes and initiatives isNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETnot clear.  Will providing patient access to medical information improve
the quality of care and patient satisfaction?  Does telemedicine increase

referrals?  Will linking providers with retail pharmacies or pharmacy

benefits managers improve medication compliance?  Will health care

organizations become, to a large degree, virtual? Their limited under-
standing of the business value of these initiatives causes organizations to
be hesitant in carrying out Internet-enabled change.  The examples below

explore particular uncertainties in greater detail.Example 1:  Changes in Industry Structure.
  Internet investments and start-
ups target industries with multiple distribution channels, large numbers
of middlemen, and massive product selections (Fitzgibbons and Lee,1999).  Health care is such an industry; accordingly, a number of Internet-

based start-ups, such as Healtheon, CareSoft, and drkoop.com, have
entered the marketplace.  The intent of these investments and start-ups is

to significantly alter and improve the mechanisms by which health care is
distributed, in some cases simplifying administrative transfers of infor-
mation and in others creating new channels for the provision of health
care and health information.  It is not clear whether extensive use of the

Internet will dramatically change the health care industryÕs structure,altering the relationships among consumers, care providers, managed
care organizations, and insurers.  At one extreme, the introduction of the

Internet could so empower consumers that they force major changes in
MCO operations that now tend to limit their choice of care providers and
to direct provider-patient interactions.  At the other extreme, the Internet
could simply reinforce existing structural arrangements, perhaps making
them more efficient.Example 2:  Separation of Content from Transaction.
  The Internet allows
separating content acquisition (e.g., conducting research on vacation
spots) from the execution of a transaction (e.g., booking a vacation).  Con-

sumers often use information gathered in one location to inform decisions
made and transactions executed elsewhere.  This practice is already occur-

ring in health care as consumers find health-related information on the
Internet and later present it to care providers to help guide decision
making on diagnoses and needed tests, procedures, and medications.
Similarly, discussions with care providers can lead consumers to order
medical supplies or nonprescription drugs through an Internet-based
service.  The disaggregation of transaction and content, and the com-

moditization of both, may have profound impacts on the value proposi-
tion on which care providers have long based their existence.  The ramifi-

cations are not well understood by the provider community (or most
other communities facing similar changes in value propositions).  Further-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET191more, health care providers do not understand how to take advantage ofsuch a change or ensure that patients are not harmed by it.Example 3:  Alteration of Roles.  
 The Internet is altering the traditional roles
of and relationships among patient, primary care provider, local special-
ist, and tertiary hospital specialist.  As consumers become better informed

about health issues, they may pressure MCOs to relax restrictions on the
pursuit of care directly from a specialist.  Patients may also seek greater

flexibility in selecting specialists who, although they may not be local,
offer superior service and expertise.  Such specialists would include radi-

ologists, dermatologists, nutritionists, pharmacologists, and others with
knowledge of particular medical domains.  If this occurs, then existing

referral patterns may be disrupted (or strengthened), and the definition of
high-quality service and care may change.  Patients may come to expect,

as they have with many Internet-based services, 24-hour availability of
certain service offerings that are customized to their needs.  This trend, in

turn, may reinforce the already growing roles of physiciansÕ assistants
and nurse-practitioners in the provision of care.Example 4:  Management of the Chronically Ill.
  The Internet may markedly
improve the ability to manage and treat the chronically ill.  Improvements

can result from a range of Internet-based services, such as the translation
of medical text into lay language, patient-moderated chat sessions, Òask-a-doctorÓ chat rooms, remote consultations, and remote monitoring of
patient health data.  The extent to which such improvements will occur is

not clear; also unknown is the relative utility of various types of Internet-
based services and content.  In both cases, the answers will vary by dis-

ease and across cohorts of patients.Example 5:  Spot Market Purchase of Health Care
.  The Internet supports
consumers seeking to make spot market purchases of books, airline tickets,
and automobiles by providing information on sources, cost, availability,
and quality for the item or service to be purchased.  This trend has yet to

become important in health care, but one can imagine consumers engag-
ing in spot market purchases of medications, vitamins, and durable medi-
cal equipment.  Continued experience with this model could encourage

consumers to pressure MCOs to allow spot market purchases of radiology

procedures, simple surgical procedures, medical education, and routine
checkups.  Consumers in fee-for-service insurance plans might be able to

enter this marketplace more quickly.  A thriving spot market could reduce

the cost of medical procedures by allowing rapid comparisons of services
based on cost and quality.  It is not clear at this time which
Ñif anyÑelements of health care delivery would be amenable to spot market pur-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETchases, whether and to what degree consumers would be comfortablemaking them, or the degree to which such purchases would pose risks or
improve care.Internal Policies and ProceduresEffective management of clinical, administrative, and fiscal processesand activities requires policies and procedures.  Internet use often creates

a need for additional policies and procedures to guide and manage the
technology and the new patterns of communication and processes it enables.

For example, e-mail interchanges between patient and providerÑwhichare becoming more common in the health care sectorÑrequire policies onthe appropriate types of clinical conversation (e.g., e-mail should not be
used to convey highly sensitive information unless one can ensure reader
authentication).5  A provider, serving as a moderator of a disease-specific
chat room, may inadvertently create a provider-patient relationship.  The

ease with which a Web page can be created by an employee may make it
appear as if an organization is sponsoring or supporting the content when
in fact it actually disagrees with itÑif indeed it is even aware of it.  As
organizations grapple with the need for new management and medical
policies and procedures, they will find little precedent for how to deal
with these issues.  Faced with a policy and procedure vacuum and an

absence of models, organizations may hesitate to sanction Internet use
because they are not sure they can manage it well enough.Health care organizations would benefit if they could refer to refer-ence models to assist them in developing policies and procedures.  Refer-

ence models have been developed to guide other activities, such as gen-
eral confidentiality and security practices unrelated to the Internet.  These

models include sample forms for consent and release of information, con-
fidentiality policies, and chief security officer job descriptions.  Other

reference models have been developed to guide the use of e-mail between
patients and care providers (Kane and Sands, 1998).  The examples below

explore some of the uncertainties surrounding Internet policies and pro-
cedures.Example 1:  Monitoring/Conducting Health-Related Chat Sessions, Bulletin
Boards, and Forums.  A number of health care organizations and consumer
health Web sites have established chat rooms and forums for their mem-
bers.  Chat rooms and forums would appear to have clinical, service, and
marketing value for a wide variety of users:  the chronically ill, family

members of patients with debilitating diseases, consumers interested in
health care topics, and providers.  Hosting such sessions, however, can

raise a number of issues that the sponsoring organization and the mod-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET193erator must address.  For example, can the care providers who moderate
them diagnose or suggest treatment in such forums?  What types of

liability does the sponsor assume for the quality of information, the behavior
of the forum participants, or the outcome of a participantÕs efforts to seekcare?  How do providers and patients prevent the formation of inappro-

priate provider-patient relationships?  What are the characteristics of a

high-quality forum service?Example 2:  Assessing Trade-offs Between Security/Confidentiality and Access.
Some providers and payers will extend their services to enable patients to
access their personal clinical data over the Internet.  A number of online

health companies are already providing such a service.  These services

may offer information related to test results and suggestions for pursuing
related health care (e.g., a test showing high cholesterol levels might elicit
a recommendation to seek dietary counseling).  Such access and the infor-

mation it provides may improve care as well as patient perceptions of
service quality.  However, such access also poses security and confidenti-

ality risks.  How can organizations balance the technical and management

mechanisms required to provide this access against the need to maintain
acceptable security?  Furthermore, as consumers are offered the opportu-

nity to create and maintain their own health and medical records online,
new issues arise regarding data availability and integrity.  Data for these

records will come from claims, electronic medical record systems, and
provider questionnaires, and from the patients themselves.  A patient
Õsphysician may have only a limited opportunity to review this record to
assure its integrity and quality.Example 3:  Evaluating Content
.  A large number of Web sites (20,000 by
some estimates) offer health information, algorithms for evaluating health
risks and status, and tools for managing chronic diseases.  This is a poten-

tial boon to consumers because the information is widely available; how-
ever, providers and consumers often find it difficult to evaluate the qual-
ity of information available on sites that provide such content.  Health

care organizations need to determine, among other matters, how they can
help individuals distinguish reliable information dispensed by reputable
sources from less reliable information, and how providers (especially phy-
sicians) can deal with the demands for untested treatments sometimes
coming from individuals who perform their own Internet research.Technological CapabilitiesAll industries are besieged by claims that Internet-based content, ser-vices, and applications can solve a wide range of problems that haveNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETplagued prior efforts to implement other information technologies.  In
health care, these problems include the difficulty of integrating a diverse,
heterogeneous set of legacy systems; a lack of data standards; the com-
plexity of medical practice; and complex, politicized health care organiza-
tional structures.  It is not clear whether the traditional hurdles to imple-

mentation of complex clinical information systems, such as the electronic
medical record, are significantly lowered by the use of the Internet and
related technologies.  For example, although the capability to provide

access to a set of services, content, and applications through a wide array
of workstations and other devices might reduce the support costs for an
application, it is not clear that the aggregate cost of the application infra-
structure is reduced.It is highly likely that the use of the Internet and related technologieswill ease some of the challenges that have plagued the implementation of
information systems in health care over the years.  It is also highly likely

that some challenges will persist, unaffected by the presence of the
Internet.  Regardless of these uncertainties, new applications will be based

on the Internet and related technologies, and legacy applications will be
fitted with interfaces to the Internet.  Inappropriate expectations of the

InternetÕs ability to solve certain problems can cause the InternetÕs truecontributions to be disregarded or organizational resources to be squan-
dered.  As they assess Internet-enabled applications
Ñparticularly thoseretaining the same labels as non-Internet applications (e.g., electronic
medical records)Ñhealth care organizations will have limited resourceswith which to understand the value added by the Internet.  The following

examples illustrate some of the dilemmas that may arise.Example 1:  Cost of Applications. 
 Many organizations assume that Internet
applications will reduce hardware costs by allowing the use of networked
computers (or Òthin clientsÓ) with less internal capability than traditionaldesktop computers but with access to shared information and applica-
tions stored on centralized Web servers.  To assist with this transition,

application service providers (ASPs) such as Abaton.com and QCSI are
offering online access to a variety of computer programs.  Unfortunately,
few full cost comparisons have been made between ASP-delivered appli-
cations and those delivered with existing architectures.  Moreover, there

may be hidden costs in the transfer to an Internet-based infrastructure.
For example, an Internet-based infrastructure introduces new security
vulnerabilities that must be addressed, and the ability of organizations to
benefit from the Internet will depend on other IT-related expenditures.
Variations across institutions in the implementation of EMRs have a sig-
nificant effect on an organizationÕs capability to capitalize on the InternetNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET195in support of delivery of care, payment and administration of care, andresearch.  Hospitals and insurance plans need to have networking infra-

structure, electronic medical records, and clinical systems in place before
they can develop more interesting Web applications.  Elements of the

infrastructure include operating systems, networks, information, and
applications.Example 2:  Design Challenges
.  Clinical applications of the Internet pose
complex design challenges.  The applications must support comprehen-

sive interactions in a manner that is intuitive, efficient, dependable, and
fast and that clearly indicates the next set of options.  Are there design

situations and tasks for which the Internet, specifically the Web, is either
ill suited on the one hand or well suited on the other?  Are additional

refinements needed to tailor Internet-based services to different user
groups with different capabilities and needs?  The enrolled clients of

MCOs and HMOs may vary considerably in their socioeconomic status
and educational levels, for example, and different capabilities may be
needed to get them to use online services.  The match between what

health care organizations can do to better structure information access,
and what clients require and can use, needs to be examined.Example 3:  Ease of Use.
  Individual human factors constrain Internet use in
health care organizations.  Applications must be easy to use and well

integrated into the daily routines of users.  The use of IT by health profes-

sionals is growing, but it is not uniform across regions (e.g., rural vs.
urban areas), medical specialties, or practice types.  Some applications

have a long history (e.g., results reporting systems), yet it is not clear what
factors facilitate the use of information technology by health care profes-
sionals or what types of organizational arrangements or financial incen-
tives facilitate or impede the technologyÕs use.  Not enough is known
about the barriers faced by care providers and consumers in using the
Internet routinely in health-related activities.  A substantial gap exists

between a relatively small group of providers and consumers who actively
use the Internet for any purpose and the much larger group that has not
used it or cannot use it. Similarly, not much is known about the training
requirements that Internet technologies will impose on provider organi-
zations.  Substantial innovation and development will be needed to train

and prepare care providers.  Training for clinical information systems has

always been difficult and labor-intensive.  Applications often have hun-

dreds of important features that are difficult to teach to care providers
who are impatient and pressed for time.  Does the ubiquity of the Internet

and Web ease the training burden?Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETExample 4:  Systems Integration.
  Internet technologies are touted as a new
answer to the challenges of integrating large numbers of diverse legacy
information systems.  However, it is not clear to what degree the technol-

ogy can overcome difficulties such as the lack of data syntax and semantic
standards, technology incompatibilities, and vendor unwillingness to
participate actively in projects that integrate their systems with those of
competitors.Human Resource NeedsA significant organizational commitment to Internet-based applica-tions requires information technology workers who are skilled in new
technical areas such as HTML development, Internet security, and digital
commerce.  It may also result in unanticipated needs for expanded com-

puting and information processing skills among the organizationÕs infor-mation technology staff and other workers.  For example, a patient at

home whose workstation experiences problems while accessing an
organizationÕs Web site may call that organizationÕs help desk for supportBOX 4.1Unanticipated Support CostsThe emergence of unexpected technical challenges is illustrated by the experi-ences of Kaiser-Permanente of Northern California with its consumer-oriented
Web site.  The goals of the Web site are to provide value-added services to mem-
bers, facilitate the appropriate use of services, and encourage members to take a
more active role in their health care.  Kaiser members can also use the Web site to
obtain health information and service directories, request and receive problem-specific answers to clinical questions, participate in electronic discussion groups
with other members, and conduct simple tasks such as scheduling a clinic visit.More than 16,000 members have access to the site.One of the biggest challenges faced by the Kaiser staff after system launchwas the unexpected need to provide technical coaching and services to members.Member calls indicated that the quality of a Web session was highly dependent onthe configuration of the memberÕs browser, and Kaiser was placed in the position
of providing technical support for the membersÕ home computers.  Additional chal-
lenges included (1) assuring that clinicians would agree to use the clinical proto-cols developed to answer questions and (2) developing policies for monitoringÑ
and intervening inÑdiscussion groups.  For instance, Kaiser needed to rapidly
determine how to respond in a safe and appropriate manner to a message postedby a member who was in a life-threatening situation.  In spite of these challenges,
KaiserÕs efforts have been successful enough to inspire imitation by other man-aged care organizations, not-for-profit support groups, and for-profit health caresites.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET197(see Box 4.1).  The organization can thus be confronted with potentially
enormous and unanticipated support costs.  Providers who enable their

patients to send e-mail may discover the need to redirect office staff and
nursing time to responding to e-mail and printing  messages for filing

with paper records.Health care organizations would benefit from information on thestaffing levels and skills needed to develop, implement, and support
Internet-based applications.  Some experience has accumulated during

early demonstrations and evaluations of electronic medical records.  In

addition, real-life experiences or lessons learned, in the form of case stud-
ies or conference presentations on new or more complex situations, would
assist many organizations in planning for Internet use.  The following

examples suggest some of the staffing issues that may arise.Example 1:  Information Systems Staff.
  Internet-based applications are likely
to present information systems staff with situations that are new or more
complex than those they encountered with other technologies and appli-
cations.  As more patients begin using its Internet-based offerings, an

organization may be asked to provide workstation support to an increas-
ingly broad and less-well-controlled user base.  Troubleshooting prob-

lems on a network shared by multiple organizations can be difficult.  Or-
ganizations may need to expand their staffs in traditional information
systems categories, such as application developers and analysts, imple-
mentation and training, database and network technical issues, and sup-
port (e.g., for the help desk).  They may also need to retrain existing

workers to enhance their  understanding of new Internet technologies

and the ways in which they can be used in a health care environment.Example 2:  Process Support Staff.
  Management, medical and allied health
personnel, and clerical staff will need to support new clinical, administra-
tive, and financial processes.  New processes may include triaging, respond-

ing to, and filing patient e-mail and responding to patient requests for
appointments; managing Internet content updates and versions; develop-
ing Internet-based curricula and serving as teaching assistants to remote
students; and managing telemedicine consultation setup and sessions.
Additional staff may be needed to carry out these functions, and existing
staff may need retraining.ESTABLISHING ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP FORINFORMATION TECHNOLOGYHealth care organizations will not increase their commitment toInternet-based applications without strong leadership.  Issues of vision
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETand leadership are often crucial determinants of successful health careapplications of information technology (IT) in general.  Limited, narrowly

focused applications may be implemented at a grassroots level in an orga-
nization and successfully applied, but when applications require complex
interactions acrossÑand potentially beyondÑthe organization, the skillsand talents of individual participants must be augmented by strong insti-
tutional leadership and a shared vision of what the organization is trying
to accomplish.Until the 1980s, information systems managers for major corpora-tions typically played a technical, service-oriented role.  They brought

technical computing and communications skills, plus management abili-
ties, to the organization.  In recent years, however, the strategic role of

information systems has become clearer as corporations plan for the future,
identify new business opportunities, and implement new practices for
communicating with clients, distributing products, and managing inven-
tories and finances.  As a result, the technology managers are increasingly

identified as key strategic leaders for the organizationsÑat least outsidethe health care industry.  Their titles have generally evolved (typically to

chief information officer (CIO) or vice president for information systems
and technology) to reflect this central role.  When their roles were consid-

ered technical rather than strategic, they often reported to the chief finan-
cial or administrative officer.  Today, however, they more typically report

to the chief executive officer (CEO) and participate actively in high-level
strategic planning, priority setting, and decision making.  In fact, Peter

Drucker has suggested that information and supporting technology is
becoming so central to strategy that the CEO of the future will be the CIO
(Drucker, 1999).Another important change has occurred during the past two decades.Originally the IT leader had little industry-specific expertise (e.g., a drug
company CIO typically would lack a medical or pharmacology back-
ground).  Their responsibilities were largely confined to managing large-

scale technical installations and implementations, and the IT activities
were viewed primarily as a cost center for the organization.  It is now

axiomatic in many industries, however, that the CIO has deep industry
expertise.  Ideally, IT leaders 
Ògrow upÓ in that industry and combine
domain training or expertise with education in, or an inclination toward,
information systems.  Rather than constituting a cost center, the IT func-

tions overseen by the CIO are increasingly viewed as enablers of key
business or strategic opportunities.  Several studies across a range of

industries have demonstrated a relationship between the effectiveness of
an organizationÕs application of IT and the presence of a senior, strategy-oriented information systems executive (CHIME, 1998; Earl and Feeney,
1995; Kilbridge et al., 1998; McKenney et al., 1995; Ross et al., 1996;Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET199Sambamurthy, 1996).  Effective use of the Internet is unlikely to be an
exception.In health care, the pre-1980 model lingers, with CIOs who often havelimited experience in medical environments and a set of expectations and
reporting structures that de-emphasize a strategic role and instead sug-
gest a largely service and infrastructure orientation.  This is true at all

industry levels, from community-based hospitals to large biomedical
research universities.  The reporting level and professional background of

the information strategy leader in an organization inevitably influence
the attention that information management receives and can affect the
types of initiatives undertaken.  A CIO with a background in clinical

medicine might place a higher priority on the establishment of EMRs and
decision-support systems than would a CIO with a strictly technical back-
ground.  This is not to suggest that every information strategy leader in

health care needs to be clinically trained as well.  What is critical is that

the CIO function as a professional peer of the organizationÕs senior leader-ship.  This individual will require a deep understanding of the business

and mission of the organization and a place at the table when strategic
decisions are made.Health organizations need to recognize the importance of IT manage-ment.  Certainly there are important educational issues:  health care leaders
must be familiarized with the fundamental role that IT needs to play in
their organizations, and an expanded cadre of future CIOs must be pro-
duced who have a combination of technical and management skills as
well as knowledge of the medical environment and its complex cultural
constraints.  The effective mobilization of the Internet for health care, and

its use for highly leveraged applications and demonstration projects, will
require an investment and commitment from medical organizations and
visionary leadership from CEOs and other key managers who under-
stand the strategic role of the technology and the return on investment
that can be expected.SUMMARYAlthough Internet use is embryonic across U.S. industry, its transform-ing potential can be seen in the existing Internet initiatives and experiences
of health care and other organizations.  Health care organizations and

Internet-based suppliers of products and services are experimenting with
different relationships between participants and different types of ser-
vices, seeking to find business models that work.  It is clear, however, that

the Internet can advance the strategic interests of the health care industry.
Nevertheless, health care organizations will confront many barriers to
Internet use.  As improved technologies become deployed in the Internet,
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETorganizations will be able to consider new applications, and new barriersare likely to arise.Research in several areas could give health care organizations theconfidence they need to move forward in using the Internet.  First,

research on Internet-induced changes in health care economics, organiza-
tional form, and interorganizational processes would provide guidance
for organizations and patients, helping to ensure that the changes are
effective and that they do not materially damage the health care system or
harm the health of patients and consumers.  Second, model policies and

procedures for the effective management of Internet-related clinical,
administrative, and fiscal processes and activities would help organiza-
tions address these issues before they become problems.  Third, an assess-

ment of the InternetÕs capability to resolve (or not resolve) the health caresystemÕs persistent difficulties with implementing and managing olderinformation technologies would provide guidance on the value added.
Fourth, case studies of the staffing levels and skills needed to develop,
implement, and support Internet-based applications could assist plan-
ning for Internet use.  Poorly conceived or poorly executed change could

have serious negative consequences for the nationÕs health care deliverysystem, health care organizations, and health care research and educa-
tion, as well as for its citizens. All of this research is needed for develop-
ing information and guidance to promote a positive transformation of the
health care industry.REFERENCESCollege of Healthcare Information Management Executives (CHIME).  1998. 
 The Healthcare
CIO: A Decade of Growth.  College of Healthcare Information Management Executives,
Ann Arbor, Mich.Drucker, P.  1999.  
Management Challenges for the 21st Century.  Harper Business Press, New
York.Earl, M., and D. Feeney.  1995.  
ÒIs Your CIO Adding Value?Ó McKinsey Quarterly1995(2):144-161.Fitzgibbons, Stephen M., and Richard Lee.  1999.  
The health.net Industry:  The Convergence of
Healthcare and the Internet, Industry Report.  Hambrecht and Quist Institutional Re-
search, San Francisco, Calif., January 8.Glaser, John P., and Leslie Hsu.  1999.  
The Strategic Application of Information Technology inHealthcare Organizations:  A Guide to Implementing Integrated Systems. 
 McGraw-Hill,
New York.Kane, Beverley, and Daniel Z. Sands.  1998. 
ÒGuidelines for the Clinical Use of ElectronicMail with Patients,Ó Report for the AMIA Internet Working Group, Task Force on
Guidelines for the Use of Clinic-Patient Electronic Mail, Journal of the American MedicalInformatics Association 5(1).  Available online at <http://www.amia.org/pubs/
pospaper/positio2.htm>.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGES TO THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNET201Kilbridge, P., et al.  1998.  
ÒInformation Systems for IDNs:  Best Practices and Key Success
Factors,Ó pp. 229-241 in 
Proceedings of the 1998 Annual HIMSS Conference, Volume 2.Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, Chicago.McGarvey, R.  1999.  
ÒOnline Care Chase,Ó Upside 11(12):154-161.
McKenney, J., D. Copeland, and R. Mason.  1995.  
Waves of Change:  Business Evolution
Through Information Technology.  Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Mass.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).  1999.  
The Economicand Social Impact of Electronic Commerce.  OECD, Paris.
Ross, J., C. Beath, and D. Goodhue.  1996.  
ÒDevelop Long-Term Competitiveness ThroughIT Assets,Ó Sloan Management Review 38(1):31-42.
Sambamurthy, V., and  R. Zmud.  1996. 
 Information Technology and Innovation:  Strategies for
Success. Financial Executives Research Foundation, Morristown, N.J.
NOTES1.Other types of health organizations that are not directly involved in the provision of
health careÑsuch as educational institutions, insurers, and public health agenciesÑwillface similar challenges, but they are not addressed specifically in the chapter.2.The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1999), for example,
estimates that between 2000 and 2005, 60 percent of retail stock trading but only 20 percentof book sales and 7 percent of music sales will migrate to the Internet.3.Similarly, online travel service companies, such as Travelocity and Expedia, have
adapted airline reservation systems in ways that allow consumers to make purchases di-rectly from airlines, eliminating the travel agency as an intermediary.4.Security, scalability, human resources, and cost are common areas of uncertainty
with new information systems.5.The American Medical Informatics Association has developed a set of guidelines to
help providers determine how to use e-mail for patient care (Kane and Sands, 1998).Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2025Issues for Public PolicyA variety of cultural, social, and political forces influence the ways inwhich health care providers, health management organizations, pub-
lishers of biomedical knowledge, researchers, consumers, and others use
the Internet.  By shaping the prevailing policies of the times, these forces

influence not only the types of Internet-based applications that are likely
to find widespread, routine use in the health sector but also the under-
lying technical capabilities of the Internet.  Policies affecting Internet use,
and the debates surrounding them, reflect fundamental beliefs about the
way things workÑor should workÑin the United States.  In this sense,

these policies are points of potential conflict, where ideas about indi-
vidual rights, the public good, equal access, free enterprise, and the role of
government collide with material, economic, and technical realities and
possibilities.  The uncertainties surrounding the resolution of policy issues,

combined with the organizational dilemmas outlined in Chapter 4, gener-
ate considerable doubt in regard to the technological trajectories that are
likely to be pursued in the health sector and the capability of the Internet
to support health applications.  Clearly, the resolution of technical issues

will not, by itself, enable greater use of the Internet in the health sector.1This chapter examines six policy issues that influence the use of theInternet in support of health objectives:  the protection of personal health
information, access to information infrastructure, the protection of intel-
lectual property contained in educational and reference materials, regula-
tory issues associated with the electronic delivery of medical services,
federal support for health informatics research, and human resources.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY203These topics have been addressed in several national reports in the lastfive years (Box 5.1), a sign of both their significance and the difficulties of
resolving them.  Many of these issues have implications outside the health

sector; nevertheless, their importance in health applications argues for
strong leadership by the health community in their resolution.  The chap-

ter describes the issues, the uncertainties they introduce to the InternetÕsdeployment in health applications, and ongoing efforts to address them.
Consistent with the charge to the committee and the expertise of the
committeeÕs members, the chapter does not attempt to offer recommen-dations for resolving these issues.  In many cases, additional study will be

required to delineate more fully the trade-offs among possible solutions
and gather sufficient information to render reliable guidance.  These issues

will need to be resolved if the benefits of the Internet are to accrue to the
health community.PROTECTION OF PERSONAL HEALTH INFORMATIONTechnology is, to a large extent, both the cause of and the solution toconcerns about the protection of personal health information.  The capa-

bility to connect health information systems to the Internet exposes per-
sonal health information to hostile attacks that can alter, delete, or divulge
it (see Chapter 3).  At the same time, technologies such as passwords,

encryption, and firewalls offer reasonably effective means of protecting
information systems and the data contained within them.  Nevertheless,

the effective assurance of data and service protection ultimately depends
on the implementation of policies and practices within the organization
(see CSTB, 1997).  To whom should organizations be allowed to disclose

personal health information with and without patient consent?  Under

what conditions may such disclosures be made?  What steps must organi-

zations take to protect personal health information from loss, unautho-
rized editing, or mischief?  What types of security technologies and

administrative policies will be considered sufficient protection?Concerns over patient privacy are not new in the health sector.  Patients
and consumer advocate groups have long expressed concern about the
collection, use, and sharing of personal health information data and the
practices used to maintain its confidentiality.  These groups view the

Internet as further eroding patient privacy by making health information
more easily available to a larger number of users (e.g., insurers, direct
marketers, and pharmaceutical benefits managers) and more susceptible
to security breaches.  Health care organizations have been sensitive to the

vulnerabilities inherent in the Internet and have long used private net-
works for data exchange, both because products and services are available
to support such networks and because the organizations are confident ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 5.1Other Reports That Identify Policy Issues Related toHealth InformaticsRealizing the Information Future: The Internet and Beyond (CSTB, 1994).  This
report looked at the powerful potential of the emerging national infrastructure to
Òenrich peopleÕs economic, social, and political lives . . .Ó (p. 1).  It went on to say,
ÒToday we lack a consistent technical, legal, and business framework for the dis-semination of intellectual property over networksÓ (p. 100).  Noting the need to

balance public and private interests, the report called for a fuller consideration ofcompeting interests, particularly as they affect Òdecisions relating to societal equi-tyÑincluding access to networks and the information resources available on themÓ
(p. 211).Telemedicine:  A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in Health Care 
(IOM,1996).  Noting that Òmost clinical applications of telemedicine have not been sub-

jected to systematic comparative studies that assess their effects on the quality,accessibility, or cost of health care,Ó this report presented a framework for evaluat-ing the practicality, value, and affordability of telemedicine.  Concluding a lengthy

chapter on the policy context of telemedicine, the committee noted:  ÒThe task for
this committee was to develop an evaluation framework for clinical telemedicineÑnot to develop policy recommendations.  The committee recognized, however, that

policies related to licensure, malpractice, and other matters need to be considered. . . because they may affect the availability, acceptability, effectiveness, and costof telemedicine servicesÓ (p. 115).For the Record:  Protecting Electronic Health Information
 (CSTB, 1997).  This
report looked at technical and nontechnical mechanisms and issues relating to the
privacy and security of health care applications of the national information infra-structure.  It led off with a chapter on the public policy context.  Among other things,
it said that Òbetter protection of electronic health information will require efforts at
the national level.  The lack of uniform national standards for the privacy and secu-
rity of health information creates particular problems for health care organizationsthat serve constituents in multiple states and creates additional confusion for
patients regarding their rights.Ó  It then suggested that Òconflicting views of data
ownership and a lack of patient understanding of health data flows and of theirrights to privacy and confidentiality also need to be addressed . . .Ó (pp. 49-50).The Computer-Based Patient Record:  An Essential Technology for Health
Care  (IOM, 1997).  Updating and expanding the original report, published in 1991,
this revised edition provides a scorecard on the implementation of the original rec-
ommendations.  The original committee concluded that Òcomputerization can helpto improve patient records and that improved patient records and information man-agement of health care data are essential elements of the infrastructure of the
nationÕs health care systemÓ (p. 46).  The authors of the revised editionÕs progress
report noted:  ÒSecurity, privacy, and confidentiality concerns have become major
barriers to widespread implementation of [computerized patient record] systems
and [the] sharing [of] data.  There is, as yet, no agreement on what must be done
to establish the balance between appropriate use of health care data and the indi-vidual patientÕs rights to privacyÓ (p. 14).Health Data in the Information Age:  Use, Disclosure, and Privacy
 (IOM, 1994).
This report examined the potential of health data organizations to improve healthNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY205their ability to manage and protect the networks.  Although some organi-
zations have taken steps to use corporate intranets or virtual private net-
works (see Chapter 3 for a description of these technologies) for sharing
personal health information among their affiliates, they have been reluc-
tant to transmit such information over the public Internet because of con-
cerns about privacy and security.  Until key decision makers in health

organizations are confident of their ability to protect the personal health
information for which they are responsible, opportunities to harness the
InternetÕs full potential in health care will be seriously constrained.2Policy makers have already entered into the debate over privacy.Numerous bills have been introduced in both houses of the U.S. Congress
relating to the use of medical records and personal health information
(Box 5.2), but the enactment of legislation has been impeded by factors
such as differences of opinion on the restrictions that need to be placed on
the ability of different stakeholders (e.g., pharmaceutical companies,
direct marketers, and legal authorities) to access health information.  The
most notable advance was contained in the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA, P.L. 104-191), which gave the
Congress until August 1999 to pass legislation regarding the privacy of
individually identifiable health information.  The HIPAA also directed

the secretary of Health and Human Services to promulgate regulations on
the topic by February 2000 if no legislation was passed by the August
deadline.  President Clinton announced proposed regulations in October

1999.  These regulations (1) allow health information to be used and shared

easily for the provision of care and payments for care, (2) establish proce-
dures for disclosing health information without the patientÕs consent forpurposes such as research, public health, and oversight, (3) require written
authorization to use and disclose personal health information for other
purposes, (4) create a set of fair practices to inform consumers about ways
in which their information is used and disclosed, ensure that consumers
have access to information about them, and allow patients to propose
corrections or amendments to such information, and (5) require organiza-and the performance of the health care system, as well as issues relating to thequality of health information contained in data repositories and protection of theconfidentiality of personal health information.  As the report noted, 
Ò[e]xisting ethi-cal, legal, and other approaches to protecting confidentiality and privacy of person-al health data offer some confidentiality safeguards, but major gaps and limitationsremainÓ (p. 15).  The report recommended preemptive legislation to fill these gaps.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 5.2Legislation Related to Health Privacy IssuesBy May 1999, more than 70 bills on privacy and confidentiality had been intro-duced in the 106th Congress.  Some of these were related to health information,
others to financial information or personal information collected by companies for
marketing purposes.  Although obviously not exhaustive, the following three Senateand House bills attest to the political importance of confidentiality and privacyissues as they relate to health:¥S. 881 (Bennett):  Medical Information Protection Act of 1999.  The bill
requires specified health entities in possession of protected health information to
allow the subjects of the information to inspect, copy, and amend it.  It directs the
secretary of Health and Human Services to develop model notices of confidentiality.It also mandates (1) administrative, technical, and physical safeguards for protected
health information, (2) a record of any protected health information disclosures,and (3) identification of disclosed information as protected health information.  In
addition, the bill prescribes guidelines for the disclosure of protected health infor-
mation with respect to (1) authorizations for treatment, payment, and health careoperations, (2) the individualÕs next-of-kin and directory information, (3) emergencycircumstances, (4) certain oversight agencies, (5) public health authorities,
(6)health researchers, (7) civil, judicial, and administrative procedures, (8) certain
law enforcement procedures, (9) payment for health care by credit card or electronicmeans, (10) certain duly authorized representatives acting on behalf of a subjectindividual (including a deceased subject individual, or a minor), and (11) certainbusiness sales, transfers, or mergers.  Finally, it imposes criminal penalties for

knowingly and intentionally disclosing protected health information and establishescivil monetary penalties for failure to comply with the act.¥S. 578:  Health Care Personal Information Nondisclosure Act of 1999.  The
bill requires specified parties to permit an individual who is the subject of protectedhealth information to inspect, copy, and request amendment of the information (or,if amendment is refused, to permit appending the individualÕs disagreement state-ment).  It requires specified parties to maintain safeguards to ensure the confiden-
tiality, security, accuracy, and integrity of protected health information.  It also
requires specified parties to maintain a disclosure record and prohibits them from
disclosing protected health information.  In addition, the bill requires (1) a single
authorization form for each individual for disclosure in connection with treatment,payment, and health care operations and (2) a separate authorization for other
purposes, including disclosure with intent to sell, transfer, or use protected healthinformation for commercial advantage.  It requires the development of model
authorizations for circumstances other than treatment, payment, and health care
operations.  It also allows and regulates disclosure (1) to next of kin (or another
person identified by the information subject), (2) of directory information, (3) regard-ing a deceased individual, (4) in emergencies, (5) for oversight, public health, or
health research, (6) in civil, judicial, and administrative procedures, and (7) for lawenforcement.  Finally, the bill imposes criminal and civil penalties.
¥S. 573/H.R. 1057:  Medical Information Privacy and Security Act.  The bill
requires specified parties to permit an individual who is the subject of protectedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY207health information to inspect and copy the information.  It sets forth rules concern-
ing (1) supplements to protected information and (2) provision of notice of privacypractices.  It requires specified parties to establish safeguards to ensure the con-

fidentiality, security, accuracy, and integrity of protected health information.  It also
mandates the development of model safeguard guidelines; requires specifiedparties to establish a record of disclosures not related to payment or treatment;
prohibits specified parties from disclosing protected health information, except asauthorized under this title; and allows disclosure if authorized by the informationsubject.  In addition, the bill sets forth rules governing authorizations for the dis-

closure of protected information for purposes other than treatment or payment.  It
allows any person to disclose protected health information (1) to allay or remedy athreat of imminent physical or mental harm to an information subject and (2) if
there is an identifiable threat of serious injury or death to an identifiable individualor group and other requirements are met.  It authorizes disclosure to (1) a public
health authority, (2) certain protection and advocacy agencies if an individual is
vulnerable to abuse or neglect by an agency providing health or social services,(3)a health oversight agency, under specified circumstances, and (4) on court
order, a law enforcement authority.  The bill also regulates disclosure (1) to next of

kin and (2) in directories of individuals admitted to a facility.  It directs the secretary
of Health and Human Services to report to the Congress whether written informedconsent should be required and, if so, under what circumstances, before personally
identifiable data can be used for medical research.  It establishes the Office of
Health Information Privacy, including in its duties the receiving and investigating ofviolation complaints and providing for the conduct of audits.  It imposes criminal
and civil sanctions.  Finally, it amends the Privacy Act of 1974
 (P.L. 93-579) torequire an agency that receives protected health information to promulgate rules to
exempt a system of records within the agency from all but specified provisions ofthat act.SOURCE:  Information derived from bill summaries contained on the Library of Con-
gressÕs THOMAS system, available online at <http://thomas.loc.gov/home/thomas.html>.tions to implement technical and administrative mechanisms to protectelectronic health information.  As a general rule, the regulations limit

organizations to releasing the Òminimum amount [of information] neces-sary to accomplish the relevant purpose.Ó 3These regulations represent a significant step forward in the protec-tion of personal health information and should reduce some of the uncer-
tainty regarding allowable exchanges of health information and mini-
mum levels of security protection.  Other issues remain to be addressed,

however, because the regulations were limited in several ways by the
nature of the HIPAA legislation.  First, the regulations apply only to
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETelectronic health informationÑthey do not apply to paper-based records,which constitute the bulk of all medical records held by provider organi-
zations.  Second, the regulations apply only to health care providers (that

transmit information electronically), health plans, and health care clearing-
houses 
(e.g., third-party administrators who process health care bills);they do not apply to the many other organizations, such as other insurers,
pharmacies, and direct marketersÑor consumer health Web sitesÑthatroutinely handle health information.  Furthermore, the regulations leave

unanswered the question of whether consumers need an explicit private
right of action to enforce their privacy rights.  Accordingly, the President
called on the Congress to pass comprehensive health privacy legislation
that addresses these issues (White House, 1999).Further uncertainty surrounds the development of unique patientidentifiers.  The HIPAA requires the secretary of Health and Human

Services to develop standard identifiers for care providers, health plans,
and patients to streamline the electronic administration of health care
benefits and payment of claims. Work on both the provider and plan
identifiers has moved forward without great difficulty, but efforts to
develop a patient identifier have encountered resistance because of con-
cerns that a unique identifier might facilitate the linking of personal infor-
mation from different sources, thereby eroding privacy.  The Department

of Health and Human Services (DHHS) has been reluctant to specify and
implement a unique patient identifier before a consensus is reached on
the larger issue of protecting personal health information, but it is evalu-
ating several alternatives.4  The outcomes of these initiatives will have
long-ranging effects on the health care providers, payers, and delivery
systems that must implement the recommendations.International actions may further affect the ways in which personalhealth information is transmitted over the Internet.  The European Union

(EU) Data Protection Directive, which went into effect on October 25,
1998, requires EU member states to block outbound transmissions of data
to countries that do not have laws providing a level of privacy protection
similar to that in the country where the data originated.5  The directive
affords the people to whom the data refer a host of rights, including the
right to be notified of data collection practices, to access information col-
lected about them, and to correct inaccuracies.  The directive is meant to

facilitate the flow of information among EU member states, but its provi-
sions threaten to cut off data exchanges with the United States, which has
no national law governing data protection (BNA, 1998).  The Clinton

administration favors a safe harbor proposal that would allow firms to
self-certify privacy policies and has been working with the EU to find a
mutually agreeable solution to the problem.  Privacy rights groups see the

EU directives as an opportunity to push harder for national legislation onNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY209privacy.  The Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue adopted a resolution
that called on the European Commission to reject the U.S. safe harbor
proposal and recommended instead the establishment of an international
convention on privacy protection to address public concerns about
transborder data flows.  Leading U.S. and European consumer organiza-

tions agree that neither the industry self-regulation nor the safe harbor
proposal would provide adequate privacy protection for consumers.6How this issue will be resolved is unclear.ACCESS TO INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTUREThe promise of the Internet in health applications is related to itsability to interconnect the diverse members of the health communityÑcare providers, insurers, consumers, researchers, educators, and othersÑin a dynamic fashion that allows the sharing of information and resources
in response to changing needs and affiliations.  Health applications of the

Internet pose particularly challenging requirements for access.  First, they

demand that access be widespreadÑextending to the point of care,whether it be a major hospital, rural physicianÕs office, a patientÕs home,or a hotel room.  Second, to the extent that applications such as home-

based patient monitoring and telemedicine to the home become more
viable, access links will need to provide high-bandwidth connections to
and from the end user.  Third, to the extent that the Internet is used for

consumer-oriented health initiatives, near-universal access to the infor-
mation infrastructure will become important to avoid exacerbating exist-
ing inequalities in the access of different population groups to health
information and health care.  As more health transactions move online,

there will be strong incentives to ensure broad-based, universal access to
the Internet for patients, providers, and administratorsÑparticularlyamong disadvantaged groups, who are often those most in need of health
care.  Furthermore, as different technologies for high-speed (or broad-

band) connections to the Internet are deployed that cost more than a
standard telephone line, concerns will arise about unequal access to the
Internet by different population segments.Technology and business trends will go a long way toward improv-ing Internet access.  Declines in the price of Internet service and access

devices, such as personal computers, promise to make connectivity more
affordable.  Over the past five years, the average price of an Internet-

capable computer has declined noticeably, driving further penetration of
computingÑand the InternetÑinto the home.  Statistics from the U.S.
Department of Commerce indicate that roughly 42 percent of all U.S.
households owned a computer in 1998, and 26 percent had Internet access.
These figures compare to penetration rates of 24 percent for computers inNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNET1994 and 19 percent for the Internet in 1997 (NTIA, 1999).  Several compa-
nies have begun discounting the price of computers for customers who
purchase a contract for Internet service.  In addition, lower-cost alterna-

tives to the computers have already begun to enter the marketplace.
WebTV (now owned by Microsoft) offers a device for as little as $99 that
enables users to send e-mail and access the Web through a standard tele-
vision set, using a remote control or keyboard.  The 3Com Corporation

sells several models of the Palm Pilot, ranging in price from $100 to $700,
which offer various degrees of connectivity to the Internet but less func-
tionality than a computer.  Less expensive products like these could help

overcome some of the existing economic barriers to Internet access.Despite these trends, the marketplace may not ensure equitable accessto information infrastructure across demographic lines.  Broadband con-

nections to the Internet are considerably more costly than traditional tele-
phone line access and are not available in many parts of the countryÑespecially in rural areas that might benefit most from delivery of medical
services via the Internet.  In addition, many offers of discounted Internet

access require consumers to accept additional advertising or to allow
greater monitoring of online activities, a condition involving privacy that
not all users are willing to accept.  Furthermore, Department of Com-

merce statistics indicate a widening gap between those with computers
and Internet access and those without, along a number of socioeconomic
lines.7  In 1998, households at the lowest income levels were nine times
less likely to have Internet access than those with incomes exceeding
$75,000.  Fewer than 20 percent of Americans with incomes of $25,000 or

less have access to the Internet either inside or outside the home (e.g., at
work), compared with almost 60 percent of those with incomes of $75,000
or more (NTIA, 1999).  Caucasians were two to three times more likely

than blacks or Hispanics to have Internet access from any location (e.g.,
home or office), and rural residents lagged their urban counterparts by
several percentage points at all income levels, although the differences
were most notable at lower incomes.  In sum, the Department of Com-

merce figures reflect increased Internet access at all income levels over the
past few years but show growing gaps based on income, education, and
race.  A similar study conducted in the emergency department of a large

urban pediatric teaching hospital found similar results (Mandl et al., 2000).Considerable public debate centers on the best way to provide uni-versal, low-cost access to the Internet.  Many observers argue that the

federal government should stay out of this matter, that the marketplace
will take care of consumer needs.  However, telecommunications compa-

nies point out that they have little financial incentive to lay the infra-
structure in locations where populations are sparse (i.e., rural areas) or
property costs are prohibitive (i.e., urban areas).  Consumer groups have
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY211emphasized a need for increased pressure on telecommunications andcable companies to ensure equitable access to broadband Internet service
(see CFA, 1999).  Given the prevalence of mergers, takeovers, and partner-

ships that bring together cable, telephone, and wireless companies with
Internet service providers (ISPs) to forge single entities, the issue is murky
at best.8  The resolution of this debate certainly will affect the size and
scope of, and the need for, special programs such as those described in the
present report.  Numerous strategies have been proposed for expanding

consumer access to the Internet for health purposes specifically.  These

ideas range from encouraging health plans to offer their members (or the
general public) access to online health resources and to subsidize the cost
of Internet access for their members to providing such support via the
Medicare and Medicaid programs, which work with populations that
might benefit substantially from improved Internet access (Eng et al.,
1998).The federal government has long played a critical role in promotinguniversal access to basic telecommunications services.  The notion of uni-

versal service was first promulgated in the Communications Act of 1934
(P.L. 73-416), the goal of which was Òto make available, so far as possible,to all the people of the United States a rapid, efficient Nation-wide andworld-wide wire and radio communication service with adequate 
facilitiesat reasonable charges.Ó  These words continue to provide the ideological
and legal basis for numerous telecommunications practices and programs
aimed at ensuring ubiquitous, affordable access.  Prior to 1983, attempts

to ensure universal service were pursued through AT&TÕs internal ratestructure, which effectively subsidized the extension of telecommunica-
tions services to rural areas.  With the breakup of AT&T, the Universal

Service Fund (USF) was established to keep telephone service affordable
in a competitive telecommunications market.  Telecommunications com-

panies operating in the United States (including local and long-distance
phone companies, wireless and paging companies, and pay phone pro-
viders) contribute to the USF, and companies can draw money directly
out of it to defray the cost of delivering discounted service to both low-
income communities and rural areas, where the cost of providing service
is high.  The Telecommunications Act of 1996 (P.L. 105-125) also man-

dated that the USF provide support for schools, libraries, and rural health
care providers.9  The Universal Service Administration Company (USAC),
under the direction of the Federal Communications Commission, now
operates three programs that can support Internet connections:  the High
Cost and Low Income Program, the Rural Health Care Program, and the
Schools and Libraries Program.  Each of these programs provides afford-
able access to modern telecommunications services for schools, libraries,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETrural health care facilities, and consumers, regardless of geographic loca-tion or socioeconomic status.USACÕs Rural Health Care Program is only one of several programssponsored by the federal government that subsidize telecommunications
services for health care applications.  Other programs are operated by the

Department of CommerceÕs National Telecommunications and Informa-tion Administration (NTIA) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (Box
5.3).  Although these programs make significant strides toward improv-

ing the access of health care organizations and consumers to the informa-
tion infrastructure, they do not necessarily provide sufficient incentives
to ensure connectivity from all home and health care settings or adequately
target the full range of participants in health care.  For example, the NTIA
ÕsTechnology Opportunities Program (TOP) provides project funding for a
limited time, after which the project is expected to become self-sustaining.
A 1998 survey found that 70 percent of the demonstration and access
projects initially funded in 1995 were still in full operation or serving an
altered or expanded function (Westat, 1999).  The remaining 30 percent
had either been scaled back or terminated.  Lack of maintenance funding

was cited as the primary threat to the sustainability of these projects.
Projects funded for 21 months or longer were more likely to have ex-
panded to serve additional end users than were short-term projects, evi-dence of the need for longer-term support.Ironically, the DHHS does not, itself, have ongoing programs toensure Internet access for care providers, consumers, or other members of
the health community.  The National Library of Medicine (NLM) does

provide small ($30,000) grants for Internet connections to public and
private nonprofit institutions (or consortia) engaged in health sciences
administration, education, research, and/or clinical care and to consortia
of health-related institutions.  However, these grants do not subsidize the

subsequent operational costs.10  In December 1999, the Clinton adminis-
tration directed federal departments and agencies to take a number of
steps aimed at improving access to the Internet and narrowing the gaps in
access across demographic groups.  The DHHS was charged, along with

the Education, Labor, and Housing and Urban Development Depart-
ments, with expanding the nationÕs network of community technologycenters to provide access to technology for low-income Americans and
encourage the development of information technology applications that
would enable those populations to start and manage their own small
businesses (Clinton, 1999).  The provision of Internet access at public sites

such as libraries, schools, and community centers may suffice for some
federal missions (e.g., education), but to serve health purposes adequately,

connectivity must extend to all likely points of care, including homes.
Many health-related inquiries are too personal to be made in a publicNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY213BOX 5.3Federal Programs That Support Health-RelatedAccess to the InternetRural Health Care ProgramThe Universal Service Administration Company (USAC) supports Internetaccess for health care providers through the Rural Health Care Division (RHCD,formerly Rural Health Care Corporation), which was formed to ensure that health
care providers in rural areas obtain the benefits of current telecommunicationstechnology.  The Universal Service Support Program established a fund of up to
$400 million annually to ensure that rural health care providers pay no more than
their urban counterparts do for telecommunication services, including Internetaccess.  In particular, the RHCD aims to provide support to rural health care pro-
viders for services related to the delivery of telemedicine.  Initially, the RHCD

expected thousands of physicians to apply for this program.  For a variety of
reasons, however, the program has not been as successful as counterpart pro-grams that support schools and libraries.  In 1999, the RHCD approved and funded

the first applications for physician access to the Internet through this program.  On
May 2, 1999, the Federal Communications Commission established $12 million asthe collection level for the second funding year of the RHCD support program
(July1, 1999, to June 30, 2000).  As of October 1999, the RHCD had committed
total funding of only $1.2 million to 223 rural health care providers (USAC, 1999).1Although the FCC modified the collection level, it did not revise the $400 million
annual cap for the rural health care support mechanism.  Among their drawbacks,
the RHCD programs support Internet access by physicians but not mid-level prac-
titioners or allied health professionals.  Furthermore, the application process is
burdensome, certain telecommunications companies are excluded from participa-tion, and the program does not underwrite bandwidth above T-1 capacity.  Without

changes, the RHCD program cannot possibly meet its intended goals.2Technology Opportunities Program3The Technology Opportunities Program (TOP) is a competitive, merit-basedgrant program run by the U.S. Department of CommerceÕs National Telecommuni-cations and Information Agency.  The TOP provides matching grants to nonprofit
organizations such as schools, libraries, hospitals, public safety entities, and stateand local governments.  The grants are intended to fund projects that improve the
quality of, and the publicÕs access to, health care, education, public safety, andother community-based  services.  The funds can be used to purchase networking
equipment, including computers, videoconferencing systems, network routers, and
telephones; buy software for organizing and processing all types of  information,
including computer graphics and databases; train staff, users, and others in theuse of equipment and software; purchase communications  services, such as In-

ternet access; evaluate the projects; and disseminate  the project
Õs findings.continuedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETFrom its inception in 1994 through October 1999, the TOP had awarded 421grants totaling $135.8 million and leveraging $203 million in local matching funds.Many grants supported projects in rural areas.  Sixty-six of these grants, totaling

$25 million in funding, supported health-related projects, ranging from efforts todevelop a digital, wireless home health care service network, to the coordination ofresponses from health and emergency services to high-risk patients in the Pine
Ridge Reservation, to the creation of a network linking 11 county health depart-ments in California, through videoconferencing and data communications.  Never-
theless, the TOP has been able to fund only a small percentage of the proposed
projects.  More than 5,300 grant proposals were submitted between 1994 and
1998, requesting $2.1 billion in funds; only 378 of these proposals were funded,using $188 million in federal funds.Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant and Loan ProgramThe U.S. Department of AgricultureÕs Distance Learning and TelemedicineGrant and Loan Program (DLT) was established to encourage, improve, and makeaffordable the use of telecommunications, computer networks, and related tech-
nologies for rural communities to improve their access to educational and/or med-ical services.  The DLT helps rural schools and health care providers invest in
telecommunications facilities and equipment to bring in educational and medical
resources that might not otherwise be available in rural areas.  Demand for the
DLT has been high.  Approximately 500 rural medical facilities will access improved
medical care through linkage with other rural hospitals and urban medical centersfor clinical interactive video consultation, distance training of rural health care pro-viders, management and transport of patient information, and access to medical
expertise or library resources.The program is intended to fund projects that deliver critically needed educa-tional and medical services in rural areas through structured, interactive educa-
tional training and/or medical professional presence over distance.  It facilitates the
networking of multiple sites dispersed over a large area rather than single, stand-alone entities.  The DLT covers capital costs of acquiring and installing tele-

communications hardware at schools, hospitals, and other eligible sites.  It also
covers other nonrecurring capital costs of establishing a distance learning andtelemedicine system; software, training, and technical assistance are among the
items that may be purchased.  Funded projects are required to become self-
sustaining through mechanisms such as user fees, tax assessments, or schoolbudgets.  Fifty-two grants totaling $13 million were awarded in 1999.
1Detailed information on the awards is available online at <www.rhc.universalservice.org>.2Presentation by William England, Director of Operations & Systems, Rural Health CareProgram, Universal Service Administrative Company, at the Emerging Health Infor-
mation Infrastructure Conference (HII99), April 27, 1999, Washington, D.C.3The Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure Assistance program was re-named the Technology Opportunities Program in January 2000 to reflect the opportuni-
ties new technologies provide for economic advancement.BOX 5.3 ContinuedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY215arena (e.g., a library or community center), and many health care emer-gencies would require rapid access to the Internet outside the normal
operating hours of public facilities.It may be possible to encourage organizations to enable this type ofaccess or find mechanisms to pay for Internet access for health applica-
tions.  For example, incentives could be designed to entice health plans

(public or private) to support some of the costs of Internet access for their
patients.  ISPs and cable companies could be given access to USF funds

(assuming they also contribute to the fund) to encourage them to expand
their service markets.  Programs similar to those of the Department of

Agriculture and the Rural Health Care Program (see Box 5.3) that target
remote and rural areas could be created for health care providers and
delivery sites in underserved and impoverished urban areas.  The feasi-

bility of the USFÕs High Cost and Low Income Program, providing a basiclevel of Internet service to individuals, could also be examined.  Could the

same economic principle that makes telemedicine an affordable solution
for prison health care also apply to home-based telemedicine services?
Greater involvement by DHHSÑand othersÑin these initiatives may benecessary to ensure that Internet access programs meet the needs of all
parties in the health community, including consumers.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTIONThe laws and practices that cover the creation, storage, dissemina-tion, and use of intellectual property shape the way in which digital
knowledge resources can be used in health professional education, bio-
medical research, health care, and the information systems that support
health care.  Considerable experimentation is under way to develop new

models for distributing electronic media over the Internet as the technolo-
gies for disseminating and protecting health-related information mature.
These trends have implications for both the publication of such informa-
tion and the practice of distance education in the health sector.Electronic PublishingThe health community has long been among the most active scientificprofessions in developing online resources providing access to current
information (e.g., the NLMÕs MEDLINE, which predated similar biblio-graphic resources for other scientific communities), in part because of the
rapid growth in biomedical knowledge.  Thus, the health community

(biomedical researchers in particular) has a special interest in the evolu-
tion of electronic publishing and the mechanisms by which scientists and
practitioners, as well as the public, will be able to gain unfettered access toNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETinformation on research, health care, and disease.  Publishers also have a
special interest in the evolution of electronic publishing, which is seen as
both a blessing and a curse.  For example, once an electronic book is

produced, the cost of distributing copies is small compared to the cost of
printing and distributing the print equivalent (see Shapiro and Varian,
1999).  But this very quality of electronic publishing is also its burden
Ñpublishers fear that their revenues will shrink as readers simply Òcut andpasteÓ the information they want, rather than purchasing the rights to use
it.The remarkable expansion of Web-based publishing and the prolif-eration of Internet information centers, such as America Online and
MEDSCAPE, have altered the expectations of consumers, health care pro-
viders, and biomedical researchers concerning their rights to use and
retain information available on the Internet.  These expectations some-

times conflict with publishersÕ controls.  Technology offers a partial solu-tion by providing the means to protect digital content, but its use can
challenge fundamental notions of concepts such as fair use.  For example,

simple access controls can enable distributors to implement licensing
agreements that restrict the use of Internet-based health information
resources to a set of users or a specific IP domain.  Such agreements

would not permit physicians and other health care providers to deliver
information or virtual library services to their patients in the course of
delivering health care. Digital rights management technologies, such as
those offered by Intertrust Corp., IBM, and Xerox, also enable producers
to specify rules for the use of information products, but they do not neces-
sarily ensure fair use.11As health professions, schools, and research centers build Internet-based curriculum materials and databases, they become publishers them-
selves, subject to many of the concerns that commercial publishers face,
and they become involved in a competitive marketplace that strains tradi-
tional agreements about the free exchange of scientific information among
peers.  Recently, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) proposed the

establishment of PubMed Central, a repository for the barrier-free elec-
tronic distribution of life sciences research reports.12  If implemented as
proposed, the site would alter the way scientific information is exchanged
among colleagues, bring biomedical research reports within easy reach of
consumers, and raise additional questions about the best way for univer-
sities to manage and market intellectual property.  Electronic publish-

ingÑwhether it be article preprints posted on PubMed Central, labora-tory data deposited in international scientific databases, or a research set
of health outcomes information (scrubbed of personal identifiers) distrib-
uted to colleagues from oneÕs personal desktop workstationÑchallengesmany existing practices.  If the full potential of the Internet is to be real-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY217ized, public and private agencies will need to rethink the principles ofownership, authorship, and priority that have guided scientific commu-
nication for centuries  (CSTB, 2000).Distance EducationTwo types of intellectual property issues arise out of attempts to usethe Internet to deliver distance education, which is becoming increasingly
popular in the health sector.  For many years, a large group of stake-

holders participated in the Conference on Fair Use (CONFU), which spon-
sored discussions on topics such as intellectual property protection and
copyright as applied to digital images, distance learning, educational
multimedia, electronic reserves, interlibrary loans and document delivery,
and in-library use of computer software.  The groupÕs final report, issuedin November 1998, contained voluntary guidelines covering several issues
but no consensus that led to action.The issue has been brought to the fore again by passage of the DigitalMillennium Copyright Act (DMCA, P.L. 105-304), which became law inSeptember 1998.  The DMCA directed the registrar of copyright to consult

with copyright owners, nonprofit educational institutions, and nonprofit
libraries and archives and to submit recommendations to the U.S. Con-
gress on how to promote distance education through digital technologies,
including interactive digital networks.13  The recommendations must
maintain Òan appropriate balance between the rights of copyright ownersand the interests of usersÓ and may include legislative changes.  The U.S.Copyright Office issued its report in May 1999.14  The fair use issue needs
to be resolved in a way that enhances the ability of health professional
educators to take full and fair advantage of the Internet.The second problem area concerns the rights of teaching faculty toretain the products of their intellectual work.  Traditionally, universities

have allowed faculty to retain intellectual property rights (and royalties)
for the textbooks and monographs they write as part of their scholarly
work.  But patents that result from laboratory research have been handled

differently; faculty members have been allowed to retain only a portion of
revenues that result from the sale and marketing of their inventions.  The

increasing market for computer-based learning tools and courses offered
across the Internet has sparked debate over whether electronic curricu-
lum materials should be treated as textbooks or patents.  Because the

production of multimedia resources and Web-based course materials
often involves many staff members, some universities have declared these
materials to be work for hire, such that revenues are to flow to the institu-
tion rather than to any individual faculty member.  A shared-ownership

approach for multimedia works, based on the patent model, has beenNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETimplemented at some universities as an alternative to the work-for-hireapproach.Several options could be pursued to resolve these issues.  First, con-
sideration could be given to the development of fair use provisions within
the health domain.  A set of practical guidelines and licensing exceptions

could encourage and facilitate the use of information for health care while
protecting the rights of the owners of that information.  This approach has

worked well in the educational sector, where agreement was reached on
the degree to which students and researchers can reproduce copyrighted
material for educational purposes.Second, a distance education framework could be put in place thatremoves barriers to the delivery of instruction over the Internet.  Without

a set of clear, workable guidelines, schools that educate health professionals
also are unlikely to develop electronic courses and learning resources that
come up to the standards of the courses and resources available to stu-
dents in the traditional classroom.  The same can be said for the societies

and associations that provide continuing medical and professional educa-
tion to their members and health care organizations that wish to provide
patient education programs over the Internet.  Demonstrations of the

practical application of the CONFU guidelines in several health settings
could help assess the adequacy of the guidelines for health professions
education.Third, universities could develop a standard approach to the owner-ship of electronic curriculum materials that balances the rights of the
institution with those of the creators of the materials and is compatible
with other intellectual property policies.  If the proposed PubMed Central

makes access to scientific knowledge truly barrier-free for both physi-
cians and their patients, then it could fundamentally reshape the way
scientific information is brought to bear on health.  However, the mecha-

nisms for assuring the quality and scope of materials published in
PubMed Central have not yet been developed.  The health care commu-

nity needs to take an active role in devising these mechanisms.Congressional activity may affect the use of distance education mate-rials.  For instance, a bill in the House of Representatives, the Collections

of Information Antipiracy Act (H.R. 354, Coble), proposes copyright pro-
tection for owners of collections of electronic information.  The bill is

modeled on EU law (the data directive) that protects those who make
Òsubstantial investmentÓ in developing databases, giving them protec-
tion against extraction or reuse (without permission) for a 15-year period.
To obtain protection under the EU law, the United States must pass

equivalent protections.  Opponents of the bill see the proposed legislation

as an infringement of existing fair use rights and believe it will have a
chilling effect on scientific research.15Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY219REGULATIONS AFFECTING ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OFHEALTH SERVICESVarious communications technologies (e.g., telephones, satellite links,and private networks) have long been used to deliver health services at a
distanceÑthat is, telemedicine.  But a number of regulatory issues have
impeded the expanded use of  information technology for telemedicine.

Ongoing issues include payment policies, especially those used in federal
programs (Medicare and Medicaid); professional licensure requirements;
and standards for malpractice liability, which have impeded attempts to
deliver services across state lines.  The difficulties that have arisen in the

regulatory environment are indicative of the broad range of potential
obstacles that could arise as the Internet becomes more widely used for
the delivery of health services.Payment PoliciesThe lack of suitable mechanisms of payment for telemedicine sessionsis a significant impediment to the use of information technology within
the fee-for-service environment that still dominates much of health care.
Traditional fee-for-service insurers pay for health care in accordance with
specialized rules outlining the particular services that willÑand will notÑbe reimbursed.  This model stands in contrast to capitated care systems, in

which providers are paid based on formulas such as the number of patients
under their care rather than the individual services rendered.  Providers

in captitated systems have incentives to use efficacious and cost-effective
approaches, without regard to specific reimbursement policies.  They can

be expected to view Internet-based service delivery not as competing
with face-to-face service delivery but as a tool to reduce the customer
service burden on their facilities and confer a competitive advantage.
Hence, payment policies are not a significant obstacle to telemedicine in
capitated care systems.  However, private insurers that rely on a fee-for-

service model will need to revisit their payment policies.Existing payment policies within the fee-for-service framework haveonly begun to expand coverage into the telemedicine arena.16  Prior to the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (P.L. 105-33), the Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA), which pays for Medicare and Medicaid services
and thus has a significant effect on payment policies throughout the
industry, reimbursed only consultations that occurred in real time and
involved face-to-face encounters between physicians and patients
(although diagnostic teleradiology and telepathology were covered).  The

act required HCFA to expand its coverage of telemedicine services under
the Medicare program beginning in January 1999, but critics contend thatNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETbecause the new rules fail to recognize telemedicine as just another wayof delivering existing health care services they make artificial distinctions
between telemedicine sessions and traditional face-to-face encounters.17Under its new rules, which are still being evaluated, HCFA will reim-
burse telemedicine services according to the following criteria:18¥The Medicare beneficiary (i.e., patient) must reside inÑor bepresented fromÑa designated health professional shortage area (HPSA),typically rural or inner city locations that have difficulty attracting and
retaining physicians and other health professionals.  HPSAs are desig-

nated based on the total number of physicians practicing in a geographic
area.  The rules do not distinguish between a patient
Õs access to primarycare physicians vs. specialists and may not allow for reimbursement of
remote consultations by specialists in some areas.¥Services delivered through telemedicine are limited to initial,follow-up, or confirming consultations in hospitals, outpatient facilities,
or medical offices.  Reimbursement is not available for all the services that

are reimbursable in a face-to-face encounter.  Moreover, the rules do not

specifically address telemedicine delivered to the home.¥Services must delivered in real time through interactive audio andvideo telecommunications systems.  With encouragement from the Con-

gress, HCFA is expected to consider the use of store-and-forward tech-
nologies in the future, but services delivered in this form are not currently
covered.  Store-and-forward may be especially valuable in locations that

have limited access to affordable broadband technologies.¥The professional providing the teleconsultations must be a physi-cian, physicianÕs assistant, nurse-practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, ornurse-midwife.  Clinical psychologists, physical therapists, occupational

therapists, and speech therapistsÑwho may be reimbursed in face-to-faceencountersÑmay not be reimbursed for telemedicine.¥The referring professional must be a physician, physicianÕs assis-tant, nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, nurse-midwife, clinical
psychologist, or clinical social worker.  Another professional may act in

place of a referring professional to present the patient to the consultant,
provided that the professional is employed by the referring professional
and is a practitioner as defined in the regulation.  Registered nurses,

licensed practical nurses, and others (including family members for home
care) are not allowed to present cases to consulting practitioners.¥As specified by the Balanced Budget Act, the regulations re-quire fees for telemedicine encounters to be shared by the referring
and consulting practitioners.  HCFA will make a single payment to

the consulting professional, 25 percent of which is to be paid to the
referring professional.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY221These rules have allowed greater experimentation with telemedicinereimbursement programs.  As of July 1999, Medicare teleconsultation

demonstration projects in Georgia, Iowa, North Carolina, and West Virginia
were allowing more than 100 hospitals to receive reimbursement for out-
patient services involving specialist telemedicine.  Reimbursement of

telemedicine providers under the Medicaid program was ongoing in at
least 11 states, with several others considering such programs.  But, as

outlined above, the rules do not yet address payment for all the diverse
forms of telemedicine that could arise in an Internet-mediated environ-
ment.  For example, they do not cover store-and-forward systems for

medical images (either still or video), videoconferencing to the home, or
provision of services outside designated shortage areas.  Payment policies

may have to be modified further to enable these applications as other
technical and organizational impediments are overcome and the applica-
tions themselves are demonstrated to be efficacious and cost-effective.A primary requirement for paymentÑand a current obstacle to itÑisfirm evidence of the efficacy of telemedicine services.  A number of pilot

projects have demonstrated the technical feasibility of telemedicine, but
rigorous evaluations of the outcomes of care remain sparse.19  Without a
better evidentiary basis and more supportive policies, institutions and
providers are understandably reluctant to invest in the equipment and
training needed to provide high-quality telemedicine services.  Further

studies are under way to scientifically evaluate telemedicine applications.
The NLM is funding dozens of demonstration projects and has explicitly
called for evaluations of efficacy.20  Other demonstration projects funded
by federal agencies such as DHHS, the Veterans Administration, the
Department of Defense, and the National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration may help create a stronger scientific basis on which to determine
the efficacy of various telemedicine services, leading eventually to more
liberal reimbursement policies.Liability and LicensureUse of the Internet creates a host of new issues regarding licensureand liability.  For instance, it is not clear what rules and regulations con-

trol the online prescription of medications or confer credentials on remote
interpreters of radiographs.  Some people fear that the Internet could

allow quacks to masquerade as credentialed physicians.  At the same

time, existing licensure and liability rules do not adequately cover current
and potential Internet applications in the health sector.  State-based liabil-

ity for malpractice poses an additional barrier to widespread use of the
Internet for telemedicine services across state lines.  Under the principle

of  long-arm jurisdiction, any state court can claim authority over trans-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETactions in another state if it can prove that it has jurisdiction over thattransaction (Alberts et al., 1998).  The Internet confounds the matter of

which state has jurisdiction in the delivery of health services and informa-
tion because the transaction is distributed among two or more locations.
For example, if a patient undergoes a remotely managed surgical proce-
dure at a medical center in a neighboring state, which state has jurisdic-
tion if there is a malpractice claimÑthe patientÕs home state, the state inwhich the medical center is located, or the surgeonÕs home state?  Must
the surgeon be licensed in all three states?  A mechanism is needed for

crafting creative solutions to situations such as these.Similarly, under the present rules, care providersÑwhether physi-cians, nurses, or physical therapistsÑare licensed to practice in individualstates.  With telemedicine or Internet-based health care more generally, it

becomes practical for providers to practice across state lines.  But this

would be illegal, and telemedicine programs that do cross state lines must
ensure that a licensed physician is located at both ends of the transaction.
This practice not only raises the cost of telemedicine consultations or
procedures (and all of the cost may not be reimbursed, as noted above)
but also makes it difficult to implement telemedicine services in small
towns that have other health professionals but lack physicians.  These are

often the very areas that have the greatest need for telemedicine services.
Indeed, one of the reasons the telemedicine program at East Carolina
University has been so successful is because it operates only within the
state of North Carolina, thereby precluding the need to engage two phy-
sicians simultaneously.  The university employs specially trained nurses

and physician assistants in rural clinics to present telemedicine cases,
helping to reduce costs and extend the reach of the telemedicine services.
At the same time, local jurisdictions face strong political pressures to
maintain strict licensure provisions.  Allowing the interstate practice of

medicine could make it easier for larger, more prestigious health care
institutions to win business from local institutions, hurting the local
economy.A number of mechanisms have been proposed to address licensingconcerns.  The Western Governors
Õ Association, for example, proposed
several options that states could pursue voluntarily, including explicit
exemptions for remote consultations under specific conditions; participa-
tion in a uniform regional licensure program that would provide a lim-
ited license valid in any of the participating states; or institutional or
network licensure for all network physicians (Gilbert, 1995; WGA, 1995).
An alternative that has been proposed is the development of model legis-
lation for encouraging uniformity in state licensing rules (IOM, 1996).  A

more recent report from the Southern GovernorsÕ Association called for
continued examination of the licensure issue to develop a strategy forNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY223evaluating interstate licensure (Southern GovernorsÕ Association, 1999).
Clearly, continued effort is needed in this area.The Congress and executive branch agencies continue to expressinterest in telemedicine. The Information Infrastructure Task Force and
the Joint Working Group on Telemedicine are chartered to consider
telemedicine applications.  Accordingly, the Congress has begun to con-

sider corrective legislation in some of the pertinent areas (see Box 5.4).
Other groups, too, have begun to address regulatory issues associated
with telemedicine.  The Southern Governors
Õ Association, for example,
identified payment and licensure as two of the primary impediments to
telemedicine and called for the establishment of a national licensing sys-
tem, although not necessarily one run by the federal government (South-ern GovernorsÕ Association, 1999).  Regardless of the particular mecha-
nisms used, it is clear that regulatory barriers such as liability and
licensure need to be remedied before the Internet can be exploited fully to
expand the availability of health care.FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR HEALTH-RELATED INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThe combined efforts of both private and public organizations will berequired to ensure the robust development of health care applications of
the Internet.  To date, federal health agencies have exhibited uneven inter-

est in pursuing Internet-based applications or in funding information tech-

nology research that could support health applications.  By comparison,

the Department of Defense and the Veterans AdministrationÑboth ofwhich operate large health care delivery systems but are not federal health
agenciesÑhave invested considerable resources in the development oftelemedicine programs and infrastructure for sharing patient health
records.21  Some entities within the DHHS, most notably the NLM but
also other elements of the NIH and the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality, have invested in research on health-related applications of
computing and communications technologies, but DHHS itself has not
made use of the Internet in health-related activities a priority.  As one

DHHS official noted, the department has considerable expertise in infor-
mation technologies, but that expertise is dispersed throughout its many
agencies, with no formal mechanisms for cross-fertilization and exchange
of ideas.  No clear advocate exists within the DHHS for Internet-based

applications.22  As a result DHHS and its constituent agencies sometimes
lag behind the institutions they serve (e.g., they do not accept Medicare
claims via the Internet) and sometimes mirror the same conservative ap-
proach that is characteristic of many health care organizations.  For ex-

ample, HCFAÕs strategic plan for information systems, dated July 1998,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 5.4Legislation Related to TelemedicineA number of bills related to telemedicine were introduced in the 106th Con-gress.  Among those most relevant to the present report are the following:
¥S. 770:  Comprehensive Telehealth Act of 1999.  This bill would provide
payment under the Medicare program for telehealth services and for other purposes.It amends the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 with respect to Medicare reimburse-
ment of telehealth to (1) include reimbursement for store-and-forward technologies;clinical psychologist and physical, occupational, and speech therapist practitionerservices; and items and services covered under Medicare part B (Supplementary
Medical Insurance) that are provided via telecommunications systems, (2) extendtelehealth coverage to all rural areas (currently, only those designated as healthprofessional shortage areas under the Public Health Service Act are covered),
(3)allow any health care practitioner acting on instructions from the referring phy-
sician or practitioner to present the Medicare beneficiary to the consulting physi-cian or practitioner for the provision of items and services, (4) prohibit the referring
physician and the practitioner from receiving any reimbursement for such presen-tation other than the payment that the referring physician shares with the consult-ing physician, and (5) provide that payment for items and services shall include
payment for all current procedural terminology billing codes covered under Medi-care.  It also directs the secretary of Health and Human Services to study, and
report to the U.S. Congress on, issues associated with cross-state licensure ofhealth care providers (e.g., numbers of cross-licensed practitioners, status ofreciprocal agreements, and state-led efforts to ease licensure burdens) and to
provide specified financial assistance to eligible telehealth networks to expandaccess to health care services for individuals in rural and frontier areas.  The bill
was referred to the Senate Finance Committee for consideration in April 1999.  No

further major action had been taken as of February 2000.¥H.R. 1344:  Triple-A Rural Health Improvement Act of 1999.  This bill would
promote and improve access to health care services in rural areas.  Title V amends

the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 with regard to telehealth services, among otherchanges, to (1) extend Medicare reimbursement for such services to all rural Medi-care services, including services by physical, occupational, and speech therapists,
(2) revise related payment methodology, and (3) add congressional reportingrequirements pertaining to the telehealth services program.  It also changes the
name of the Joint Working Group on Telemedicine to the Joint Working Group on
Telehealth and establishes the mission of the working group, among other things,as identifying, monitoring, and coordinating federal telehealth projects and pro-grams.  The bill directs the secretary to provide specified financial assistance for

expanding access to health care services for individuals in rural frontier areasthrough the use of telehealth.  The bill was referred to the Committee on Ways and
Means and the Committee on Commerce in March 1999.  As of February 2000, no

further action had been taken.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY225mentions the Internet only twice in passingÑdespite the reportÕs focus onenhancing timely access to information for a variety of users (HCFA,
1998).Some signs of change are visible.  Since issuing its strategic plan for
information technology, HCFA has revised its security policy to allow
Internet-based exchanges of information among its own entities after the
information has been received from care providers and health plans.
HCFA also is sponsoring an ongoing pilot program to compare several
different alternatives for Internet-based submission of claims.  Depend-

ing on the findings of the pilot study and the results of a cost-benefit
analysis of claims transmission, HCFA will decide whether to allow

Internet transmission on an operational basis.23  The Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) recently initiated a project to use the
Internet as part of a Health Alert Network to detect and respond to
bioterrorist attacks, although some staff contend that this project is sig-
nificantly underfunded.24Federal health agencies have played only a limited role in supportingresearch and development (R&D) for new Internet-based capabilities.
Many R&D and demonstration projects have been funded by the NLM
and other NIH institutes, but investigations of new computing and com-
munications technologies that are motivated by health-related goals have
been only a minor element in the portfolio of the U.S. biomedical research
community.  Indeed, the biomedical research community in general, and

the NIH in particular, have been accused of failing to provide their fair
share of support for fundamental research in information technology,
especially in comparison with other mission-oriented federal agencies
(PITAC, 1999).  Of the $2.3 billion spent by the federal government on

computer science research in 1999, just $120 million came from DHHS,
and none came from the Department of Veterans Affairs (Table 5.1).25The Commerce, Defense, and Energy Departments and the NSF each
funded more computing research, despite the fact that DHHSÕs overallresearch budget of $13 billion exceeds the research budgets of the four
other agencies combined.26  This funding imbalance provides further evi-
dence that federal health agencies have been far less active than their
counterparts in the education, defense, scientific, and library communi-
ties in pursuing initiatives related to the Internet.27The reasons for the comparative lack of support for computer scienceresearch within the DHHS are manifold, but perhaps the underlying prob-
lem is that the department as a whole has not embraced information
technology (IT) as fundamental to its mission.  Federal agencies that have

allocated major portions of their R&D budgets to fundamental IT research
tend to view IT as an integral part of their particular missions, whether
national security, scientific research, or industrial competitiveness.  Many
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETdiscoveries funded by DOD, DOE, and NSF have found their way intosystems applied in the health disciplines.  Almost all of DHHSÕs researchfunding is obligated to biological and medical sciences; IT is seen prima-
rily as infrastructure to support these other activities.  A recent NIH report

on biomedical information science and technology recognizes the impor-
tance of computing in biomedical research (NIH, 1999), but it assumes
that computer science is a source of tools for enabling biomedical research
rather than a field of intellectual inquiry worthy of further investigation
by biomedical researchers.  Until government and industrial research

organizations see the health disciplines as a potential source of innova-
tion for new information technologies, fundamental informatics research
is not likely to emerge from the traditional biomedical sciences; instead,
health informatics research probably will continue to emphasize demon-
stration projects and applications.There are several arguments for involving health agencies moreclosely in information technology research that is motivated by health
needs.  As noted throughout this report, IT is increasingly critical to the

continued success of the nationÕs health enterprise.  Achieving the goal of
promoting a healthy citizenryÑas well as assuring equitable access toaffordable, high-quality health careÑis likely to depend on the effectiveuse of new and emerging information technologies, including the Internet.

Although the capabilities required of the Internet for health applications
do not differ significantly from those for applications in other areas where
the government has a mission, research programs motivated by health
needs probably would emphasize characteristics and capabilities that
would not otherwise receive sufficient attention but that could be widely
applicable, just as earlier work in expert systems that was motivated byTABLE 5.1  Estimated Federal Funding for Research by Selected
Agencies, 1999ComputerComputer Science
All FieldsScienceResearch as % of
(millions of $,(millions of $,Agency
Õs ResearchDepartment/Agency% of total)% of total)in All Fields
Department of Health and   Human Services12,982 (39.3)120 (5.3)0.9
Department of Defense4,089 (12.4)864 (38.3)21.1

Department of Energy4,128 (12.5)656 (29.1)15.9
National Science Foundation2,655 (8.0)395 (17.5)14.9
Department of Commerce850 (2.6)85 (3.8)10.0

All federal agencies32,992 (100)2,255 (100)6.8
SOURCE:  National Science Foundation (2000), Table C-22.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY227health needs resulted in important advances that have proven widelyapplicable (Box 5.5).Efforts to involve the DHHS and its constituent agencies more closelyin Internet-related research will require careful thought.  Structuring mis-

sion agency research programs in information technology is vexing, espe-
cially given the history of successful research support by the DOD and
NSF.28  The DHHS could initiate its own network research program, but
it would most likely need to coordinate its activities with other agencies
to avoid unnecessary duplication.  Lack of experience could be a barrier

to this approach; the department has not been active in basic network (or
computer science) research for some time, so it may lack the ability to
identify relevant and challenging research areas, to select promising pro-
posals, and to manage the research.  An alternative approach would be

for DHHS to encourage and foster collaborative R&D between health
informatics investigators and technical experts in communication and in-
formation technologies who are actively engaged in networking R&D.
This approach is more likely to lead to solutions that advance the infor-
mation technology infrastructure in general and less likely to strand health
informatics in an isolated technological corner.WORKFORCE ISSUESIf governments, health care organizations, academic institutions, andprofessional groups need to attract more effective leaders in the strategic
uses of information technology, where will they find them?  The number

of individuals who understand both the biomedical milieu and the tech-
nologies relevant to computing and the Internet is remarkably small.  The

lack of trained individuals at the interface may also help to explain why
the biomedical community has lagged other fields in understanding and
adopting computing and communications technology, especially when
direct use by health professionals is required.  Although the NLM has

funded graduate training programs in informatics for more than two
decades and some computer science departments and library schools have

set up programs to train health technology specialists, the supply of medi-
cal information scientists and professionals from these programs does not
meet the demand.  Directors of the current medical informatics training

programs find that their graduates are highly sought after by industry
(e.g., the pharmaceutical and health information system industries), health
care organizations (e.g., managed care groups, hospitals, and multi-
specialty practices), and academic informatics groups with training or
research missions.The problem is not necessarily unique to health care computing.  Com-
panies in all sectors of the economy report difficulties in attracting andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETBOX 5.5Medically Motivated Research on Expert SystemsThe health community played an important role in the rise of expert systems,which are software environments that analyze data and give advice based on theinternal encoding of human expertise (Duda and Shortliffe, 1983).  Although early

work involved applications in a large number of fields, work on medical expertsystems starting in the 1970s had a particularly important impact.  This work not
only developed technologies and systems that were beneficial to health care and
biomedical research but also pushed the frontiers of computer science, developingnew knowledge and technologies that could be incorporated into systems for arange of other applications.  The medical focus of this work uncovered real-world

problems that could be solved only through fundamental computing research.The real-world issues that arise in medicine pressed the limits of existing soft-ware technologies in challenging ways (Clancey and Shortliffe, 1984).  For exam-

ple, medical applications required new approaches to managing and modelinguncertaintyÑspecifically, the uncertainties associated with causality, diagnosis,and treatment.  Biological systems were not as well understood as the engineering

systems being analyzed by expert systems at the time.  Furthermore, because of
the diverse types of data that must be considered in diagnosis and the complexityof patient records, medical expert systems could not rely on a simple question-and-
response approach to data gathering in support of decision making (an approachthat suited many simpler systems).  Hence, medical informatics researchers pio-
neered the integration of expert systems with large databases, such as computer-based medical records.  The complexity of medical decision making and the
difficulties involved in embedding decision-support tools into the work flows of prac-
ticing medical professionals drove further advances in the representation of largeand complex knowledge bases and acceptable modes of interaction with users.The work simultaneously forced the community to take a fresh look at the psycho-
logical underpinnings of human problem solving in medicine, leading to productivecollaborations among physicians, cognitive scientists, and computer scientists.Ultimately, many of the techniques developed by the medical computingresearch community, generally with funding from the National Institutes of Health(NIH) or the predecessor to the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality(AHRQ), were adapted for use in other application areas.  In fact, during the 1980s,

interest in expert systems soared, largely in areas outside of medicine (ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board, 1999a).  It is clear that the results of
early NIH- and AHRQ-supported research in this area had a major impact on cor-
porate America and the economy in the decades that followed (Feigenbaum et al.,1988)Ironically, the adoption of expert systems in health care has been slower.  Only
now is an infrastructure, culture, and health-financing climate emerging that is likelyto allow expert systems to have a substantial impact in the clinical setting.  The
recent emphasis on the implementation of clinical guidelines, reduction in practice
variations, and adoption of evidence-based practice has made expert systemsseem more attractive.  In addition, the introduction of electronic medical records,
distributed computing, and networking within institutions has made it possible to
integrate decision-support tools in ways that do not require the stand-alone consul-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY229tation model typical of the earlier medical expert systems.  Thus, the true payoff, in
terms of the mission and goals of NIH and AHRQ, will have occurred 25 to 30years after they began to support research in this area, although there have been
interim spin-offs in other areas.  If the biomedical research agencies of the 1970s
had demanded a 2-year turnaround time for their investments in information tech-nology research, the work that has produced so many benefits today never would
have been initiated.retaining sufficient numbers of information technology workers.  A recent
report by the PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee(1999) contends that the supply of information technology workers does
not meet the demand in almost all segments of society.29  The Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council
has been charged by the Congress to more fully evaluate the issue.30  As
the advisory committee report argues, ÒIt is crucial that we produce acontinuous supply of well-trained, high-quality professionals in engineer-
ing and computer and information science, not merely skilled users, but
researchers, creators, and designers of advanced technologyÓ (PITAC,
1999).  As with information technology fields in general, niche areas

requiring expertise in health care, biomedicine, computing, and commu-
nication also appear to be undersupplied.  There are important scientific

issues to address, practical systems to be built, and strategies to be put in
place.  Health care will be constrained until there are many more indi-

viduals with these combinations of talents.One option for addressing this concern is to expand educationalopportunities in health-care computing and communications.  Existing

training programs in health informatics could be expanded, and new
emphases or tracks could be developed in related disciplines.  Alternative

training tracks in areas of application ranging from clinical medicine and
nursing to bioinformatics and health system management also could be
developed.  At the same time, educational opportunities could be created

within schools of the health professions and computer science depart-
ments.  Beyond such training programs, which would be designed to

develop a cadre of researchers who operate at the nexus of health and
computer sciences, initiatives could be taken to infuse some degree of
informatics training throughout the health sciences curricula.  Health pro-

fessionals need to become part of the information culture that will define
the century ahead, and their educational opportunities, in both profes-
sional school and continuing education programs, must be responsive to
that need.  Such training needs to emphasize areas of overlap among
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNEThealth care, biomedicine, computing, and communicationsÑnot simplycomputer literacy as traditionally, and narrowly, construed.31CONCLUSIONAs this chapter illustrates, the availability of useful information tech-nologies is not enough to ensure their effective application in health care.
Myriad policy issues will most likely need to be resolved concerning
patient privacy, access to health care and Internet services, intellectual
property protection, payment mechanisms for telemedicine, and human
resources.  The effective implementation of new information technologies

in complex environments such as the U.S. health care system will require
vision, commitment, and leadership at the highest levels; a well-funded
research agenda; effective policies for developing the necessary workforce;
and a grassroots community of capable participants.  To make decisions

related to Internet technologies in health and health care, public and pri-
vate policy makers need sophisticated analyses and information that goes
beyond traditional reporting on a narrow set of facts.  The issues are

emotionally and politically charged.  Their resolution will require the

concerted efforts of many public and private sector organizations, includ-
ing government agencies, companies, and professional associations.
Without deliberate, sustained action, the fundamental conflicts seen in
these policy debates will keep the Internet from fulfilling its promise in
health care.REFERENCESAlberts, R.J., A.M. Townsend, and M.E. Whitman.  1998.  
ÒThe Threat of Long-Arm Juris-diction to Electronic Commerce,Ó Communications of the ACM 41(12):15-20.
Appavu, S.I.  1997.  
Analysis of Unique Patient Identifier Options.  Report prepared for the
Department of Health and Human Services, November 24.  Available online at <http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/app0.htm>.Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (BNA).  1998.  
ÒEU Privacy Directive Will Take Effect EvenWithout Implementing Legislation,Ó Electronic Commerce and Law Report, November17.  Available online at <http://zeus.bna.com/e-law/articles/top0335.html>.
Clancey, W.J., and E.H. Shortliffe, eds.  1984.  
Readings in Medical Artificial Intelligence
.Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.Clinton, W.J.  1999.  
Narrowing the Digital Divide:  Creating Opportunities for All Americans in
the Information Age.  Memorandum to executive departments and agencies, December 9.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1994.  Realizing the Information Future:  The Internet and Beyond
.  National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1997.  For the Record:  Protecting Electronic Health Information.  National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY231Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999a.  Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999b.  Being Fluent with Information Technology.  National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.2000.  The Digital Dilemma:  Intellectual Property in the Information Age
.  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Consumer Federation of America (CFA).  1999.  
Transforming the Information Superhighwayinto a Private Toll Road:  The Case Against Closed Access Broadband Internet Systems
. CFA,Washington, D.C.,  September.   Available online at <http://www.consumerfed.org/

broadbandaccess.pdf>.Duda, R.O., and E.H. Shortliffe.  1983.  
ÒExpert Systems Research,Ó Science 220:261-268.
Eng, Thomas R., Andrew Maxfield, Kevin Patrick, Mary Jo Deering, Scott C. Ratzan, andDavid H. Gustafson. 1998. ÒAccess to Health Information and Support:  A Public High-
way or a Private Road?Ó Journal of the American Medical Association 280(15):1371-1375.
Feigenbaum, E.A, P. McCorduck,  and H.P. Nii.  1988.  
The Rise of the Expert Company:  How
Visionary Businesses Are Using Intelligent Computers to Achieve Higher Productivity andProfits.  Times Books, New York.
Gilbert, F.  1995.  
ÒLicensure and Credentialing Barriers to the Practice of Telemedicine,Ópp. 27-35 in Telemedicine Action Report:  Background Papers
.  Western Governors
Õ Asso-
ciation, Denver.Goldberg, A.S.  1999.  
ÒTaking Healthcare to the PatientÑTelemedicine Delivers,Ó HealthLaw Digest 27(7):3-10.
Gotcher, R.  1999.  
ÒEnd-to-End E-Publishing Service Announced,Ó InfoWorld Electric, Novem-ber 10.  Available online at <www.infoworld.com/dgi/bin/displayStory.pl?991110.
icpublish.htm>.Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA).  1999.  
Fact Sheet:  Medicare Payment for
Teleconsultation in Rural Health Professional Shortage Areas.  HCFA, Baltimore, Md., May.
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA).  1998.  
HCFAÕs Information Technology Vision.HCFA, Baltimore, Md., July.Institute of Medicine (IOM).  1997.  
The Computer-Based Patient Record:  An Essential Technol-
ogy for Health Care, rev. ed.  R.S. Dick, E.B. Steen, and D.E. Detmer, eds.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Institute of Medicine (IOM).  1996.  
Telemedicine:  A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in
Health Care.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Institute of Medicine (IOM).  1994.  
Health Data in the Information Age:  Use, Disclosure, and
Privacy.  Molla S. Donaldson and Kathleen N. Lohr, eds.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.Mandl, K.D., S. Feit, B.M.G. Pena, and I.S. Kohane.  2000.  
ÒGrowth and Determinants ofAccess in Patient E-mail and Internet Use,Ó Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medi-cine, in press.Mueller, Milton L., Jr.  1997.  
Universal Service:  Competition, Interconnection, and Monopoly in
the Making of the American Telephone System. AEI Press, Washington, D.C.
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics.  1999.  
Second Annual Report to Congresson Implementation of Administrative Simplification.  July 22.  Available online at <www.
ncvhs.hhs.gov/yr2-rpt.htm#progress>.National Institutes of Health (NIH).  1999.  
The Biomedical Information Science and TechnologyInitiative:  Report of the Working Group on Biomedical Computing
.  June 3.  Available
online at <www.nih.gov/welcome/director/060399.htm>.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETNational Research Council (NRC).  1999.  
A Question of Balance:  Private Rights and the Public
Interest in Scientific and Technical Databases.  National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.National Science Foundation (NSF).  2000.  
Federal Funding for Research and Development:Fiscal Years 1998, 1999, and 2000.  Early release tables, National Science Foundation,
Arlington, Va.National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), U.S. Department ofCommerce.  1999.  
Falling Through the Net:  Defining the Digital Divide.
  Available online
at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/>.PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  1999.  
Report to thePresident, Information Technology Research:  Investing in Our Future,
  February.  Available
online at <http://www.ccic.gov/>.Shapiro, C., and H.R. Varian.  1999.  
Information Rules:  A Strategic Guide to the Network
Economy.  Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Mass.
Southern GovernorsÕ Association, Task Force on Medical Technology.  1999.  
From Promiseto Practice:  Improving Life in the South Through Telemedicine
, Final Report, Washington,D.C., September.Strode, S.W., S. Gustke, and A. Allen.  1999.  
ÒTechnical and Clinical Progress inTelemedicine,Ó Journal of the American Medical Association
 281(12):1066-1068.
Tracy, Joe, Thelma McClosky-Armstrong, Rob Sprang, Sam Burgiss, Jim Reid, and DonnaHammack.  1999.  
ÒMedical Reimbursement for Telehealth Encounters.Ó  Position
paper available from the University of Missouri Health Sciences Center, Columbia,Mo., October 11.Universal Service Administrative Company (USAC).  1999.  
Report to the FCC:  Evaluation of
the Rural Health Care Program. Universal Service Administrative Company, Madison,Wisc., March 5.U.S. Copyright Office.  1999.  
Report on Copyright and Distance Digital Education, May.  Avail-
able online at <http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/cpypub/de_rprt.pdf>.Westat.  1999.  
Evaluation of the Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure AssistanceProgram for the 1994 and 1995 Grant Years.  Report prepared for the U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Agency, February.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/otiahome/tiiap/index.html>.Western GovernorsÕ Association (WGA).  1995.  Telemedicine Action Report.  Western Gover-norsÕ Association, Denver, Colo.
White House, Office of the Press Secretary.  1999.  
ÒRemarks by the President on MedicalPrivacy,Ó Press release, October 29.
NOTES1.As a reviewer of an early draft of this report noted, issues other than technology,
organizational uncertainty, and public policy will determine the degree to which the
Internet finds application in the health sector.  The Internet must be applied properly to
create solutions that work in health applications before wide adoption can be expected.The Internet has been accepted by the public as a tool for gaining insight into illness and
health issues because it delivers value.  Clinicians use the World Wide Web for MEDLINE
searches because they obtain some value from it.  On the other hand, clinicians do not use
the Internet to deliver care because valuable, usable, affordable, and practical Internet-
based solutions have yet to be built.  In other words, public policy is a very important factor
in the acceptance of Internet technology in biomedicine and health care, but it may not bethe first hurdle or the highest.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES FOR PUBLIC POLICY2332.One of the primary benefits that could be lost because of concerns over privacy and
security is the capability to compile comprehensive health records of individual patientsfrom a number of different sites at which they were treated.  At present, personal health

information usually resides at the health care provider organization.  For many people,
there is no comprehensive health record that merges information from numerous care sites,a gap that can compromise the quality of care received subsequently.  Such longitudinal

records also would have value in public health and health services research.3.The text of the proposed regulations, as well as a summary of their contents, is
available online at <http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/>.4.For additional information on the privacy implications of universal health identifiers
and standards-setting activities in this area, see Appavu (1997), CSTB (1997), and NationalCommittee on Vital and Health Statistics (1999).5.The full title of the directive is Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 11 March 1996 on the Legal Protection of Databases, 1996 O.J. (L77) 20.  The
full text of the directive is available in NRC (1999), Appendix D.6.See <http://www.epic.org>; main news feature (accessed May 5, 1999).  For infor-
mation on the safe harbor proposal, see <http://www.ita.doc.gov/media/419data.htm>.7.This gap has been characterized as a 
Òdigital divideÓ between 
Òinformation havesÓand Òinformation have-nots.Ó  See NTIA (1999).
8.The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National
Research Council has a project under way to examine technology, business, and policy
issues affecting the deployment of broadband technologies for the so-called Òlast mileÓ to
the home.  Additional project information is available online at <www.cstb.org> and at
<www.nationalacademies.org>, under the heading ÒCurrent Projects.Ó9.The 1996 act was the first to codify the notion of universal service (Mueller, 1997).
10.The NLM grants cover gateway and associated connection hardware; internal access
equipment, such as personal computers and local area network costs, are expected to beprovided by the institution(s).  In 1999, seven awards were made for $232,000.  The NLM
also has awarded approximately $6.7 million to nonprofit health centers since 1996 for
telemedicine and Next Generation Internet projects.  Additional information on NLM
Õsinfrastructure programs is available online at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ep/connect.html>,<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/telemedinit.html>, and <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
research/ngiinit.html>.11.For information on Xerox
Õs rights management technology, see Gotcher (1999).  Infor-
mation on IntertrustÕs products is available at <www.intertrust.com>.12.Information on this announcement is available online at <http://www.nih.gov/
welcome/director/ pubmedcentral/ pubmedcentral.htm>.13.The DMCA brings the United States into closer compliance with the World Intellec-
tual Property Organization (WIPO) treaty.  It has numerous provisions.  First, it assigns
liability to online service providers for acts of subscribers who infringe on the intellectualproperty rights of others.  Universities, some of which have medical schools, are determin-

ing how best to comply with the act in a way that enables them to qualify for liabilitylimitations.  Second, the DMCA outlaws the circumvention of technical protection systems.Exceptions to the act are permitted for educational fair use, reverse engineering to support
interoperability, protection of personal privacy, and security testing.  Third, the DMCA
required the U.S. Copyright Office to determine whether any adverse effects on fair use hadbeen observed after a 2-year moratorium.14.See U.S. Copyright Office (1999), available online at <http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/
cpypub/de_rprt.pdf>.15.Concerns regarding the possible effect of the EU Directive on scientific research are
discussed in a 1999 report from the National Research Council.  See NRC (1999).
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNET16.Blue Cross-Blue Shield plans in Iowa, Kansas, and Montana have already developed
payment policies for some forms of telemedicine, and North Dakota has announced pay-ment plans that include telemedicine, but even these policies may need to be revised as new
applications emerge (Goldberg, 1999).17.For further elaboration on these points, see Tracy et al. (1999).
18.This summary of coverage rules is derived from Goldberg (1999) and from HCFA
(1999).19.For a discussion of the history and challenges of evaluating telemedicine applica-
tions, see Institute of Medicine (1996) and Strode et al. (1999).20.Additional information on the NLM
Õs telemedicine programs, including descriptions offunded projects, is available online at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/telemedinit.html>.21.The Department of Defense has investigated technologies for remote treatment of
soldiers and developed telemedicine systems for military personnel and their families, andthe Veterans Administration has developed technologies for sharing medical records amongits health care facilities.  In addition, NASA has invested in technologies for remote consul-

tation and treatment of astronauts.22.Margarate Hamburg, DHHS, presentation to the committee on March 1, 1999, Wash-
ington, D.C.23.Further information on the pilot can be obtained from either <www.wedi.org> or
<www.afecht.org>.24.William Yasnoff, associate director for science and acting director, Information Net-
work for Public Health Officials in the CDC Public Health Practice Program Office, in hispresentation to the committee on March 1, 1999, estimated that $200 million would beneeded, in addition to the $28 million already appropriated, to get the Health Alert Net-
work up and running.25.Of the $120 million in computer science research funding from DHHS, $110 million
came from the NIH and $10 million came from the AHRQ.26.In 1999, research funding for the Departments of Defense, Energy, and Commerce
and for the NSF totaled $4.1 billion, $4.1 billion, $808 million, and $2.7 billion, respectively.
These figures include funding for basic and applied research but not development (NSF,2000, Table C-22).27.Thomas Kalil, National Economic Council, presentation to the committee on
March 1, 1999, Washington, D.C.28.Two forthcoming reports from the CSTB will address issues of structuring federal
and nonfederal support for mission-driven information technology research:  MeetingSocietyÕs Needs:  Expanding the Scale and Scope of Information Technology Research
 and the final
report of the CSTB Committee on Computing and Communications Research to EnableBetter Use of Information Technology in Government.  For additional information on these

projects, see <www.cstb.org>.29.Gauging the supply of and demand for information technology workers is a difficult
task, and several analysts have noted faults in data given out by industry groups and the
Department of Commerce.  The CSTB has initiated a study of information technology
workers that is expected to shed more light on this subject.30.Information on the CSTB project workforce needs in information technology is avail-
able online at <www.cstb.org>.31.Insight into the scope of an expanded definition of computer literacy can be gleaned
from a report by the CSTB (1999b).Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2356Conclusions and RecommendationsEnsuring that the Internet becomes a suitable, ubiquitous medium forsupporting health applications is a challenging task.  Not only must the

Internet provide connectivity among the participants in health-related
information transactions, but it must also ensure that such transactions
can occur predictably, efficiently, and without endangering patient safety.
Consumers must be able to determine the quality and provenance of the
information they retrieve from the Internet.  Care providers who access

patient records remotely must be assured that the network will be avail-
able when and where needed.  Administrators must be sure that bill

payment and enrollment information is not corrupted as it crosses the
Internet.  Without proper security protections, use of the Internet to trans-

mit medical records could make personal health information more sus-
ceptible to breaches of confidentiality and loss of integrity.  Without

adequate assurances of network reliability and quality of service (QOS),
use of the Internet for remote monitoring of patients, controlling remote
medical equipment, or conducting remote medical consultations could
impair rather than facilitate the delivery of quality health care.  Address-

ing these concerns demands efforts in many areas, both technical and
nontechnical.This chapter summarizes the committeeÕs main conclusions andrecommendations for making the Internet capable of supporting a wide
range of health applications.  Drawing upon the material presented in

Chapters 2 and 3 of this report, it identifies the technical capabilities the
Internet must possess in order to provide the security, reliability, andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETquality of service that health care applications demand.  But it does not
stop with recommendations on technical requirements.  It also discusses

the policy and organizational issues that must be resolved to make the
health community more capable of adopting Internet applications in both
the short and long term.  The capabilities the Internet offers to consumers,

care providers, public health officials, health care administrators, and
researchers promise to reshape the landscape of the health sector.  Accom-

modating these changes will require actions within individual organiza-
tions and across them, enlisting the support of technologists, practitioners,
legislators, and the general public.  This chapter, accordingly, makes

recommendations in areas ranging from identification of the needed tech-
nical capabilities of the Internet to specification of the organizational and
policy issues that constrain its use in health applications.  The recommen-

dations are targeted at policy makers, the networking research commu-
nity, researchers in health-related fields, health care administrators, and
managers of health-related organizations.  Taken together, the recom-

mendations aim to provide guidance both on short-term measures that
can set the process in motion and on long-term and continuing needs in
communications, information technology, and health care.CONCLUSIONSConclusion 1.  The Internet can support a wide range of applica-
tions in consumer health, clinical care, health care financial and
administrative transactions, public health, professional educa-
tion, and biomedical research.  The networking capabilities

needed to support these applications are not unique, but they
do reflect distinctive characteristics of the health environment.In each of the domains examined by the committee, the Internet couldbe used to facilitate communications among parties in ways that can
improve quality and efficiency.  For example, in the clinical care domain,
care providers already use the Internet to search the professional litera-
ture for information on particular diseases or to examine evidence-based
practice guidelines for managing a particular disorder.  As ongoing projects

demonstrate, the continued research, development, and deployment of
Internet applications will allow care providers to more routinely access
electronic medical records held by an affiliated health care organization
or to interpret medical images (such as mammograms) sent to them from
a remote mammography center.  They will be able to offer remote medical

consultations to patients in rural areas or to adjust settings on remote
dosimetry equipment or pacemakers without establishing fixed, dedi-
cated connections between sites.  They will increasingly participate in
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS237online discussions with other care providers to consult on particular cases,sharing medical records and images as needed.The success of any of these applications depends on a variety of fac-tors, including their cost-effectiveness, ease of use, and ability to improve
on existing processes.  While some applications are already being used in

operational environments across networks other than the Internet, many
represent new capabilities that have no parallel on other networks or that
have not been fully implemented on a large scale, such as remote medical
consultations.  As a result, not enough information has been gathered to

allow evaluation and comparison, and continued experimentation will be
needed to explore and evaluate their true potential, their technical needs,
and their real-world operational requirements.  A preliminary assessment

(Table 6.1) shows a diversity of technical needs, with some commonality,
at least within a particular domain (e.g., clinical care, public health) or
class of application (e.g., real-time video, file transfers, collaboration).
Consumer applications, for example, tend to demand high levels of secu-
rity to protect confidentiality; clinical applications require a combination
of security (to protect confidentiality and data integrity), reliability, and
QOS.  Virtually all collaborative applications
Ñregardless of whether theyare in clinical care, public health, biomedical research, or other domainsÑdemand high levels of QOS, and file transfers in any health application
tend to strain technologies for authenticating the identity of communicat-
ing parties.  Determining which technical capabilities health 
applicationswill demand must be viewed as an ongoing process as workers envision,develop, and evaluate new applications.The technical capabilities demanded by a number of health applica-tions of the Internet exceed those provided by the current Internet, but
they are not necessarily unique.  Applications in other sectors (e.g., defense,
entertainment, financial services) also require better security, reliability,
and quality of service.  However, when these technical characteristics are
combined with factors such as the distributed nature and economic struc-
ture of the health industry and the constraints of operating in a health
care environment, it can be seen that health does occupy a distinct, if not
unique, position.  Solutions to problems of authentication and QOS, for

example, must scale sufficiently to support the activities of numerous
independent health organizations and hundreds of millions of potential
users.  This argues for full participation by the health care community in

defining the research agenda and contributing to its resolution, as the
Internet moves forward with new architectures and technical capabilities.Conclusion 2.  Security and availability are critical technical
needs for health applications of the Internet and are not
adequately met by todayÕs Internet.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETTABLE 6.1  Primary Technical Challenges and Limiting Technical
Factors in Selected Health Applications of the InternetClass of ApplicationReal-Time VideoTransmissionStatic File TransferRemote Control
ApplicationDomainConsumer healthRemote medicalAccessing personalRemote control of
consultations tohealth records online.patient monitoring

the home, office,Downloadingequipment.
or wherever theeducational videos.
patient is located.Sending periodic
reports on healthconditions to acare provider.Clinical careRemote medicalTransfer of medicalRemote and virtual
consultationsrecords and imagessurgery (a long-
between clinician(e.g., X rays, MRI,term possibility
and patient orCT scans).being examined by

between twothe defense and
clinicians.space communities).
AdministrativeVideoconferencingPayment of services,N/A
and financialwith real-timeenrollment of

transactionssharing ofpatients, quality
documents.reviews, etc.  Large
medical records and
images may betransmitted insupport of some
claims.Public healthVideoconferencingIncident reporting.N/A
among publicCollection of
health officialsinformation from
during emergencylocal public health

situations, such asdepartments and
chemical orlaboratories.
biological attacksSurveillance for

by terrorists.emerging diseases or
epidemics.  Transfer
of epidemiology
maps or other imagefiles for monitoringthe spread of a
disease.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS239Information SearchReal-Time
and RetrievalCollaborationPrimary Technical Challenges
Online searching forCollaboration withProtection of sensitive patient
health information orcare providers.information from breaches of

self-assessment guides.Participation in chatconfidentiality and from
Looking for a doctorgroups and supportcorruption.  Ubiquity of access so
or hospital.groups.that all health care consumers can
be reached at the location atwhich care is needed. Tools andpolicies for validating the quality
of online information.Practice guidelines.Consultation amongAccess to sustained bandwidth
Searches ofcare providers, suchand low latency for remote
professional medicalas for surgicalconsultations and collaboration.
literature.planning, which maySecurity of clinical records.
involve manipulationNetwork reliability. Ubiquity of
of digital images.access for care providers.
Consumer access toN/ASecurity to ensure confidentiality
information aboutand integrity of records. Network

health plans,reliability sufficient to support
participatingregular use for business
practitioners, eligibilitytransactions. Standards for data

for procedures,exchange and definitions of data
covered drugs inelements.
formulary.Access to publishedVideoconferencingSecurity to ensure confidentiality
literature and researchamong publicand integrity of laboratory reports
results as well ashealth officialsand other public health
epidemiological data.during emergencyinformation that may contain

Delivery of alerts andsituations, such aspersonal identifying information.
other information tochemical orNetwork reliability.  Security from
practitioners or otherbiological attacksinformation warfare or attacks on

health workers.by terrorists.the network
Õs physicalinfrastructure.continuedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETTABLE 6.1  Continued
Class of ApplicationReal-Time VideoTransmissionStatic File TransferRemote Control
ProfessionalDistance education:Accessing electronicSimulations of
educationeither real-timemedical records fromsurgical procedures.
transmission ofremote clinics.Virtual

lectures or on-Downloading sets ofenvironments for
demand streamingreference images orexploration of
video withprerecorded videosthree-dimensional

integrated graphics.of lectures.environments.
Real-timeconsultations with
experts aboutdifficult cases.BiomedicalVisual feedbackTransferring largeControlling
researchfrom remotedata sets betweenexperimental
instrumentation.computers for high-equipment, such

Online conferences.speed computationas electron
Collaborationand comparisons.microscopes.
among distantReviewing results of

researchers.remote experiments.
Searching archives ofthree-dimensionalmedical images.LimitingTechnical FactorsAvailability ofAuthentication ofNetwork latency
sustained,source and recipientand bandwidth.
predictable,of information.Ability to obtain

high-bandwidthSecurity of personallyguaranteed
connections toidentifiablebandwidth for
many locations,information in transitpredictable periods

including ruralacross the networkof time.
health clinics andand in storage at
patientsÕ homeseither end of the
(to support remotenetwork.  Availability
consultations).of sustained
high-bandwidth
connections fortransfer of large,time-critical files.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS241Information SearchReal-Time
and RetrievalCollaborationPrimary Technical Challenges
Accessing referenceVirtual classrooms.Sufficient bandwidth to
materials and courseDistributedaccommodate large numbers of
materials.collaborativetransactions from a single
projects.educational institution or to
Distributedsupport access to remote scientific
discussions.and clinical simulations.  Ubiquity
of access for students in remoteclinical rotations and to supporteducational applications in the
home.Searching remoteCollaboration amongSufficient bandwidth to support
databases andresearchers.  Peerrapid transfers of large sets of
professional literature.review. Interactivedata for distributed simulations.
virtual conferences.Low latency to accommodate
remote control of equipment.Tools for locatingSustained access to
information of interesthigh-bandwidth,
and for determininglow-latency networks

the quality of retrievedfor collaborations
information.  Means ofinvolving real-time
allowing anonymousvideo or manipulation

searches.of images. Multicast
protocols to makemore efficient use of
networking resources.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETAll applications that involve the transmission of personal health infor-mation (such as data contained in electronic medical records, claims for
payment, prescriptions, or public health reports from testing laboratories)
demand that information be kept confidential.  Furthermore, virtually all
applications in consumer health, clinical care, health care financial and
administrative transactions, public health, and biomedical research require
that the integrity of information be assured and maintained both during
and after transmission.  Meeting these requirements demands a variety of

technical supports (as well as policies governing the disclosure of infor-
mation), including suitable encryption of information during transit and
rigorous authentication of both the source and the recipient of informa-
tion.  Access controls are also required to ensure that users can view only

the information they are authorized to see; auditing technologies are
needed to ensure that successful attempts to circumvent access restric-
tions are identified so that violators can be punished.The need for data protection and access control is acute in healthapplications because some personal health information is extremely sen-
sitive.  Not only can loss of confidentiality cause embarrassment and

social stigmatization, but personal health information can affect an
individualÕs employment and insurance coverage, especially for peoplewith private insurance or who work for self-insured organizations.  More-

over, once health information is divulged, its confidentiality cannot be
regained; there is clearly a difference between the prospect of losing $50
when oneÕs credit card number is stolen and losing privacy when oneÕsHIV status is revealed to friends and co-workers.  Confidentiality prob-

lems are compounded in health care because many people have a legiti-
mate need to see sensitive patient information.  These include workers

involved, for example, in the provision of care, payment for services, and
filling of prescriptions.  In addition, legitimate access may be needed by

someone with whom the patient has had no previous relationshipÑper-haps a physician at an institution that the patient has not visited before
(e.g., in an emergency room situation).Although technologies have been widely deployed for encryptinginformation transmitted across the network (e.g., Secure Socket Layer
encryption), technologies for authenticating the identity of users at both
ends of a transaction are not in widespread use, especially among con-
sumers.  This approach is effective in electronic commerce applications

because most vendors can obtain certificates to authenticate themselves
to consumer Web browsers, but despite some early efforts no effective
mechanism yet exists for providing authentication devices in large num-
bers to consumers, including patients.  This is not an impediment to

electronic commerce because most merchants are willing to authorize a
transaction once a valid credit number is presented, but an artifact such asNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS243a credit card may not be suitable to allow access to an online healthrecord.  In telemedicine applications or the retrieval of medical records, a

compelling need exists to identify the end user reliably.  There are compa-

rable circumstances in which an authenticated third party needs to gain
access to information via the Internet, such as an emergency room physi-
cian accessing a patientÕs health record that is stored at another institutionconnected to the Internet.In addition to security, high levels of network availability are neededto support many health-related Internet applications, particularly in clini-
cal care, in finance and administration, and in public health.  Health care

organizations must be assured that the network will be available almost
around-the-clock if they become dependent on using the Internet for access-
ing electronic medical records, for remote monitoring of patients, or forclinical decision support.  Payers and administrators will also demand

high levels of availability if they are to use the Internet instead of private
networks for important transactions.  The network must be made robust

against failure and against hostile attacks, whether directed at its physical
infrastructure or at denying its services to end users by flooding its capacity
(denial-of-service attacks).The need for security and availability is compounded by the fact thatin many clinical applications of the Internet, human life and health may
be at risk.  Errant decisions based on incorrect information
Ñwhether indiagnosing a condition or filling a prescriptionÑcan be harmful or fatal.Hence, ensuring data integrity and properly authenticating individuals
are even more important than in many other spheres of application.
Inability to access patient information (such as from an electronic medical
record), to complete a distant consultation, or to control remote monitor-
ing and dosimetry equipment can also undermine the quality of care and,
thus, the health of the populace.  Internet-based applications, including

the physical networks on which they run, must be robust in the face of
failures.  A broken fiber-optic cable should not prevent an application

from running when an alternative path exists.  Remotely controlled

instruments should not perform any damaging action if they lose contact
with the controller as the result of a network interruption.  Guarantees of
network performance must be extremely robust in order to prevent statis-
tically unlikely events from having serious consequences.Conclusion 3.  The quality of service needed by a number of
high-end health applications will not necessarily be deployed
soon across the Internet in a form that meets the needs of the
health industry.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETA number of potential health applications of the Internet demandguarantees on the quality of service they get across the Internet.  The need

for QOS derives from the frequent need for smooth and responsive
interactivity.  For example, care providers engaging in remote video con-
sultations with patients or other care providers need sustained access to
high-bandwidth connectivity (roughly 384 kbps for simple interactions
and 768 kbps for higher quality video) for the duration of the consulta-
tion.  So do molecular biologists who wish to control visually an electron

microscope located at a remote facility, or medical students who wish to
practice a surgical technique using multimedia simulations that are avail-
able on remote servers, or groups of surgeons from different parts of the
country who wish to collaborate in planning a difficult procedure.  QOS is

also needed for making practical the real-time exchange of large images,
whether medical images such as X rays and mammograms or anatomical
images for educational purposes.  QOS would not only need to ensure

that adequate bandwidth is available to provide timely delivery of images
but would also need to offer real-time interaction to allow a primary care
provider and a consulting specialist to point out specific items of interest
in the image.Whether the Internet will provide the needed capabilities in the nearfuture is uncertain.  The protocols currently deployed across the Internet

for routing packets do not contain mechanisms to support guaranteed
QOS; rather they provide best-effort service, in which packets are deliv-
ered as best the networkÕs resources and traffic levels will allow.  Internet
service providers (ISPs) are attempting to improve service quality across
their networks by deploying additional bandwidth, but this approach
does not allow explicit guarantees to be made on bandwidth, latency, and
jitter.  Protocols have been developed to support different forms of QOS

across the Internet (e.g., the differentiated service and integrated service
models described in Chapter 3), but they have not yet been deployed, and
even if deployed, they may not fully support health applications.  For

example, the differentiated services (diff-serv) standard does not include
mechanisms for providing QOS guarantees for packets that must traverse
the networks of different ISPs.  Hence, individual ISPs may be able to

offer improved QOS to customers attached to their networks, but they
cannot provide guarantees related to traffic flows among organizations
connected to different ISPs.  Because the health industry is highly decen-

tralized and individual care providersÕ offices may need to interact with a
number of different managed care organizations, insurers, and other care
providers, inter-ISP mechanisms will be important for health applica-
tions.  The challenge of providing QOS in a health environment is further

complicated by the extremely variable QOS needs of individual health
organizations over time.  The kinds of information exchanges in which an
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS245organization engages typically vary considerably in the course of a day,from simple exchanges of information regarding a patientÕs coverage by ahealth plan, through transfers of medical records with affiliated organiza-
tions, to the exchange of large medical images for interpretation and diag-
nosis.  The bandwidth needs of a small medical clinic could, accordingly,
vary enormously during the course of a day, ranging from near nothing
one minute to several megabits per second the next.  Finding ways to

satisfy such variable demand for bandwidth economically represents a
significant challenge.  The integrated services (int-serv) approach to QOS
can support variable bandwidth needs through protocols for reserving
capacity, but such protocols may not be sufficiently scalable to support
widespread deployment across the Internet, as health applications could
demand.  Nor can it be assumed that QOS mechanisms that are optimized

for content distribution (i.e., information flows that are predominantly
one-way) will be effective for the more symmetric transactions typical of
many health care applications.Conclusion 4.  Ensuring widespread access to the Internet is
essential to achieving its promise in health applications.One of the most dramatic effects of the Internet is its ability to engagepatients and consumers more actively in health issues.  As the amount of
health-related information on the Web increases, patients become more
actively involved in maintaining their health: seeking information related
to specific ailments or topics of interest, discussing medical problems
with peers in online chat groups, e-mailing care providers with questions
regarding symptoms or treatments, assessing their health, scheduling

appointments with care providers, and maintaining their own health
records online.  These actions are reinforced by a number of fundamental

factors in the nationÕs health care system, including greater consumerchoice in selecting among alternative health plans, concerns about the
quality of care provided by health care organizations in an increasingly
competitive environment, and pressures to shift the site of care away
from the provider location and to the consumerÕs location and to shiftfrom unilateral to shared approaches that bring patients into the decision-
making process.  All of these factors encourage
Ñand in fact requireÑconsumers to become more educated about their health and health care.As these trends continue, the Internet will probably play a more cen-tral role in supporting the processes of health care, reinforcing the calls
for expanding consumer access to Internet resources.  Persistent inequali-

ties of access to the Internet could exacerbate existing inequalities of access
to health care.  Strong social pressures exist to ensure some degree of

equity in access to health resources.  Recent statistics show that those
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETmost in need of health care and who could benefit most from Internet-mediated careÑsuch as those in rural and inner city areasÑare also thosewith the least access to the Internet.  Furthermore, many of the local

strategies used to expand access, such as the provision of Internet-enabled
computers in libraries, classrooms, and community centers, may not be as
effective in addressing consumer health needs.  Access may be needed

outside normal business hours (especially if the Internet becomes a medium
for providing care or real-time advice on medical emergencies), and many
users might feel uncomfortable researching or discussing personal health
problems in a public venue.  They will increasingly want such access in

their homes and may come to view it as a necessary component of a
comprehensive health care system.Access concerns will not be limited to consumers, however.  Care
providers, too, will need simplified, high-speed access to the Internet for
a range of information services and to provide clinical services.  In rural

areas, in particular, it is not always easy for local care providers to access
the Internet, and they often need more advanced networking services
than consumers do.  As health education shifts its focus from hospitals

and medical centers to local offices and remote-practice clinics (both for
training students and residents and for continuing medical education),
ensuring broad access to Internet resources will become increasingly
important.  The same Internet that delivers health care to the home and

curriculum materials to students in the health professions (e.g., doctors,
nurses, and pharmicists) can also deliver information resources for patient
and consumer education.  The issue of access becomes even more com-

plex for health applications that demand high bandwidth, because broad-
band technologies are still not widely deployed
Ñespecially in places such
as rural areas that could most benefit from remote consultations.  Access

concerns also have implications for quality of service.  High QOS cannot

be provided cost-effectively to all Internet traffic, and many applications
do not require it.  Cost is one mechanism that is generally considered as

helping to control demand for high QOS capabilities, meaning that QOS
could be limited to those who are willing (or can afford) to pay for it.Conclusion 5.  Technical  advances are needed across many areas
of information technology (not just networking) if the potential
of the Internet is to be achieved in support of health applications.Networking capabilities are not the only technical impediments tomany health applications of the Internet.  For example, there is great

concern regarding the quality of health information on the Internet and
the inability of many consumers to assess adequately the credibility of
information provided on different sites.  While a number of nontechnicalNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS247approaches can be taken to rate the quality and provenance of informa-tion and to determine whether it comes from an authoritative source,
there is considerable room for technological solutions as well.  Other

health applications demand different technological advances.  Remote

medical consultations (to rural medical clinics or the home, for example)
will demand medical instruments (e.g., stethoscopes, blood pressure
monitors, and respiration monitors) that are suitable for personal use and
that can interface with home computing devices.Conclusion 6.  Health care organizations are ill-prepared to
adopt Internet-based technologies and applications effectively.A number of transformations in the health care industry are drivingthe use of the Internet as a medium for sharing information among pro-
viders, patients, and administrators.  New Internet-based health compa-

nies are being established to offer consumers medical information, tools
to help them to monitor their care more effectively, and other medical
products and services.  Existing organizations are using the Internet to

alter their position, relationships, role, and power in the health care
industry by moving into new areas, often ones that involve their reaching
out directly to patients.  The more innovative care organizations are pro-

viding customers with Internet-based resources to help them to better
assess their medical needs and to seek appropriate advice.  These trends

reflect and reinforce ongoing attempts to reduce medical costs by reduc-
ing hospital stays and outpatient care, especially in the emergency room,
and by promoting prevention through better monitoring of wellness,
chronic disease, and behavior.Nevertheless, the health care industry as a whole is ill-prepared toaccommodate this change.  Despite continuing consolidation among pro-
viders, insurers, and managed-care companies, health care is still largely
a decentralized industry populated by diverse organizations with differ-
ent motives, resources, and incentivesÑit is sometimes referred to as aÒtrillion dollar cottage industry.Ó  It comprises thousands of hospitals and
hundreds of thousands of physicianÕs offices and includes academic medi-cal centers, community hospitals, large physician groups, solo physician
practices, home health agencies, health centers, and rehabilitation hospi-
tals.  Other participants are pharmaceutical companies, managed care

organizations, and traditional indemnity insurance companies.  This di-

versity brings with it different degrees of sophistication and a diverse set
of challenges, resources, and missions but makes it difficult to speak with
a unified voice or to adopt a critical mass of technology.  Recent consoli-

dation of the industry has somewhat improved the industryÕs ability toachieve critical mass more quickly, but much of the consolidation (e.g.,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETthe formation of integrated delivery systems that link different types ofcare provider organizations under a single organizational umbrella) tends
not to remove the diversity as much as mask it behind single organi-
zational identities.Current fiscal constraintsÑon care provider organizations, in par-ticularÑfurther hinder the industryÕs ability to make major investmentsin information infrastructure and applications unless these investments
can be shown to lead to significant and low-risk returns.  Information

technology will be adopted rapidly if it results in a material and obvious
advance in medical practice (such as magnetic resonance imaging
machines), but adoption is more difficult for technologies with less quan-
tifiable benefits, such as the security technologies that control access to
medical records.  The Internet itself is such a new phenomenon that its

eventual contribution to the delivery of care is poorly understood by the
industry as a whole.  It is unrealistic to expect that the industry will

rapidly overcome its fragmentation and diversity to speak loudly and
with one voice. The traditional conservatism of the health care industry in
the face of information technology is likely to persist in the face of the
Internet.In addition to these larger structural problems, impediments existwithin individual health organizations.  Provider organizations lack infor-

mation about the potential benefits and effectiveness of Internet-mediated
health interventions in terms of both cost and quality, making it difficult
for them to make decisions about Internet investments.  Industry refer-

ence models have yet to be developed, and not much information has
been developed or shared about the kinds of Internet-based systems that
are demonstrably effective in improving care.  Organizations also lack

authoritative guidelines to help them develop formal policies related to
Internet applications, such as rules for e-mail exchanges between patients
and providers and for monitoring sponsored discussion groups.  Reflec-

tive of a tight labor market overall, health care organizations also often
have difficulty attracting qualified engineers and programmers to develop
information technology systems for use in health-care settings.Conclusion 7.  A number of difficult public policy and regula-
tory issues constrain the adoption of Internet-based health
applications by health organizations and consumers.  Some of
these issues are specific to the health sector; many others extendbeyond the health sector but require the health communityÕsactive participation in their resolution.Many of the same issues that have slowed the growth of traditionalforms of telemedicine (using private networks) will continue to impedeNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS249the expansion of Internet-based medicine.  For example, health care pro-
viders are currently licensed by individual states and are generally pro-
hibited from providing care across state linesÑa clear issue when a patientis in one state but the physician at the other end of a telemedicine link is in
another.  Liability claims are also handled at the state level, with consider-

able variation among states.  Such policies have made it difficult, if not

impossible, for physicians to practice telemedicine across state bound-
aries.  So has the lack of means for paying for a full range of remote

medical consultations in the Medicare program and in many traditional
insurance companies.1   These policy issues limit the returns that health
care organizations can expect to receive from investments in network-
based health care solutions.  They also affect the willingness of physicians

to adopt new technologies and practices.Other policy concerns also threaten to slow the spread of health-related applications of the Internet.  Concerns over the security of personal

health information continue to dampen consumersÕ enthusiasm for Internet
systems that share such information.  The Department of Health and

Human Services has promulgated draft regulations governing privacy
and security of electronic health records, but these provisions have yet to
be finalized and will not cover all exchanges of information among the
many kinds of organizations that collect, process, and distribute health
information.  Beyond the issue of medical records privacy lies the larger

issue of the privacy of online searches and transactions that has arisen in
many forms of electronic commerce and Web browsing.  What kinds of

information can be collected about individuals online, and how can that
information be shared?  Recent accusations that several health-related

Web sites have not adequately disclosed their information-gathering and
data-sharing practices have brought renewed attention to this issue
(Clausing, 2000).  Other issues associated with the protection of intellec-

tual property on the Internet also have repercussions for health care, es-
pecially in regard to the dissemination of professional literature and edu-
cational courseware designed for use over the Internet.  Efforts are needed

on the part of governmental, industrial, and provider groups to craft an
effective solution.RECOMMENDATIONSEnhancing the Internet to support the health community more effec-tively will require active stewardship on behalf of health organizations,
the information technology industry, the research community, and gov-
ernment.  These groups must attempt to ensure that the Internet evolves

in ways that support health care and that the health sector is prepared to
incorporate the Internet into its processes for delivering care, paying forNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETcare, conducting research in biomedicine and health services, improvingpublic health, and providing health education.  Action is needed in four

areas, as outlined below:  (1) ensuring that suitable technical capabilities

are developed and deployed in the Internet, (2) demonstrating and evalu-
ating Internet-based applications in the health and biomedical sectors,
(3)educating the health community on ways to incorporate the Internet

safely into their routine activities, and (4) resolving policy issues that
impede use of the Internet in health.Research, Development, and Deployment ofNeeded Technical CapabilitiesTo ensure that the Internet has the ability to support health applica-tions, additional technical capabilities need to be developed and deployed.
Although some existing technologies could be deployed in the Next Gen-
eration Internet (NGI) to facilitate experimentation with and evaluation
of health and biomedical applications, other technologies will require
further research.  The health community must articulate its needs to the

information technology research community and must actively engage in
developing Internet-based systems.  The goal is to assure that developers
better understand the ways in which the requirements needed for health
care applications of the Internet diverge from, or converge with, those
needed to support Internet applications in other sectors.  To this end, the

committee makes four recommendations.Recommendation 1.1.  The health community should ensure that
technical capabilities suitable for health and biomedical appli-
cations are incorporated into the testbed networks being de-
ployed under the Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative and
eventually into the Internet.The NGI testbed networks being deployed by federal agencies suchas the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the National Science
Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the
Department of Energy will provide a basic communications infrastructure
on which a number of high-end health applications could be demon-
strated and evaluated.  To help the health community experiment with

new networked applications, these testbed networks must be deployed
with the technical capabilities to support a range of high-end health appli-
cations, such as medical consultations at a distance, remote control of
research equipment, surgical simulation, and collaboration among
researchers and clinicians. The networks are expected to be deployed
with bandwidth that can support a wide range of health applications,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS251although other technical capabilities will need to be deployed as the tech-nologies become sufficiently stable:¥Quality of service mechanisms.  QOS mechanisms should be deployedin the NGI to support applications that require, for example, the rapid
transfer of digitized medical images (or medical records), the use of real-
time video for remote medical consultations, and the control and receipt
of imagery from remote experimental equipment, such as electron micro-
scopes.  Remote videoconferencing, for example, may require less than

1Mbps of bandwidth to be effective, but that bandwidth must be predict-

ably and reliably available for the duration of a clinical consultationÑperhaps 30 minutes or more.  In addition, low latencies will be needed to
support more natural, real-time interaction among participants.  The dif-

ferentiated services (diff-serv) and integrated services (int-serv) models
for QOS can each support a range of anticipated health applications.  Both

should be deployed across the NGI to allow further experimentation with
their capabilities and their limitations.  Deployment of the diff-serv model

would be a valuable first step because it would allow users to experiment
with applications that demand quantifiable QOS guarantees and to
develop policies for determining which types of data traffic need a higher
level of service and which can be satisfied with lower levels of service.
Deployment of the int-serve model could expand the number of end-user
organizations that take advantage of QOS capabilities because it would
allow them to reserve premium services for use when needed, rather than
having to subscribe to a premium service that they may leave unused
much of the time.  Deployment of int-serv across the NGI testbed net-

works would also allow researchers to better investigate the ability of the
protocols to accommodate large numbers of users in an operational envi-
ronment; issues of scalability have yet to be resolved with int-serv.  More-

over, deployment of diff-serv and int-serv protocols in the NGI testbeds
would enable the health community and ISPs to investigate effective busi-
ness for financing the wide-scale deployment of QOS mechanisms
throughout the Internet.  Considerable work must be done to find a way

of creating an incentive for ISPs to deploy QOS capabilities in a way that
is consistent with the health communityÕs needs.¥IP Security.  Deployment of IP Security (IPSec) protocols wouldallow further experimentation with virtual private networks among health
care organizations involved in the NGI program and would allow further
testing of the ability of the protocol to scale sufficiently to support effec-
tive interchanges of information among health organizations.  The use of

IPSec across the Internet could allow secure communications between
fixed sets of health organizations and permit the transfer of health records
among affiliated care providers or the exchange of payment, enrollment,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETand other administrative information between care provider organiza-tions and third-party payers and administrators.  While Secure Socket

Layer (SSL) protocols can also support confidential transactions across
the Internet, the use of IPSec could simplify security administration by
providing a central point at which all traffic can be encrypted and authen-
ticated as it leaves one site destined for another.  It could further mitigate

concerns regarding the authentication of individual users, as discussed
below.¥Public key infrastructure.  The use of SSL encryption across theInternet already enables a wide range of health applications, including
remote access to medical records.  What is now missing from such sys-

tems is typically a secure way of authenticating end users.  While most

online vendors use cryptographic certificates to validate their identities,
most implementations of SSL rely on simple password schemes to vali-
date the identity of end usersÑor they simply require a valid credit cardnumber to be presented for billing purposes.  The NGI program offers an

ideal environment for experimenting on a limited basis with stronger
forms of authentication, including the use of public key infrastructures to
distribute and validate cryptographic certificates for individual end users.

Effective and scalable PKI strategies could be developed to allow more
routine sharing of information among more loosely affiliated participants
in the health community.Recommendation 1.2.  To ensure that the Internet evolves in
ways supportive of health needs over the long term, the health
community should work with the networking community to
develop improved network technologies that are of particular
importance to health applications of the Internet.It is difficult to predict which particular technologies will be needed,but based on the evaluation presented in this report, several areas seem
reasonable as starting points for continued research:¥More readily scalable techniques to provide bandwidth guarantees ondemand.  Techniques are needed for ensuring that individual organiza-tions (or individual end users) can receive high-level QOS across the
Internet on an as-needed basis.  Smaller health care organizations and

individual users in particular are unlikely to be able to afford to subscribe
to statically provisioned premium-level QOS offerings, but they may need
on occasion to send large files quickly across the Internet or to engage in
remote video consultations.  The diff-serv model that has been standard-

ized by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) does not yet incorpo-
rate mechanisms for providing premium services on demand.  Nor have
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS253standards been defined for the provision of end-to-end QOS acrossmultiple service providers using diff-serv.  The int-serv model, which

does provide such reservation mechanisms, may not, however, be suffi-
ciently scalable for widespread utilization across the Internet backbones.
There are also concerns that the level of QOS assurance provided by the
diff-serv model are not strong enough for mission-critical applications.
Research programs are under way to develop scalable mechanisms for
providing QOS on demand across the Internet and must continue to be
supported.¥Stronger forms of authentication.  Additional research is also needed
to develop methods for authenticating users of networked applications to
ease the problem of reliably identifying individual consumers and allow-
ing secure communications between parties that have not established
relationships beforehand.  Technologies and processes must be devel-

oped for key and certificate management systems that can be used by
individuals and small organizations to authenticate their identities in
online transactions. Solutions must be capable of scaling up to the size of
the entire population and must address the issues of delegation of trust
that certification hierarchies face.  Work on smart cards, token-based

authentication, and biometric authentication devices would seem to be
especially useful in serving health needs.¥Symmetric or dynamically reconfigurable broadband technologies for thelast mile.  Techniques are needed to enable consumers to transmit infor-
mation at data rates similar to those at which they can receive it.  Current

technologies for high-speed Internet access tend to be configured to allow
much greater bandwidth into the home than out of it.  For many health

applications, however, it is conceivable that consumers will send as much
information into the network as they retrieve from it (home-based remote
medical consultation is an example).  This capability might be achieved

by deploying more symmetric forms of broadband access (e.g., symmetric
DSL or cable modems that allocate more bandwidth to upstream capac-
ity) or by developing ways to allow end users to use some downstream
bandwidth for upstream communications when needed.¥Hardened QOS guarantees.  Mechanisms are needed to ensure that
critical health care applications do not lose their QOS guarantees as a
result of link failures across the Internet, except in those cases in which
the network suffers catastrophic failures that leave it without connectivity
between desired points of communication.  Part of this effort will require
work on techniques for rapid reconvergence after link failures.  Approaches
are needed to ensure that Internet routers can determine updated com-
munications paths across the network should a particular link fail and to
ensure that data are not lost during the reconvergence period.  Applica-

tions such as remote control of experimental or clinical equipment andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETpatient monitoring may not be able to tolerate the brief loss in connectivity(and perhaps loss of packets) that characterize reconvergence efforts on
todayÕs Internet.  In particular, efforts are needed to address disruptions
in service between two ISPs, where existing link recovery schemes may
not be effective.¥Disaster operations.  Techniques are needed to ensure delivery of
high-priority traffic (including, but not limited to, health information) in
the event of a natural or man-made disaster that disrupts large segments
of the nationÕs information infrastructure.Recommendation 1.3.  The National Library of Medicine should
forge stronger links between the health and networking
research communities to ensure that the needs of the health
community are better understood and addressed in network
research, development, and deployment.To date, interactions among members of the networking communityand the health informatics community have been minimal.  The health

sector is generally underrepresented in standards-making bodies such as
the IETF, and few research projects attempt to explicitly forge alliances
between networking researchers and health researchers.  Bridging this

gap would help networking researchers and standards developers to
better understand the challenges that health applications pose for net-
working infrastructure and would help the health informatics community

to learn how to incorporate new networking technologies more effectively
into their applications.  One way of encouraging more cross-fertilization

between these communities would be for the National Library of Medi-
cine to encourage or require recipients of its contracts and grants for
networking-related projects to participate in meetings and conferences of
networking researchers and standards-making bodies.  It could explicitly

indicate that it would support travel and related costs for such endeavors.
The NLM could also explicitly require collaboration among networking
researchers and health researchers in some of its awards.  It could also

itself play a more aggressive role in establishing contact between the
health community and the networking community.  It could speak for the

health community in conveying needs to networking researchers and in
reaching out to ISPs, presenting health care as a cutting-edge example of
a peer-to-peer application that demands networking capabilities beyond
those now being deployed (e.g., QOS throughout the network and sym-
metrical forms of broadband access for residential use).  The NLM could

also establish an ad hoc task force to explore other ways of communicat-
ing health-related needs to the networking community.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS255Recommendation 1.4.  The National Institutes of Health and its
component agencies should fund information technology
research that will develop the complementary technologies that
are needed if the health community is to take advantage of the
improved networking technologies that can be expected in the
future.As noted above, putting adequate network infrastructure in place isnot sufficient for enabling Internet applications in the health domain;
other information technologies are needed to enable network-based appli-
cations to develop.  The medical service arena is a problem-rich one with

considerable need for research into new technologies and new network
capabilities.  The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), by

virtue of its broad purview over health-related efforts in the federal gov-
ernment, should play a leading role in funding research on information
technologies of particular importance to the health community.  At

present, DHHS provides only a small portion of the federal governmentÕsfunding for computing research (the vast majority of funding comes from
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the National Sci-
ence Foundation, with other significant contributions by the National

Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Department of Energy).
Two recent reports encouraged DHHS (or elements within it, in particular
NIH, AHRQ,2 and NLM) to become more actively engaged in informa-
tion technology research.  A report by the Working Group on Biomedical
Computing (1999) of the National Institutes of Health, for example, calls
for increased basic research on information technology tools to support
biomedical computing and for the establishment of national programs of
excellence to advance research in areas of biomedicine where computa-
tion is increasingly important.  Similarly, the President
Õs InformationTechnology Advisory Committee concluded that Òthe National Institutesof Health (NIH) should support biomedically motivated basic research in
information technology and view it both as important information tech-
nology research and as fundamental biomedical researchÓ (PITAC,  1999).
It is not possible to identify in advance all areas in which the health
community needs to become engaged, but the analysis in this report iden-
tifies the following topics as pertinent preliminary areas of inquiry:¥Validation of online information.  Effective techniques are needed to
help consumers to judge the quality of the health information they retrieve
from the Internet and to give them more confidence in it.  The goal of

these techniques should not be to prevent dissemination of certain infor-
mation via the Internet but to ensure that consumers have a way of judg-
ing the quality of what they find there.  Different technical approaches
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETmay be effective in automating what is now a more or less manual processof labeling content to indicate its provenance.¥Tools for protecting anonymity online. Technologies are needed toimprove privacy on the Internet, so that users may pose queries, receive
replies anonymously, and browse Web sites without necessarily divulg-
ing their identities.  Use of the Internet to retrieve health information or to

purchase products can reveal much about a personÕs health status andconcerns.  A provider
Õs use of online clinical resources could also provideclues about his or her knowledge of a given subject area.  Such informa-

tion could be used in ways that harm Internet users.  The health commu-

nity therefore has a strong interest in developing tools to protect the
identities of online users.¥Access controls.  Mechanisms are needed to limit users
Õ access to
just the programs, databases, and data fields they need to perform their
job function or play their role in an online transaction.  Development of

robust access controls is especially difficult in health care because there
are many kinds of actors (care provider, educator, researcher, etc.), each
of whom requires access to information, and many kinds of information,
most of which should be privileged.  These problems are further compli-cated by the dynamically changing nature of the relationships in health
care, e.g., between a patient just admitted to an emergency room and the
health care providers at the admitting hospital.¥Controls on secondary distribution of patient health information.  Research
is needed to develop effective mechanisms for managing the distribution
of health information beyond the walls of the organization that originally
collected it.  A number of technologies, such as digital property-rights-

management languages and encrypted containers, have been developed
to control the distribution of digital media and to ensure the adherence of
recipients to particular provisions or use of the information (e.g., pay-
ment for access, limits on redistribution).  Additional work is needed,

however, to extend such capabilities into the health environment, where
the new technologies may be able to control the distribution and use of
health records and other confidential information.¥Improved audit capabilities.  Additional work is needed to develop
tools for reviewing audit logs that health care organizations could com-
pile on accesses to electronic medical records.  These tools would need to
automatically identify potential violations of confidentiality, drawing
from external databases such as scheduling calendars and referrals to
differentiate between legitimate and illegitimate accesses.¥QOS policies that are suitable to health and health care.  Policies are
needed to govern the provision of QOS in high-traffic environments to
ensure that critical health-related messages receive their requested QOS
in emergency situations.  Mechanisms for defining and propagating QOS
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS257policy across a network are currently being defined, and it is importantthat such mechanisms are developed in a way that meets the needs of the
health community.  Work is also needed to establish guidelines for deter-

mining which packets sent by particular institutions will receive the high-
est priority.¥QOS-aware applications.  Work is needed on networked applications
that are tightly linked to the underlying QOS capabilities of the network.
Only by creating networked applications that leverage emerging QOS
capabilities can the shortcomings of those capabilities for health applica-
tions be determined and requirements for new QOS capabilities be estab-
lished. Furthermore, by demonstrating the utility of such capabilities in a
health care context, it may be possible to influence the deployment of new
QOS capabilities by ISPs in a direction that is useful to health care.Demonstration and Evaluation of Health Applications of the InternetContinued experimentation and evaluation is a central component ofefforts to understand better the kinds of health applications that may
become more widespread across the Internet and the technical capabili-
ties they demand.  By demonstrating health applications such as distant

consultation, remote control of experimental equipment, and online access
to electronic medical records, members of the health community will have
a better opportunity to examine their relative costs and benefits, the busi-
ness models needed to support them, and the kinds of organizational
policies that are needed to govern their use.  A number of public and

private organizations have supported demonstration programs to allow
such exploration.  These efforts need to continue as new Internet tech-

nologies become available and new applications are envisioned.  They

will be increasingly important to the health community if it is to establish
a dialog with the larger Internet community about its evolving needs.
The efforts will allow continued identification of technical requirements
that the networking community can address and of other problems and
issues for the health community.  To provide the kinds of information that

will inform this dialog, a number of parallel efforts will be needed, as
recommended below.Recommendation 2.1.  The Department of Health and Human
Services should fund pilot projects and larger demonstration
programs to develop and demonstrate interoperable, scalable
Internet applications for linking many health organizations.Public and private organizations have supported a range of pilotprojects and testbeds to demonstrate the capabilities of information tech-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETnology in health organizations.  Most have tended to focus on stand-alone
applications that operate within a single organization.  Many of the chal-

lenges of Internet-based systems derive from the interconnection of many
organizations to a large network.  DHHS and its constituent agencies

(NLM in particular) should fund pilot projects and testbeds that explicitly
connect multiple organizations for purposes of information exchange.
These projects are not intended to develop community-wide repositories
of health information, as was attempted with community health informa-
tion networks (CHINs), but should try to facilitate information exchange
among limited sets of organizations, whether for clinical care (e.g.,
exchanges of medical records, the sharing of clinical guidelines, or remote
consultations between an urban medical center and several remote clinics)
or administration (e.g., payment of claims).  Only by establishing testbeds

on a large scale can the issues of scalability and the effects of decentraliza-
tion be identified and evaluated.These projects should explore the capabilities, limitations, and perfor-mance requirements for health applications in a highly networked envi-
ronment with many participating users at different organizations.  For

example, projects could be supported in application domains such as
(1)public health surveillance, (2) clinical care, (3) home-based care,

(4)remote consultations, and (5) payment for services.  Pilot projects that

integrate entire vertical slices of the health care delivery process could
also be tried.  Such projects would help private and public organizations

experiment with possible applications of the Internet and determine the
ways the Internet can be used most effectively.  By involving a large

number of organizations, the projects will also aid in understanding issues
associated with access to information resources, especially if the projects
involve outreach to individual consumers.  They would look at whether

the research efforts outlined in Recommendation 1.1 had achieved the
infrastructure required for health networking applications.  Thus, dem-

onstrations that show the effective use of advances in bandwidth, latency,
QOS, and reliability would be most appealing.Recommendation 2.2.  Federal agencies such as the Department
of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Defense, the Health Care
Financing Administration, the National Institutes of Health,
and the Indian Health Service should serve as role models and
testbeds for the health industry by deploying Internet-based
applications for their own purposes.The information technology and health care industries need to doconsiderable experimentation, standards development, and integration
work before the Internet can be used routinely for health care purposes.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS259The government could play a proactive, catalytic role in this effort.  It
operates a substantial health care operation of its own, in the form of the
health care systems operated by the Veterans Health Administration (part
of the Department of Veterans Affairs, or VA), the Department of De-
fense, and the Indian Health Service.  The Health Care Financing Admin-

istration operates an enormous system to pay for care provided under the
Medicare, Medicaid, and related programs.  By partnering with industry,

these government agencies could use the Internet aggressively in their
health-related systems.  HCFA could, for example, develop policies and

standards for the electronic submission of Medicare claims and could act
as the certificate authority for a public key infrastructure for authenticat-
ing people and organizations that submit claims.  The DOD and the VA

could use their telemedicine programs and efforts to exchange medical
records as testbeds and demonstrations that could influence private sector
initiatives.  In effect, these would be pilot implementations and they

would help industry develop appropriate standards and software.  An

open-source model could be required, thus making the fruits of this effort
available broadly to industry.  This is an area where governmental leader-

ship is likely to be crucial and where passivity on the part of the govern-
ment will cause many lost opportunities.Recommendation 2.3.  Health organizations in industry and
academia should continue to work with the Department of
Health and Human Services to evaluate various health applica-
tions of the Internet in order to improve understanding of their
effects, the business models that might support them, and
impediments to their expansion.Health organizations will adopt health care applications of theInternet largely on the basis of their ability to improve the quality of care
and reduce its costs.  Deployment of needed infrastructure will be moti-

vated by the development of business models for supporting the applica-
tions and paying for network services such as QOS.  To date, the health

industry has had little guidance in these areas, and its adoption of the
Internet will be slow without better information.  Work is therefore needed

to determine the effect of Internet applications on care quality and costs;
organizational performance; job skills; relationships between participants
(e.g., changes in the role of patients and responsibilities of patients); the
economic or business models of care (e.g., use of the Internet to establish
contractual relationships between affiliated care providers rather than
buying them outright); provider workflows; and confidentiality and liability
concerns.  Across all of these areas, evaluations should seek to under-

stand whether Internet-based applications have a different impact onNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETquality, cost, and access to care than non-Internet based applications (e.g.,are Internet-based implementations of electronic health records materially
different from non-Internet implementations?).  Similarly, studies should

identify factors that hinder the expansion of health applications of the
Internet from prototypes or demonstrations to broad organizational or
national use.  Additional work is needed to develop mechanisms whereby

the health industry can afford the investments in information infrastruc-
ture needed to enable more sophisticated applications.  Elements within

the Department of Health and Human Services can continue to play a
vital role in providing financial support for these evaluations, as has been
done by the National Library of Medicine and Office of Rural Health
Policy.Recommendation 2.4.  Public and private health organizations
should experiment with networks based on Internet protocols
and should incorporate the Internet into their future plans for
new networked applications and into their overall strategic
planning.Even though several years may pass before the Internet can providethe QOS, security, and reliability needed for health-related transactions,
health care organizations need to start preparing now so that they will be
equipped to use the improved capabilities offered by future generations
of the Internet.  They must develop an understanding of the ways the

Internet can support their missions, prepare their infrastructures to be
compatible with Internet technologies, develop the human resources
needed to design, develop, and deploy effective systems, and put policies
in place to govern the use of the Internet and Internet-related applica-
tions.  Individual organizations and professional societies have roles to

play in this endeavor.Because the health care industry has limited experience with Internet-based applications and because models for delivering and paying for
health care continue to evolve, it is not yet clear how the Internet can best
be used to improve health and minimize costs.  In the end, some balance

between Internet-based and private networks will probably emerge to
meet the full spectrum of capabilities needed by health care organiza-
tions.  In the meantime, these organizations should take steps to under-

stand better the benefits of Internet-based systems and to have Internet-
ready resources in place.  They should establish institutional connectivity

to the Internet and among their constituent organizations.  They should

establish network-based relationships with vendors that allow them to
explore electronic commerce opportunities.  They should begin using net-

works that incorporate Internet protocols such as TCP/IP, e-mail, FTP,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS261and HTTP for internal communications.  And they should begin thinking
about ways in which the Internet can enhance and extend their missions.
These represent relatively inexpensive steps for gaining critical insight
into the ways the Internet may become more fully engrained in health
processes at a later date.  Without such experimentation, health organiza-

tions risk missing out on future opportunities.Addressing Educational NeedsIn order for the Internet to achieve its full potential in health applica-tions, not only must it provide adequate technical capabilities, but health
organizations also must be capable of adopting it.  Health organizations

will need the internal capability to envision ways in which the Internet
could support their missions and to design, develop, and implement sys-
tems that fulfill those visions.  The experimentation outlined in Recom-

mendations 2.1 through 2.4 will improve organizationsÕ capabilities con-
siderably, but additional efforts will likely be needed to bolster internal
policy development and human resource development.  Efforts in three

areas are recommended.Recommendation 3.1.  Professional associations with expertise
in health issues and information technology should work with
health care organizations to develop and promulgate guidelines

for safe, effective use of the Internet in clinical settings.Improved information outlining best practices for using the Internetin health applications would help individual organizations benefit from
each otherÕs experiences and develop informed policies and proceduresto guide their own efforts to harness the capabilities of the Internet.  Profes-

sional associations have an important role to play because their membership
spans large numbers of organizations that face common challenges.  Pro-
fessional associations with expertise in health care and information tech-
nology could help convene groups that would develop standards and
guidelines based on the experience and expertise of their memberships.
Some associations have already taken productive steps in this direction.
The American Medical Informatics Association, for example, developed a
set of guidelines for using e-mail in clinical settings, and the Association
of American Medical Colleges has initiated programs to evaluate the infor-
mation technology needs of academic medical centers that could also
produce valuable guidelines.  Similar efforts are needed to develop guid-

ance in (1) monitoring and conducting health-related chat sessions, bulle-
tin boards, and forums, (2) remote education of health professionals,
(3)disseminating information to a broad audience, (4) appropriate and
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETinappropriate creation of provider/patient relationships, (5) assurance ofthe integrity and accuracy of patient-maintained health records, (6) means

to assess trade-offs between security, confidentiality, and access, (7) direct
marketing to patients of health care services (e.g., pharmaceuticals, pros-
theses), (8) communication across traditional boundaries (e.g., patient to
provider), (9) clinical e-mail, (10) Web information services, and (11) pri-
vacy and security of electronic health information.Recommendation 3.2.  Government, industry, and academia
should work together and with professional associations hav-
ing experience in health and information technology to educate
the broader health and health care communities about the ways
the Internet can benefit them.Part of the inability of health organizations to aggressively pursueInternet strategies derives from a lack of appreciation among health
workers about the potential benefits of Internet-based applications.  Many

have had limited formal education in computing and communications
technology and continue to have limited experience using it.  Educational

programs could go a long way to overcoming institutional resistance and
helping workers to better use such systems.  Academic health organiza-

tions and professional associations have important roles to play in edu-
cating the health community at large about the potential benefits of
Internet-based systems in health care.  Academic health organizations are

among the leaders in applying the Internet to health applications and
educate a range of health professionals.  Associations can draw upon their

large and diverse membership to pool ideas and reach out to individual
organizations.  They must also work individually to assemble information-

technology-savvy staff who can envision and develop Internet-based
health systems.  Chief information officers and other high-level informa-

tion systems professionals should have expertise in both information tech-
nology and health care.Recommendation 3.3. The Department of Health and Human
Services should commission a study of the health information
technology workforce to determine whether the supply of such
workers balances the demand for them, to identify the kinds of
training and education that workers at different levels will
need, and to develop recommendations for ensuring an adequate
supply of people with training at the intersection of informa-
tion technology and health.For health applications of the Internet to be envisioned, developed,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS263and deployed, knowledgeable workers are needed who understand boththe technical capabilities of the Internet and the nuances of operating in a
health context.  Information technology firms perceive a distinct shortage

in the number of qualified information technology workers they can hire,
although a formal assessment of the situation is still under way.3  The
supply of workers with both information technology and health skills
may be even tighter, but the situation has not been well investigated.
Impressions of supply and demand tend to be based on anecdotal evi-
dence about the demand for graduates of existing programs.  All health

organizations will be affected by the Internet and will need to develop
competencies to work with it.  To date, support for training in areas such
as medical informatics has come almost exclusively from the National
Library of Medicine, but it will soon need to come from other sources as
well if the pool of qualified workers is to grow.  It is not clear what kinds
of skills workers at different levels in a health organization will need.
Additional study is required to determine the extent of the problem and
the best avenues for addressing it.Addressing Policy IssuesA number of impediments to Internet-based health care must beaddressed at a policy level.  While it is not possible to identify or predict

all the barriers that will arise as the Internet becomes more widely used in
the health sector, there is a need to ensure that regulatory barriers do not
unnecessarily impede application of the technology as it evolves and that
all demographic groups are active participants in health on the Internet.
The impediments include issues such as payment for services delivered
via electronic networks, licensure, and malpractice.  These impediments

have slowed past attempts to deploy telemedicine services more broadly;
they exemplify the kinds of mismatches that may result from attempts to
use laws and regulations created in the past to govern a growing range of
Internet-mediated services.  What were minor concerns in the past may

become more important as the capabilities of the Internet grow and its
applications expand into health and health care. The committee notes that
it is not possible to enumerate all the ways in which the legislative and
regulatory environment may need to be altered to accommodate the
Internet in health and health care, but some of the areas that have been
identified hint at the larger set of issues to come.  Although it is beyond

the scope of its charge and its expertise to provide recommendations for
remedying these policy concerns, the committee notes that they pose a
significant barrier to the deployment of Internet-based applications in
health and health care and makes the following recommendation to has-
ten their resolution:Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETRecommendation 4.1.  The Department of Health and Human
Services should more aggressively address the broad set of
policy issues that influence the development, deployment, and
adoption of Internet-based applications in the health sector.Addressing the policy issues that are raised in this report will requirestrong leadership from federal health agencies.  Not only does DHHS

need to ensure that concerns and needs of the health community are
reflected in attempts to address policy issues such as intellectual property
protection, privacy, and access to the information infrastructure, but it
can also help to ensure greater coordination of the efforts of federal health
agencies in these areas.  Elements of DHHS are involved in missions that

are affected by these issues and have taken steps to address them, and the
DHHS itself has taken steps to address issues such as the privacy and
security of electronic medical records.  Additional focus would help

ensure that these issues are suitably addressed by the policy-making com-
munity.  DHHS could play a number of roles:
¥Providing strategic leadership for Internet-related programs within thedepartment and its constituent agencies and coordinating them with those of
other federal agencies.  Because the Internet may transform a number of
aspects of health care, including many of those overseen by federal agen-
cies, government would be well served by a process that would assess,
manage, and monitor the implications of the Internet for federal health
activities.  Many of the agencies within DHHS, including the Health Care

Financing Administration, the National Institutes of Health, and the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention, have ongoing plans to evaluate
Internet applications in some of their mission-critical operations, but little
higher-level strategy exists within DHHS for better harnessing the capa-
bilities of the Internet throughout the organization.¥Convening public and private bodies to identify and examine issues relatedto the Internet and health care.  These bodies could help federal agencies
identify issues that need to be resolved, provide guidance on the kinds of
approaches that might be most effective, and ensure greater coordination
of public and private efforts.  The National Committee on Vital and Health

Statistics (NCVHS) has been playing a similar role in the area of privacy
and security of electronic health information and could serve as the
modelÑor the seedÑfor other such groups.¥Exploring cross-cutting issues that affect a number of government healthagencies and developing programs for addressing them.  For example, DHHS
could examine ways to implement a public key infrastructure that would
support a range of federal health activities, from provision of care in DOD
and VA facilities to payment of Medicare and Medicaid claims.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS265¥Encouraging sharing of information and perspectives among health-related agencies.  Development of a health information infrastructure will
involve a multitude of participants with different responsibilities and
interests:  provision of care, payment for care, monitoring of care, health-
related research, public health, and others.  Because of its broad interest

and activity in many of these areas, DHHS could serve as a focal point for
encouraging dialog among these constituents and coordinating activities.¥Advancing the national debate regarding key information technology is-sues that affect health care.  As noted throughout this report, considerable
uncertainty exists about the ways in which the Internet is likely to influ-
ence the health sector and about the effectiveness of different applica-
tions.  Based on experience with its own systems, its interactions with the

private sector, and its ability to serve as a neutral meeting ground, DHHS
could help the entire health community become better informed about
use of the Internet in health care and about the technical, organizational,
and policy issues that must be addressed.¥Creating organizational structures to ensure that issues at the nexus ofhealth and information technology are identified and addressed promptly and
efficiently.  The speed with which the Internet and its applications are
advancing requires proactive consideration of opportunities and chal-
lenges and the structures that can respond to a rapidly changing environ-
ment.  Progress has been made along some of these lines by establishing

the DHHS Data Council and redefining the charter of the NCVHS.  The

NCVHS has, in fact, begun to address the creation of a health information
infrastructure (NCVHS, 1998), but additional effort along these lines will
be needed to ensure that adequate attention is paid to this emerging area.A FINAL WORDThe recommendations offered above are intended to set the nation ona course that will ensure that technology, organizational practices, and
public policies converge in ways that will lead to broader deployment of
Internet-based systems in health applications (see Box 6.1).  Undoubtedly,

this course will have to be recharted over time to reflect progress made
along each of the fronts and as Internet-mediated health processes con-
tinue to unfold.  Changes in the structure of the nation
Õs health care willcontinue to drive the kinds of health-related systems that will operate
over the Internet, and the Internet will, in turn, drive changes in the
structure and nature of health care.  Continued dialog between the infor-

mation technology community and the health community will be central
to ensuring that the Internet evolves in ways that meet the ever-changing
demands and specialized needs of the health sectorÑand to ensuring thatthe Internet will support the health of the nation.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETREFERENCESClausing, Jeri.  2000.  
ÒReport Rings Alarm Bells About Privacy on the Internet,Ó New YorkTimes, February 7.
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA).  1997.  
Telemedicine Report to Congress,Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., December 4.  Available

online at <http://www.hcfa.gov/pubforms/telemed.pdf>.National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS).  1998.  
Assuring a HealthDimension for the National Information Infrastructure,  October 14.  Available online at
<http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/hii-nii.htm>.BOX 6.1A View of the FutureTwo scenarios demonstrate the kinds of capabilities that could be achieved ifthe recommendations outlined in this report are implemented:1Scenario 1:  Georgia Johnson, a 64-year-old widow with hypertension and con-gestive heart failure, lives in Quincy, Pennsylvania.  Her physician, Dr. Ramesh, is
located in Baltimore, where she lived before her husband died.  Ms. Johnson sees

her doctor biweekly, through a videoconference visit that is hosted in her home byMarcus Brown, a student in the University of VirginiaÕs distance-learning nurse-practitioner program.  During a routine video visit, Dr. Ramesh tells Georgia that

she needs to reduce her salt intake and gives her an information prescription.Marcus fills the prescription by adding two new features to GeorgiaÕs personalhealth Web page: an interactive diary that she will use to track her own sodium
intake and a three-part multimedia series on living with congestive heart failure.During the visit, Georgia hears the doctor suggest that Marcus visit the NLMÕsInternet library of chest sounds to learn more about how to recognize congestive
heart failure.  At GeorgiaÕs request, Marcus shows her how to use this resource
and links it to GeorgiaÕs Web page, too.  After showing Georgia how to post a copy
of the interactive diary to her electronic medical record, Marcus heads out for his
next home visit.  As he walks to his car, Marcus calls his e-transcription service,
logs in, and dictates visit notes into GeorgiaÕs electronic medical record.Scenario 2:  Juanita and Santos Del Rios have lived in the United States for3years.  They live in a large apartment complex in downtown Miami with their four

children, who range in age from 2 to 9.  They are learning English, but they also
depend on their 9-year-old, Rosa, who learns English in school, to help translatefor them.  Last year, their health plan sent someone to deliver a home health kit

consisting of Internet connectivity, a digital thermometer, a heart rate monitor, astethoscope, and a videocamera.  The installer, who spoke Spanish, showed them
how to use the equipment and to connect to the Internet through their television.
One night, Juanita is awakened by the baby, who is coughing, wheezing, andcrying.  She wakes up Rosa and asks her to call the HMO for advice.  Hearing the
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS267symptoms, the pediatrician on call asks to have a quick look at the baby.  Rosa
turns on the set, while Juanita sets up the health kit. Rosa establishes an encrypted

session with the server and reserves a suitable level of bandwidth for a video-conference, using the Òbandwidth wizardÓ on the server.  When the connection is
complete, Rosa selects the Òhabla EspaŒolÓ option for simultaneous subtitles, so
her mother can communicate directly with the doctor, and pages the doctor.Remembering a recent news item about a rash of respiratory problems in thisneighborhood, the pediatrician links to the local public health department e-channel
to check on specifics.  While waiting for the doctor to finish her research, Juanita
scans the index of the HMOÕs self-help library and downloads two items, LasSyntomas de la Asma and 
El Gripe y su NiŒo, for later reading.These scenarios require advances in technology, organizational capabilities,and public policy in order to become commonplace in the future.  The first scenario

requires dependable bandwidth on demand, authenticated remote access topatient records, and widely accessible Internet-based collections of resources likethe multimedia series.  It also requires cross-border licensing arrangements and

health care reimbursement policies that cover this kind of service.  The technical
requirements for the second scenario include cable modems, reservable band-width, encrypted server access, digital instruments, and instantaneous language
translation.  The nontechnical requirements include a health plan that supports
home telemedicine and online access to Spanish-language consumer health infor-mation.  Most features of these scenarios exist now but are not widely available or

easily accessible to those who may need them.  The expanded capabilities for
health care outlined in these scenarios could be achieved in the near future givenaction on some of the recommendations outlined in this report.  Even more exciting
are the applications that could be imagined if the nation were to begin to use theInternet to its full potential in health applications.1These scenarios were first described by Valerie Florance of the Association ofAmerican Medical Colleges in a public briefing to release a prepublication versionof this report.  Because of the interest they generated, they have been included

here.PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  1999.  Information Tech-nology Research:  Investing in Our Future
, National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and Communications, Arlington, Va.,  February 24.  Available online at
<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.Working Group on Biomedical Computing, Advisory Committee to the Director.  1999.  
TheBiomedical Information Science and Technology Initiative, National Institutes of Health,Bethesda, Md., June 3.  Available online at <http://www.nih.gov/welcome/director/

060399.htm>.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268NETWORKING HEALTH: PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE INTERNETNOTES1.HCFA is already working to investigate means of reimbursing the costs of some
types of remote consultation and has funded demonstration projects to explore alternativepayment schemes.  For information on HCFA
Õs efforts on paying for remote health services,see HCFA (1997).2.The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research was recently renamed the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).3.The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board is studying workforce needs
in information technology.  Additional information on this project is available online at
www.cstb.org.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.271APPENDIX ASite Visit Summaries
As part of its data-gathering activities, the Committee on Enhancingthe Internet for Health Applications visited eight sites that were either
developing health-related applications of the Internet or engaged in
health-related activities that could be transferred to the Internet in the
future.  These visits, conducted between December 1998 and February

1999, spanned half a day to one full day each.  They provided committee

members with a snapshot of the state of deployment of the Internet in the
health community at that point in time and an opportunity to better
understand the technical and other challenges associated with use of the
Internet in support of health care.This appendix briefly summarizes the committeeÕs eight site visits,including four in California, two in North Carolina, and two in Washing-
ton State.  The sites were the Laboratory for Radiological Informatics at

the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF); Kaiser-Permanente
of Northern California, Oakland; Stanford Center for Professional Devel-
opment, Stanford University; the National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration (NASA) Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California; the
Center for Health Sciences Communication at East Carolina University
(ECU), Greenville, North Carolina; the University of North Carolina
(UNC), Chapel Hill; and the University of Washington (UW) and Regence
BlueShield in Seattle.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272APPENDIX ALABORATORY FOR RADIOLOGICAL INFORMATICSMembers of the study committee spent half a day at the UCSF Labo-ratory for Radiological Informatics (LRI) on December 16, 1999.  H.K.

(Bernie) Huang and his colleagues at LRI demonstrated systems designed
to share three different types of telemedical images:  digital mammograms;

cardiograms; and neurological images made by magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) and computerized tomography (CT).1  For the most part, these
systems make use of a picture archiving and communications system
(PACS) at UCSF that stores digital medical images in several terabytes of
optical disk storage and an asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) wide-
area network (WAN) that connects UCSF with nearby Mount Zion Hospi-
tal.  Originally, the laboratory used a dedicated WAN, but then the uni-

versity installed a synchronous optical network (SONET) ring, which now
supports the network.  A T1 connection
Ñwhich supports data rates of1.544 megabits per second (Mbps)Ñlinks UCSF with Stanford UniversityMedical Center, an hourÕs drive away.TelemammographySteve Frankel of the Breast Imaging Section at UCSF and Andrew Louof LRI provided an overview of the teleimaging system.  UCSF now has

two full-field digital telemammography systems that produce images of
40 to 60 megabytes (MB) compressed (using an acceptably lossless com-
pression scheme).  A typical study generates four such images, two of

each breast, but also requires a historical set of equal size for comparison.
Images can be transmitted across the WAN for remote interpretation and
diagnosis or real-time reading by expert mammographers.  In the demon-

stration, staff physicians at UCSF sent images to Mount Zion for interpre-
tation.  Physicians at both UCSF and Mount Zion used high-resolution

(2,000  2,000 pixel) monitors to view the images.  Using custom software
developed at UCSF, the referring and consulting physicians could use an
on-screen dual-pointer to identify objects of interest and change the
brightness and contrast of the images to aid in interpretation.  An elec-

tronic magnifying glass enabled mammographers to examine portions of
the image in greater detail.Expert reading of mammograms in real time is not necessarily neededfor regular screenings, but it can be useful if potential abnormalities are
discovered.  In such cases, remote experts can provide faster diagnoses or

request additional images before the patient leaves the mammography
center.  Busy centers may examine 80 to 100 women per day (20 per day is

more typical for an average center), with the expectation that images willNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A273be read the following day.  Longer delays are not uncommon; many
mobile mammogram centers have 2-week turnaround times.Telemammography is viewed as a means of supporting increaseddemand for mammograms.  The National Cancer Institute (NCI) recom-

mendation that all women over age 40 have an annual mammogram
could, if widely heeded, greatly increase the rate of mammography, UCSF

system developers noted.  They also said the nation has too few expert

mammographers to handle the increased volume and, moreover, that
many rural areas have no local experts.  To provide teleradiology inter-

pretation services for other health care organizations, UCSF has estab-
lished a consortium with Emory University in Atlanta; Wake Forest
University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Brigham and WomenÕsHospital in Boston; and the University of Pennsylvania.  The consortium,

named Telequest, accepts images over a dedicated T1 line and provides
transcribed diagnoses.  Participating physicians must be cross-licensed in

the examination sites.Cardiology TeleconferencingTony Chou, director of the catheterization labs, described a cardiol-ogy teleconferencing system linking UCSF and Stanford University.  This

application, which runs on a T1 line, is used as an educational tool to
enable physicians to present cases to colleagues for postmortem reviews.
It is not yet used for diagnostic purposes but it could be, once the institu-
tions install digitized catheterization labs.  The system has been used to

review angiography and intravascular ultrasound images, which are cur-
rently captured as analog video and digitized.  Digitized angiogram files

are roughly 60 MB in size; intravascular ultrasounds are about 50 MB.
The size of these files is expected to grow by a factor of 10 once the fully
digital systems are installed.  Videos are displayed at a rate of 25 frames

per second.In applications tested to date, digitized videos of angiograms andintravascular ultrasound have been transmitted across the T1 network
and replicated on both sides of the connection, a process that takes
approximately 5 minutes.  In one case, images were transferred to a medi-

cal center in Germany overnight.  Participants in the teleconferences can

examine images simultaneously, using on-screen pointers to note items of
interest and zooming in on particular portions of the video.  Physicians

report that the quality of the video is already sufficient for most diag-
noses, but the system has been used only for reviewing outcomes and
medical decision making.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274APPENDIX ANeuroimagingBill Dillon, chief of the Neuroimaging Department, provided an over-view of the neuroimaging teleconsultation system linking UCSF and
Mount Zion.  The system is used primarily for MRI and CT scans, which

usually are digitally captured and stored in the PACS.  Before the PACS

was established, some 15 to 20 percent of films were lost and hundreds
went unreadÑmeaning that the hospital could not bill for the service.The PACS allows immediate access to images and was accepted rapidly
by physicians, who found that the system greatly increased the ease of
locating needed studies before meeting with a patient.The WAN has enabled UCSF to offer image interpretation services.In fact, UCSF now has a resident on call to read neuroimages taken at
Mount Zion.  Such centralization of interpretation skills helps accommo-

date the interests of the state of California, which is pressuring California
hospitals and medical schools to reduce the number of specialists and
trainees in specialty areas.  Similar pressures are being felt at the national

level as health care providers merge and attempt to consolidate services
and eliminate duplicative capabilities across large health care delivery
systems.KAISER-PERMANENTE OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIAThe study committee visited Kaiser-Permanente of Northern Califor-nia on the afternoon of December 16, 1999.  Kaiser-Permanente is the

nationÕs largest health maintenance organization (HMO), with more than9.4 million members in 20 states.  It has approximately 100,000 employees,

including 10,000 physicians and 30,000 nurses and pharmacists, and it
operates some 30 hospitals with more than 8,000 beds.  The HMO is not a

single entity but, rather, an affiliation of two separate organizations:  the

Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, which handles administrative and man-
agement functions, and Permanente Medical Group, which consists of
12separate groups of practitioners.  Kaiser-Permanente has experimented

with network-based telemedicine applications, particularly in telederma-
tology and teleradiology.  Its most notable success was with a system for

retinal screening of diabetic patients, which began when a clinic bought a
camera and began sending images electronically to an expert reader for
interpretation.  This simple procedure increased initial screening rates

from 30 to 93 percent of all patients who met the criteria in the risk guide-
lines.Kaiser-Permanente staff began evaluating different Internet applica-tions at the request of its chief executive officer.  The result was a unified,

three-pronged strategy consisting of a provider-oriented system; aNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A275customer-focused system; and a common, shared database.  Development
of the provider system and shared databaseÑthe Permanente KnowledgeConnection (PKC)Ñhas proceeded under the auspices of Kaiser-PermanenteÕs Care Management Institute.  Development of the consumer
component, the KPOnline system, has proceeded separately.  The discus-

sions during the site visit focused on both the instituteÕs efforts to developinternal applications for use by care providers and on the efforts of
KPOnline, a customer-focused system.Permanente Knowledge ConnectionPeter Juhn, executive director, described the activities of the CareManagement Institute (CMI), a national entity within Kaiser-Permanente
that operates on behalf of both the Kaiser Foundation Health Plan and the
Permanente Medical Group.  CMI was established in 1997 and employs

approximately 80 people, 30 of whom work in Oakland and the rest of
whom are distributed throughout the Kaiser-Permanente system.  Its prin-

cipal function is to develop evidence-based approaches to care manage-
ment.  This work has three areas of emphasis:  content, measurement, and

implementation.  Content work includes the development of manage-

ment programs for conditions such as diabetes, asthma, and depression,
as well as an overall compendium of clinical best practices.  Measurement

work encompasses large-scale national studies of health outcomes and
has included studies of 200,000 diabetic patients, 320,000 cardiovascular
patients, and 90,000 asthma patients in the Kaiser-Permanente system.
The implementation work builds on the content foundation, using the
collected information as a basis for clinical systems that can influence care
at the point of delivery.  The objective of these activities is to change care

providersÕ behavior to coincide with best practices developed throughout
the Kaiser-Permanente system.  Such systems can have dramatic effects

on care.  Over the previous year and a half, Kaiser-Permanente found a 10

to 15 percent gain in the use of practice guidelines in some areas where it
had developed content.The PKC is a network-based application that was developed to sup-port the CMIÕs objective of improving care.  Its primary function is to
allow care providers to access current CMI content on best practices.  The

CMI staff realized that each Kaiser-Permanente site was gathering useful
information that could benefit other local and national care providers, but
little of it was shared.  Using Kaiser-Permanente
Õs national intranet, thePKC now has national and regional databases of best-practice informa-
tion that is vetted before it is entered into the databases.  A board of

directors that represents all executive and physician groups approves
information for inclusion in the national database.  Twelve regional
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276APPENDIX Agroups establish approval processes for their own regions, and localoffices establish processes for local approvals.  This structure balances

local freedom against the need for greater structure at the highest levels of
the organization.  The databases are linked together through the national
officeÕs intranet Web site, which makes the information searchable andreduces duplication of effort.  In addition to linking care management

information, the PKC provides a centralized outlet for other information
resources of interest to care providers.  It contains a section for continuing

medical education (CME) that allows users to look up their CME credits.
It also provides access to online text books and journals and supports
discussion groups with threaded discussions.  Its workgroup functions

enable users to post material and conduct national meetings in a virtual
manner.  Workgroups can be designated for members only, with mem-

bership defined by the chair.The CMI staff plan to build on the PKCÕs current capabilities to makePKC more useful to care providers.  The staff will address topics such as

improving search capabilities, tailoring information to provider needs,
and expanding access to affiliated care providers.  The PKC can support

searches across the national intranet using a commercial search engine,
but the CMI is looking into ways to improve search capabilities and help
different types of users find information they need, perhaps by adding
ÒmetadataÓ capabilities.  The staff also plan to use ÒpushÓ (as opposed topull) technologies and customization to provide users with information
relevant to their immediate and long-term needs.  Plans for this enhance-
ment are tied to efforts to place a computer on every physicianÕs desktopand provide access to a clinical information system (more than 40 percent
of Kaiser physicians had desktop computers at the time of the site visit).
Overall, however, the Kaiser-Permanente staff do not consider technol-
ogy a limiting factor.  They have modest aims for now, and technology is
often a distraction from reaching other goals.  They prefer to take known

technology and find ways of using it to support their business, rather than
pushing the technological envelope.Nevertheless, determining how best to expand the PKC to affiliatedproviders will entail both technical and policy considerations.  Kaiser-

Permanente has agreements with approximately 40,000 affiliate provid-
ers in physician groups outside of California.  How can Kaiser convince

the affiliates to care for Kaiser patients according to Kaiser practices?
Should the affiliates have access to all the available knowledge, or should
some information be considered proprietary?  How can information be

layered and filtered easily to accommodate restrictions placed on affiliate
access?  How can firewalls be extended to include specific partners while
still providing adequate protection for KaiserÕs information systems?  At
present, the system does not contain patient-level data, which alleviatesNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A277some concerns regarding security, but Kaiser needs to evaluate alterna-tive ways of providing security on an extranet and/or the Internet.  It also

needs to determine how best to blend public and proprietary information
to benefit its providers.  Kaiser officials do not consider their practice

guidelines proprietaryÑand would even like to make them publicÑbutthe tools for implementing these practices are unique and will be kept
proprietary.  Kaiser would like to translate the guidelines into lay terms

and make them available on its consumer-oriented Web site.The Kaiser staff anticipate three types of outcomes from the PKC.First are the financial benefits.  They want to leverage the size of the

organization while avoiding duplication of effortÑsomething the PKCcan facilitate.  The staff will try to determine how much money was saved

by not starting new programs or sustaining existing ones because PKC
indicated that similar work may prompt changes in clinical decision mak-
ing that yield improved clinical outcomes and use of facilities.  Other

benefits will accrue from improved knowledge management, which should
succeed in educating care providers about new diagnostic approaches
and new techniques.  The Kaiser staff hope to make the link between

successful patient-provider interactions and the PKC system evident, to
demonstrate the systemÕs ability to support corporate objectives.If the system is to be successful, then usage rates must increase.  At
the time of the site visit, 2,700 of Kaiser-PermanenteÕs 10,000 physiciansused the system, but all were expected to use it by the end of 1999.  To

attain and maintain that level of usage, the system will need to prove
itself capable of educating physicians about the new diagnostic approachesand clinical techniques.  The system will also need to demonstrate its

capability to enhance the goals of the organization.  Management will

need to see a direct linkage between improved patient-provider inter-
actions and the tools that support that interaction.  Privacy issues will also

need to be addressed so that providers know whether information will be
collected on their searches of medical literature and whether such searches
will be viewed as positive (i.e., the provider is engaging in continuous
learning) or negative (i.e., searches indicate gaps in a providerÕs knowledge).KPOnlineAnna-Lisa Silvestre and Richard Leopold described KaiserÕs consumer-oriented Web site, the primary component of KPOnline.  KPOnline is a

three-tiered system with a Web page interface that interacts with legacy
systems through an intermediate object layer.  Ms. Silvestre views the

Web site as a service for interacting with Kaiser-Permanente members.  It

is not a marketing tool or a mechanism for providing content.  Rather, it is

intended to provide members with an alternative to telephone calls andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278APPENDIX Aoffice visits.  The site provides members with capabilities for messaging,
scheduling appointments, and checking prescriptions 24 hours a day, 7
days a week.  Eventually, the Kaiser staff would like to integrate KPOnline

with the PKC so they can take the information gathered from patients
through KPOnline and incorporate it into practice guidelines and, con-
versely, incorporate practice guidelines into chat rooms and e-mail dis-
cussions with patients.  The goal is to help patients better understand

health information, tailor it to them, connect them with providers, and to
help them make sound, coordinated decisions regarding their care.At the time of the site visit, approximately 16,000 registered users hadlogged on to KPOnline more than once.  This number is just a small

fraction of Kaiser-PermanenteÕs 9.4 million members, but the staff believesusage will increase as more of them gain Internet access.  The recent

biannual survey reported that 72 percent of members are adults, 53 per-
cent of whom have Internet access at home, work, or both.  Ten percent of

all members have requested a personal identification number (PIN) to use
with the system.  Hence, Kaiser expects hundreds of thousands of mem-

bers to access the system simultaneously in the near future (the target was
350,000 active users in 1999) and is in the process of procuring additional
servers to handle the load.  The organization is still trying to learn how

members use the site and what types of services they seek.  Kaiser is

starting to collect data on site usage (it does not track an individualÕsmovements within the site) but does not yet have adequate volume to
examine usage by demographic category.Consumers are coming online quickly, and KPOnline is expected tobecome a basic utility that will benefit both consumers and Kaiser-
Permanente.  A basic evaluation will be performed to determine who uses

the system, their level of satisfaction, and the overall utility of the system.
More formal cost-benefit analyses will also be conducted.  A tangible cost-

benefit analysis will evaluate processes such as online pharmacy refills
and automated appointment scheduling and compare them to more
traditional, manual processes.  The Kaiser staff expects that online phar-

maceutical services have the highest benefits per unit cost because fillingprescriptions becomes much less expensive when done in high volumes.
Other tangible benefits not associated with cost reductions, such as help-
ing members make good decisions, will also be considered.  Some of the

benefits will be difficult to quantify, but there may be ways to determine
if online material helped to prevent an unnecessary visit to a Kaiser facil-
ity, improve the appropriateness of a subsequently scheduled visit, or
increase membership retention rates.Early experience with KPOnline has uncovered numerous issues thatneed to be resolved.  One of the main ones is the need for standards for

measuring the quality of online transactions.  For example, with respect to
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A279online questions to nurses, it might be desirable to track the time of receipt,
the time at which the question was answered, the time at which the
member retrieved the response, and whether the answer given was valid.
Similar standards are now in place to help train nurses who provide
advice over the telephone, but such situations involve near-real-time feed-
back.  In addition, nurses need training in how to provide care based

strictly on text input (which creates a record of the interaction), with no
voice or personal interaction with patients.  At the time of the site visit, all

of Kaiser-PermanenteÕs care providers had e-mail accounts, but patientswere not yet using them.  The use of clinical e-mail raises several ques-

tions, as yet unanswered, regarding medical records.Other issues include the determination of rules for intervening insponsored chat groups.  Kaiser-Permanente had a case in which a

memberÕs postings to a chat group suggested suicidal tendencies.  The
organization had to decide whether and how to intervene.  Should it link
the userÕs anonymous login with the medical record database to check themedical history and find contact information?  In this case, the Kaiser staff

did just that, and an advice nurse called the patient and arranged an
appointment, which revealed that the patient was indeed suicidal.  Events

such as this prompt policy reviews.Kaiser has established a set of technical measures and administrativeprocesses to provide security on the Web site.  The site uses Secure Socket

Layer (SSL) encryption to protect messages between members and Kaiser,
and members need a PIN to access chat groups.  Members are required to

provide their membership number and address to obtain a PIN.  In addi-
tion, the manager of the business unit is a security trustee and has to
ensure that policies and procedures are in place.  These policies are

reviewed regularly and upgraded as needed, and attempts are made to
achieve consistency between online and off-line policies.  For example,

Kaiser dropped the authentication requirement for scheduling an appoint-
ment online because such authentication is not performed when schedul-
ing appointments via the telephone.Members of the Kaiser-Permanente staff identified several technicalcapabilities they would like to be able to incorporate into KPOnline:¥Authentication technologies that would allow multiple users within a
single household to use the same computer but keep their information
separate.  In the current KPOnline system, if users forget to log out of a

session, then other family members can see what they did and what infor-
mation they retrieved.  The Kaiser staff would like to obtain improved

technologies to identify users and authenticate their identities.  One pos-

sible solution is biometrics, but this approach would be costly to imple-
ment across many computers.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280APPENDIX A¥Higher-speed Internet connections for end users.  The objective is to
enable members to have Òa T1 experienceÓ while using a 28.8 kilobit per
second (kbps) modem.  Kaiser has its own wide-area network that con-

nects all Kaiser facilities.  Should the organization become the equivalent
of an Internet service provider (ISP) so that it can provide high-speed
connections and ensure security?  Should care providers act as ISPs them-

selves so that members can connect to the network using high-speed cable
modems or digital subscriber line technologies?¥A standardized Web browser.  The Kaiser support staff spends con-
siderable time helping customers configure their browsers to work with
KPOnline.  Users sometimes confuse the application with the infrastruc-

ture and call KaiserÕs support desk to report problems that are not associ-ated with KPOnline but rather with their ISP.¥A simple telemedicine terminal.  A computer that supports video-
conferencing, and sensors for collecting diagnostic information, would
enable care providers (such as triage nurses) to interpret and evaluate
cases based on more than just text-based information.  A pilot program

using this technology is ongoing in the mid-Atlantic region to monitor
diabetic patients, and there are plans for another pilot program in the
Northeast with congestive heart failure patients.  Telephone lines are used

to transmit information.  The main problem experienced to date is not

capturing the information but incorporating it into the medical record.
Security issues also need to be addressed.STANFORD CENTER FOR PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENTCommittee members visited the Stanford Center for Professional Devel-opment on 
December 16, 1998, to meet with Andrew DiPaolo, its execu-tive director, and members of his staff and learn more about the Stanford
Online system.  Stanford Online is the current Web-based implementa-

tion of the Stanford Instructional Television Network, a system pioneered
by Stanford UniversityÕs engineering school to teach courses at a distance,largely (in the past) to employees in local industry.  The system allows

students or employees to remain at their company sites while taking
courses.  Through the Honors Co-op Program, workers can maintain full-

time employment while studying to earn a full-fledged masterÕs degree.The program focuses on engineering classes, but members of the
UniversityÕs section on medical informatics have taught courses using thesystem.The system started with live broadcasts over private systems betweenStanford and the subscribing companies, generally with two-way audio
supplementing one-way video so that students could ask questions of the
instructors and participate in discussions.  Subsequently, workers
Õ need
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A281for flexibility in scheduling of studies led industry to call for videotapesthat could be watched at the convenience of students rather than only
during live video feeds.  The program was broadened into the Stanford

Center for Professional Development (SCPD) when it became clear that
the distance-education model would be more than simply broadcast tele-
vision.  Anoop Gupta, a computer science faculty member, had devel-

oped Vxtreme, a technology for streaming video, which was experimen-
tally adopted by the SCDP as a means of distributing ÒvideotapesÓ by the
Internet rather than by courier.  Vxtreme was later acquired by Microsoft
Corporation, and the SCPD continues to use the Microsoft streaming
video products (which are incompatible with RealVideo).Today, Stanford Online has become an important means of dissemi-nating video-recorded classes along with slides and photographs of black-
boards or projection screens.  Videos are up on the Web within 3 hours of

the class.  Class videos are indexed into segments by undergraduate stu-

dents, who manually perform this function immediately after the class.
Methods are being explored for automating the indexing and matching
the video to the master copy of slides.  A previous year
Õs videos arediscarded because the courses are taught again and the lectures are con-
tinually updated.Stanford Online students see three things in their browser window:  a
relatively small video of the instructor giving the class; an index of topics
covered by the lecture (topics can be selected as the student wishes); and
PowerPoint slides or, alternatively, photos of projected slides or black-
boards, coordinated with the audiovisual track.  Even with a 28.8 kbps

connection, students can work through a lecture and skip around based
on the indexing outline.  The browser has a plug-in for streaming video.

The system is intended to be used asynchronously; students cannot ask
questions in real-time via the Internet, but they can send e-mail to profes-
sors and participate in online discussion groups.Students can take courses whenever they want if they are not seekingcredit.  If they want credit, then it is best for them to take the course

during the regular semester, at the same pace as on-campus students, to
take advantage of resources such as teaching assistants who are available
to grade homework.  Class videos are also broadcast to dormitories at

specific times over the campus television system, enabling Stanford stu-
dents who live on campus to view lectures they missed or wish to view a
second time.  Television viewing does not allow user-controlled access to

specific portions of the lectures, however, as does the Stanford Online
version.  With the availability of both scheduled replays of lectures and

Stanford Online video on demand, it is now possible for students to take
two courses that meet at the same time.  Students like the asynchronous

method because they can follow courses when they are away from theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282APPENDIX Acampus.  However, the online capability can reduce the number of stu-
dents attending the live lecture; in fact, some students have opted not to
attend class at all, especially early in the morning.  The smaller number of

live participants can reduce class interactions and force changes in the
way professors deliver lectures.File sizes for 10 minutes of video range from 1.6 MB to 38 MB depend-ing on the bit rate at which they are sent (Table A.1).  The size of the file is

minimally affected by the size of the video image on the computer screen.
The image quality of the frame degrades as the number of frames per
second (fps) increases, even though the throughput (bit rate) may remain
constant.  The frame rate depends on the video capture card
 that convertsvideo imagery into digital format and on the horsepower of the authoring
workstation.It is not clear whether there are unique networking requirements formedical education.  Some technologies may be more important for the

delivery of lectures dealing with medicine than of these dealing with
other fields.  For example, techniques are needed for tracking laser pointers

on slides, an essential in teaching radiology classes.  The SCPD is trying to

develop techniques for overlaying the movement of a pointer on the

screen and ways of noting changes between or within items on the screen.
It is conducting formal studies of performance and has involved the
universityÕs education school in the evaluation process.  At present,
Stanford Online is a technical implementation of current models of teach-
ing; little thought has been given to changing the educational model to fit
the technology.  This approach has at least one advantage:  it allows

lecturers to deliver courses online without changing their form or struc-
ture.  Some minor changes have been made, such as the use of bigger

chalk to make writing more visible.The SCPD makes money for the university, enough to pay for a largestudio and the operation of five channels.  Net income is roughly $4mil-

lion per year, some of which is divided among university departments.
Faculty members have financial incentives to teach courses online:  They

receive a share of the tuition for online courses, as do their departments.TABLE A.1  File Size of 10 Minutes of Video at Different Bit Rates
Bit Rate (kbps)2250100256512
File size (kB)1,6563,7567,50719,01838,408
SOURCE:  Michael Rouan, Stanford University, personal communication, January 18, 1999.
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A283But new financial models may be needed to pay for new services.  So far,off-campus services are offered only to Òmember companies.Ó  This
approach would need to change if the university decided to allow indi-
vidual students to pay for their own classes, as they would for CME.The SCPD programÑthe online portion, in particularÑis very popu-lar.  Online participation may cut into the broadcast model.  Obviously,

this could be a big business for Stanford, a trend that threatens small
colleges.  SCPD has the capability on existing servers to teach 2,000 simul-

taneous users; additional capacity could be brought online to expand its
scope.NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTERThe committee visited NASA Ames Research Center on December 16,1999.  Committee members were hosted by Muriel Ross, then director of

the Ames Center for Bioinformatics, and her team of biocomputing
researchers.  NASA
Õs space exploration mission, particularly the possibil-ity of crewed flights over long distances, poses particular challenges in
network communication.  As space vehicles venture further from Earth

and for longer periods of time, it is unlikely that the crew will have all the
needed medical expertise.  Accordingly, the NASA team is focusing pri-

marily on how to provide health care using telemedicine over long dis-
tances with high latency.  The emphasis is on technologies that consume

little power (such as personal computers) and that can leverage the power
of more costly hardware through network connections.  They are addressing

two particular aspects of this challenge:  the need to support remote,

collaborative medical assessment and treatment using the Internet (as an
approximation of the network that would be available using wireless
communication) and the need to support rapid, accurate three-dimensional
rendering of organs for assessment at a distance by medical professionals.As part of its preparation for remote medical consultations, NASAAmes has established a collaboration among in-house staff and Stanford
University scientists to experiment with the transmission of images, in
particular complex three-dimensional models of hearts, skulls, and other
structures.  The challenge for NASA networking scientists is to send the

images simultaneously to multiple sites (i.e., multicasting, as opposed to
point-to-point communication).  They have created a testbed network

that links NASA Ames with Stanford University Medical Center, the
Cleveland Foundation Clinic in Ohio (through NASAÕs Glenn ResearchCenter), Salinas Valley Memorial Hospital (through the University of Cali-
fornia at Santa Cruz), and the Navajo Nation at its Northern Navajo Medi-
cal Center in New Mexico.  The network is extremely complicated, linking

local-area networks (LANs) at the participating institutions to a variety ofNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284APPENDIX Ahigh-speed WANs, including the NASA Research and Educational Net-work; Abilene, a high-speed network backbone project of 
the UniversityConsortium for Advanced Internet Development; and the very high per-
formance backbone network service (vBNS), a research network launched
through a 5-year cooperative agreement between MCI and the National
Science Foundation.  Connections to the Navajo Nation run through satel-

lite and high-speed ground links.The three-dimensional medical images used in NASAÕs tests containseveral million polygons and are too complicated for typical computer
workstations to render.  NASA therefore planned to perform volume

rendering on a powerful central graphics computer and then transmit the
images (or changes in the images) to peripheral workstations at the remote
sites.  Because the files would be too large for straightforward transfer on

todayÕs Internet, NASA planned to use the Abilene network, which oper-ates at 9,920 gigabits per second (Gbps).  Limitations in bandwidth in

various parts of the network, however, precluded even this design.  Con-

sequently, NASA designed a hybrid system in which high-resolution
static images (containing roughly 1.2 million polygons) are transmitted
from the centralized site and real-time rendering of object manipulations
is handled at lower resolution (approximately 20,000 polygons) by the
individual sites.  Changes are made visible to all participants, and at the

end of a manipulation, the centralized NASA computer sends an updated,
full-resolution image back to each of the remote sites using multicast
technologies.  Users at the collaborating sites wear special glasses to view

the three-dimensional images. The images for cranial-facial surgery con-
sist of skin and skull only, but future modeling will include brain tissue
and blood vessels.The testbed provides simulations of remote medical care for Earth-bound patients as well as astronauts.  If, for instance, it was suspected that

a child at the Navajo Nation might have a congenital birth defect of the
heart, a local physician and technician would send three-dimensional
images obtained with ultrasound or MRI technology to consultants at
Stanford and Salinas for opinions about treatment.  The three-way col-

laborative environment would allow the specialists and caregivers to

assess the situation quickly and weigh two options:  local management or

transfer to a medical center.EAST CAROLINA UNIVERSITYThe visit to East Carolina University (ECU) on February 2, 1999,featured extended discussions of the universityÕs Telemedicine Programas well as tours and demonstrations.  The study team spent the day with

David Balch, director of ECUÕs Center for Health Sciences Communica-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A285tion and director of the Telemedicine Program, and Gloria Jones, theTelemedicine Program coordinator.  Other staff members and affiliated

clinicians and educators participated in portions of the meeting.Between August 1992 and February 1999, the ECU Telemedicine Pro-gram conducted about 2,500 real-time consultations in 31 different fields,
using about 60 different doctors.  The top five areas are dermatology;

cardiology; neurology; gastroenterology; and allergy, asthma, and immu-
nology.  In addition, the program has conducted numerous radiological

consultations, many on a store-and-forward basis.  The Telemedicine Pro-

gram also runs distance learning programs, the first of which began in
1989 over a statewide network that links major universities in North
Carolina.Between 1991 and 1999, ECU spent about $8 million on local facilitiesand infrastructure for telemedicine and teleeducation.  Physical space is

provided by the School of Medicine, and most equipment has been pro-
vided through grants from the Office of Rural Health Policy (ORHP) and
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA).  The site visit committee

toured the facilities and observed a telemedicine consultation to a rural
site.TelemedicineEast Carolina University has two telemedicine suitesÑan older oneand a newer oneÑwith a total of eight rooms.  Each room has a telephone,
a personal computer for displaying electronic medical records, a display
of the remote site, and a display of the consulting physician.  The newer

rooms are 6 by 8 feet and have a Òsound domeÓ overhead to direct audio
to the physician; the older rooms are slightly larger to accommodate a
larger display and are soundproofed.  The newer rooms were built for

about $8,000, of which $4,500 was spent on equipment (e.g., computers,
monitors, stethoscopes) and $3,500 was spent on furnishings and con-
struction.  Remote sites feature standard arrays of diagnostic equipment

that can plug into the network.Physicians typically schedule three or four consultations in a 2-hoursession.  The technical staff makes sure that all the equipment is working
and that patientsÕ online records (if there are any) are available.  After
each consultation, the physician completes a report, which is entered into
the clinical database.  Cases are presented at remote sites by a nurse or a

physiciansÕ assistant.  A distant site provides a half-time dedicated em-
ployee who is trained by ECU to be a telemedicine presenter.  The pre-

senters generally train with the ECU specialists for a week and come in to
the center about every other week; in this way, physicians and remote
presenters learn to collaborate before being placed at opposite ends of aNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286APPENDIX Atelemedicine link.  Physician training includes a 1-hour interview with a
simulated patient.  ECU charges outsiders for this training; the university

needs to subsidize training for its own people.  Distant-site physicians are

not involved in the telemedicine consult unless they wish to be; only
rarely do they participate.ECU centralizes the management of store-and-forward consultationmessages, which typically consist of medical images attached to e-mail.
This process allows managers to control bandwidth, monitor usage and
flow of information, maintain the equipment, and capture the demo-

graphic and survey data they need for their own purposes and to satisfy
requirements of the HCFA.  ECU tried switching from motion Joint Photo-

graphic Experts Group (JPEG) to wavelet compression, but physicianswho were already trained did not like the resulting interface change.At distant sites, ECU pays for all equipment and 3 years of linecharges, taking this as a marketing and referral expense.  Standard instal-

lation costs $150,000 per site, including remote camera control, two-way
audio and video, and continuing medical education content.  Installation

and bandwidth are sized to support echocardiograms and cineo-
angiograms, the most bandwidth-intensive images.  ECU tries to install

identical capabilities at all sites, to avoid creating second-class sites with
less expensive equipment.Each telemedicine application supported by ECU has a different busi-ness model and a different networking infrastructure.  Some of the appli-

cations are moneymakers, whereas others are seen as loss leaders for
future services and still others may not be sustainable after federal fund-
ing expires.  For example, the state fully funds Medicaid telemedicine

sessions, but this arrangement is in jeopardy because of new national
policies.  ECU has a waiver from the HCFA and is receiving Medicare

reimbursement for consultation sessions, but the paperwork burden is
heavyÑup to a dozen forms filled out for each telemedicine session.Many of these consultations are store and forward, and new applications
in primary care (e.g., wellness) are not considered consultation, so there is
no reimbursement potential for these sessions.The following five subsections describe the primary telemedicine ser-vices offered by ECU.  The sixth subsection outlines how these services

differ in terms of networking infrastructure.Prison TelemedicineECU has a contract with the state of North Carolina for services to thestateÕs central prison.  The most popular applications include dermatol-
ogy and endocrinology.  This was ECUÕs first telemedicine program, andit is a moneymaker.  ECU bought the equipment and charged back for it
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A287over 4 years on a flat-rate basis that included equipment costs and main-tenance plus 10 free consultations.  The break-even point is 800 consulta-

tions per year.  The state was able to document a per prisoner cost saving

from avoiding transportation costs (it formerly cost about $800 per year to
transport a prisoner to another site for health care).  Officials also noticed
a decline in the number of medical complaints by prisoners, who can no
longer view a visit to the doctor as a chance to leave the prison.  ECU

probably will expand this program to cover the entire North Carolina
prison system.Hospital to HospitalThe hospital-to-hospital telemedicine link was funded initially by theHCFA but now is covered by ECU and the participating hospitals.  There

are 20 hospitals involved, each with a T1 connection.  No more than half

of the T1 link is needed for video, so the other half carries data.  Origi-

nally, the system used so-called triple integrated services digital network
(ISDN) at 384 kbps, but after the telephone company switched its billing
practices, ECU converted to T1 lines for both conferencing and data.  For

echocardiography, triple ISDN might work in some situations, but it is
not adequate for cine-angiography.The ECU hospital funds the program at $150,000 per partner.  ECU
purchases and loans the equipment to the site; sets up the router, com-
puter, and coder-decoders (codecs); orders the T1; installs the equipment;
and trains and supervises the half-time staff person (usually a nurse or
physicianÕs assistant) who works the equipment at the remote site.  The
partner has to agree to fund this position, provide space and insurance for
the equipment, and pick up the line charges after 3 to 5 years.  The service

is not a moneymaker for ECUÑno one makes money from consultations.It is viewed as a marketing effort that may establish relationships that
bring in patients and eventually lead to procedures, which would gener-
ate income.  For instance, the hospital might get more cardiac referrals as
an indirect result of a well-baby telemedicine program.  Such benefits

would be difficult to track, however.  The financial gain would be virtu-

ally impossible to calculate because any lost business opportunities would
need to be figured in.Home HealthThe home health program is funded by a grant from the ORHP withinthe U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  The goal is to deter-

mine if hospitalizations can be avoided through better home monitoring
of health indicators, such as blood pressure and heart rate.  The program
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288APPENDIX Aconnects 14 homes through ordinary telephone lines (sometimes referredto as Òplain old telephone serviceÓ or POTS), using two different vendors.
At first ECU used two phone lines per home (one for transmitting audio
from the stethoscope, the other to carry the patientÕs voice), but they havesince found ways to compress the audio sufficiently to enable the use of a
single phone line.  Participants are selected on the basis of their frequent

use of hospital facilities (e.g., high-risk obstetrics patients or patients who
are seen more than twice a week in the emergency room) and their ability
to have the system installed in their home for at least 6 months.  ECU has
approval from Medicaid for the program, but home health is not included
in the new regulations promulgated by HCFA regarding government
payment of health services delivered over electronic media.Health ScreeningAnother ORHP grant is supporting two distributed networks (in con-trast to the hub-and-spoke architecture of the other networks) that link
mental health centers and schools to ECU.  Over one network, ECU pro-

vides medical/psychiatric consultations to four mental health centers.
The other network links four schools with the county health department,
a mental health center, a local pediatrician, and ECU.  The networks use

128-kbps ISDN lines (so-called single ISDN, which has proven to be more
reliable than the triple-ISDN lines used in other applications).  It is hoped

that the networks will reduce travel for care providers.The connection to the schools is used to screen students for mentalhealth problems (25 percent were found to have such problems) and to
hold wellness clinics and more general disease screenings.  The project

has a number of aspects:  student health awareness (through focus ses-

sions on topics such as peer relations, nutrition, and physical fitness);
clinical consultations; continuing education in cultural sensitivity for
teachers; clerkships for students in health professions; and health assess-
ment in the schools.  The school-based program sets up live videoconferences

between a doctor and school students for discussions of health-related
topics.Store-and-Forward E-mail ConsultationsA store-and-forward system is used for multimedia e-mail consulta-tions (using the VisiTran MD application).  The system uses the Internet

and POTS dial-up to a central server to connect a number of sites on the
Outer Banks of North Carolina with ECU.  Remote sites use standard

desktop computers (Pentium class) to transmit image files averaging 3MB

in size, a figure driven by technical limitations.  Nurses could easily take
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A289more images or add more video, but most gateways cannot handle fileslarger than 5 MB.  The system loses money because of the HCFA
Õs reim-bursement schedules, but income is generated by procedures that result
from referrals.Variations in Network InfrastructureThe ECU program began in 1988 with a microwave network designedfor educational purposes.  Since then, the networking infrastructure has

evolved into an amalgam of components cobbled together over the years
as telecommunications companies have offered different technologies.
Old networks have not been upgraded to provide greater uniformity
because of the costs involved.  Instead, ECU officials have developed a

bridge to link their disparate systems.  Codecs pass signals from one

medium to another in a manner transparent to both ends.  For example,

the prison contract uses the state microwave system, but the signal is
digitized for delivery to ECUÕs desktop workstations.  The digital signal is
converted back to microwaves for delivery to the prison.  All of ECU
Õstelemedicine activity takes place over leased lines rather than the general
Internet, although North Carolina has built a fiber optic superhighway
that links many of the stateÕs universities.The infrastructural variations are not solely technology-driven,because, as David Balch noted, one size does not fit all applications in
telemedicine.  Different specialties require different amounts of band-

width.  Echocardiography and cine-angiography require the highest

bandwidth, 784 kbps; cardiology, emergency room consultations, and
neurology require roughly 384 kbps; and psychiatric consultations require
128 kbps.  Static image specialties such as radiology, dermatology, and

pathology are generally bandwidth-independent because images can be
sent in a store-and-forward mode.  Home health requires just one tele-

phone line.  Hence, various communication media are used, including

microwave, T1, single ISDN (128 kbps), triple ISDN (384 kbps), and POTS.
Table A.2 summarizes the networking infrastructure for each of the sys-
tems ECU currently has in place.TeleeducationEast Carolina University has eight teleclassrooms on campus.  The
network was originally built to deliver distance education in engineering
and is currently used for nursing classes.  (The classrooms are too large

for doctor-patient telemedicine applications.)  A standard room has all

networking modalities available:  the North Carolina Information Highway
(NCIH) at 45Mbps; T1 
networking at 1.5 Mbps, ISDN dial-up capability;Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290APPENDIX APOTS lines; and CU-CMe (a software package for sending low-qualityvideo across the Internet).  The rooms hold 10 to 15 people each and have

cameras aimed at each chair for video.There is also a larger lecture hall, similarly equipped, that is used forgrand rounds sessions.  ECU provides grand rounds three times per week

to 20 hospitals.  These sessions can be carried out using one 15-person

conference room and one small auditorium, both of which can connect to
37 sites on the North Carolina Research and Education Network (NCREN)
at T3 speeds (or 45 Mbps), 127 NCIH sites at T1 speeds, and other sites
using ISDN.  PowerPoint slides are converted to video.  Grand rounds are

seen as a loss leader designed to acclimate remote users to the equipment
and style of interaction, in the hopes that they will later try clinical consul-
tations at the remote sites.  Scheduling is complex; ECU uses scheduling

software developed in-house.ECU is using Internet-based streaming media (real-time audio), a chatchannel, Web pages, and animations (Shockwave) for a small number of
nursing courses.  Both asynchronous and synchronous instruction are

available (i.e., students can participate in lectures in real time or down-
load the video for later viewing).  The network was designed to accom-

modate 28.8 kbps modem speeds so that it could be accessed by a large
number of users.  That bandwidth is suitable for transmitting lecturers
Õslides, but it forces audio to be compressed into 6.8 kbps, making the
video slightly choppy.  The network determines the speed at which to

deliver data based on the receiving studentÕs access bandwidth.The asynchronous system incorporates 20 kbps video, which con-sumes most of the available bandwidth.  PowerPoint slides are converted

to HTML for use by both the nursing instructors and the students at
home.  Audio is captured and sent in a 6.8 kbps stream to leave room for

the graphics.  Lecturers have added some small animations; it takes about
TABLE A.2  Network Infrastructure Used for Different East Carolina
University Telemedicine ServicesTelemedicine SystemNetwork Infrastructure
Prison1/2 T1 line, by microwave
Hospital to hospital1/2 T1 line or 384 kbps ISDN dial-up
Home healthPOTS (one line)

DistributedSingle ISDN (128 kbps)
Store and forwardVolume-based; Internet, POTS, ISDN to Raleigh,
T1 from Raleigh to GreenvilleSOURCE:  David Balch, director of Telemedicine at ECU, site visit by committee on Febru-

ary 2, 1999.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A2911 hour to create 10 seconds of animation.  Materials are available online
within 24 hours after a class session.  The system can handle up to 25 users

per class; 5- to 10-second delays are considered acceptable.The synchronous system uses Microsoft NetMeeting or ICQ for inter-activity.  It takes advantage of the chat feature alongside PowerPoint

slides for interaction between instructors and students, but little inter-
activity has been observed.  In a large class, the professor might have an

assistant answer the chat questions.  Problem areas include scheduling,

preparing auxiliary materials, marketing, and meeting assessment dead-
lines.  Presenters must act as moderators and must learn to teach to an

empty room or to a screen audience and a live audience at the same time.Next Steps:  Switching to the Internet
The Internet, especially the Next Generation Internet (NGI), wouldoffer increased bandwidth and networking capabilities that would in turn
enable a range of scenarios for telemedicine.  One scenario might be

physician-free medical practices in which nurses and physiciansÕ assis-
tants handle many patient complaints and consult with specialists only
when needed.  In another scenario, centers such as the one at ECU could

become brokers between practices and specialists rather than hubs that
provide the specialists.  The center at ECU also could become a means of

providing services to more affluent clients who opt to pay for their own
health care rather than relying on their health plan.  Real-time treatment

planning, with its increased bandwidth requirements, is seen as unlikely.
In the future, Internet Protocol (IP) video and Web TV will be close to
providing telepresence.ECU is not currently slated to receive a connection to the NGI, butresearchers are trying to find a way to get a connection.  In the meantime,

telemedicine system developers have been thinking through the chal-
lenges inherent in moving their telemedicine network to an all-IP envi-
ronment, which would provide more of a plug-and-play capability.  Mr.

Balch has been working with the American Telemedicine Association to
sort out which disciplines are most likely to be effective using telemedicine
and the bandwidth and throughput required for each.  Table A.3 summa-

rizes his conclusions, which divide telemedicine consultations into three
broad categories:  (1) those in which high-resolution, static images are

needed (such as in pathology, dermatology, or radiology), (2) those in
which medium-resolution imagery is needed, with little motion (such as
in psychiatry or internal medicine); and (3) those in which medium-
resolution images are needed, but with a high degree of motion (such as
in cardiology).ECU officials would consider switching from leased lines to theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292APPENDIX AInternet if there were evidence that it would reduce costs and lead toincreased access, which it currently would not in rural eastern North
Carolina.  They would like to outsource the networking part of the busi-

ness to a company experienced in dealing with telephone companies (i.e.,
an ISP).  They are moving to IP-based video, in spite of the cost and access

issues, to overcome the problem of heterogeneous systems.  Beyond these

issues, use of the Internet would require attention to a variety of adminis-
trative and technological challenges.One challenge is rapid change in both health care models and tech-nology.  Modes of health care delivery and payment are in flux, and

provider plans are becoming more integrated and national in scope.  This

is not currently a problem for ECU because it serves only North Carolina,
so it is able to use physiciansÕ assistants on the remote end and a physi-
cian on the central end.  But working across state lines would require a

physician on each end and perhaps some type of cross-licensing arrange-
ment.  Meanwhile, as noted earlier, rapid changes in technology have left

ECU with a system that is cobbled together rather than designed for
optimum overall functioning.A variety of standards and quality control measures would have to beinstituted.  A technical service broker would need to document the ses-

sions, keep records, and keep track of the time.  For the system to be

efficient, participants would need to use standard history-taking proce-
dures, standard clinical protocols, and standard tools for teleconsultation.
Triage and quality control would be needed on the store-and-forward
systems.  A certification system would also have to be created for consult-

ants, presenters, and, perhaps, for overall telemedicine programs.Security also would need to be improved.  Security is an issue for
both data transmission and medical records, which must be kept secure
from unauthorized viewers, including technicians and hospital employ-
ees.  Currently, ECU faxes medical records and uses Proshare, which

provides encrypted mail, for the store-and-forward system.  Each mes-
TABLE A.3  Bandwidth Required for Different Types of Telemedicine
ApplicationsTelemedicine ApplicationNeeded Bandwidth
High resolution, no motionStore and forward
Medium resolution, low motion128 kbps
Medium resolution, high motion384 kbps
SOURCE:  David Balch, director of Telemedicine at ECU, site visit by committee on Febru-

ary 2, 1999.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A293sage is checked to be certain that all the parts are there, but this model willnot scale up.  The NCREN fiber network cannot be used for telemedicine
because it passes through the telephone company, creating too many
security issues.Quality of service (QOS) is not an issue for ECU today because theprogram uses leased lines; service-level agreements (pacts between ISPs
and users on minimum bandwidth, maximum latency, etc.) to provide
equivalent QOS would be needed if the Internet were used.UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA, CHAPEL HILLThe site visit to the University of North Carolina (UNC) in ChapelHill on February 3, 1999, featured two main activities:  a visit to the

computer graphics laboratory for demonstrations of telepresence systems
with potential applications to medicine and a meeting to discuss Internet-
based education programs in the School of Medicine.UNCÕs Computer Graphics LabGuided by Henry Fuchs, the committee saw four demonstrations ofcomputer graphics and virtual reality systems with potential applications
to medicine:  the Telepresent Office, augmented-reality ultrasound, wide-

area tracking/walking, and image-based rendering/depth extraction.  All

of these systems attempt to convey telepresence.Telepresent Office/Office of the FutureThe Office of the Future is an attempt to create an immersive environ-ment that enhances the sense of participation in teleconferences by using
multiple cameras and multichannel audio.  The remote participant sits at

a corner desk, and a 270-degree image of the central conference facility (or
operating room) is projected on the walls of the room.  Real-time video

and audio are transmitted to the remote location.  The setup requires

about a dozen live video streams, which require substantial bandwidth
(although bandwidth demands might be reduced).  Persons at the central

location see the remote participant on a video monitor and receive an
audio feed.Much attention has been focused on image registration by camerasand projectors and on the mapping of images onto room geometries that
differ between sending and receiving locations.  Flight simulator data

show that occlusions and breaks must be kept at 50 msec to avoid interfer-
ing with a personÕs conscious attention to the task (100-msec breaks createa distraction).  The 50-msec figure is used as a point of reference in build-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294APPENDIX Aing smoothness into the collaborative environment.  The system has been
used with multiple IP video streams over the vBNS.  Empirical observa-

tions suggest that it does not work very well in spite of apparently adequate
bandwidth; there is not much emphasis, at present, on the efficient net-
work transport of video and audio.Latency and time-stamping of different video streams are important,especially during the current transition from a two-dimensional to a three-
dimensional system.  A true sense of presence can be provided only if

there is no latency.  The system needs to factor in the distance between

viewer and viewed and provide a 360-degree view without breaks.  In the

demonstration, two or three cameras were added to compensate for dis-
tance, and two or three more to ensure a 360-degree view.  Then, all the

video streams need to be delivered together and reconstructed into a
seamless image.  Perfect time-stamping, down to microseconds, is needed

for reconstruction.  The time stamp could be a property of either the

network or the packet.  There are problems with either approach:  a time

stamp in the packet helps with synchronization, for example, but it cre-
ates a latency problem.Augmented-Reality Ultrasound VisualizationThe augmented-reality ultrasound system consists of a head-mounteddisplay that provides an ÒX-ray visionÓ view of a surgical patient
Õs abdo-men.  The user can visualize hidden structures reconstructed from CT

images and/or an ultrasound probe.  The system is able to convert

sequential two-dimensional ultrasound into three-dimensional objects
within the abdominal cavity.  It was developed in collaboration with a

local UNC surgeon who specializes in minimally invasive procedures.  It
is not envisioned as a network application.Wide-Area TrackingThe wide-area tracking system uses a three-dimensional helmet dis-play of a virtual architectural space.  Guided by position sensors in the

helmet, the system renders appropriate changes in perspective as the
person wearing the headgear walks through a room.  It is supplemented

by tactile feedback from Styrofoam objects that correspond to three-
dimensional images.  The system is tied to high-speed position detection

and three-dimensional rendering of local objects, but it could be con-
verted to a network application.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A295Image-Based Rendering/Depth ExtractionThe image-based rendering/depth extraction technology is a three-dimensional modeling system in which architectural surfaces are scanned
by a laser to acquire depth information, upon which surface information
from two-dimensional images is mapped.  The system produces photo-

realistic rendering on a computer display (requiring tens of millions of
image primitives per second) with interactive joystick control.  Users can

move around the scene.  It runs on a pixel planes computer and is bound
to a central processing unit and local memory.  The system is not envi-

sioned as a network application.Educational TechnologiesJohn Loonsk, head of information systems for the School of Medicineand the Division of Medical Informatics in the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, discussed the UNC approach to technology-based curricu-
lum support.  The goal is to create an Internet-based learning environ-

ment for medical education for both resident and nonresident students.
The system incorporates standard off-the-shelf software and a browser-
based interface.  It uses flat HTML for all pages, with URL interlinking for

navigation.  A staff of 45 handles all of the work; few faculty members are

involved directly in creating materials.All medical students are required to purchase a specific laptop com-puter, which has standard software and preconfigured ISP accounts for
remote access.  The staff transfers course notes from the live network

environment so that students can download the previous, current, and
following weekÕs syllabus materials and use them off-network.  A recent
study of system use found that 136,000 pages were retrieved and videos
were played  4,300 times in a month (Box A.1).  Students also are required

to take a medical informatics course delivered online.  Before each class

session, the students receive an e-mail message with HTML links to basic
materials for that topic. Then a lab session is held in the five rooms in
which student carrels are located; each student has a carrel with network
access and power.The preclinical version of the educational system has five compo-nents.  One is reference materials based on the university
Õs UNCLE sys-tem, which includes links to (1) MEDLINE; (2) products from Ovid Tech-
nologies that contain links to 60 full-text journals and textbooks; and

(3)some UNC-specific links to content.  A selection/editorial committee,

with members from various UNC schools and run by the library, chooses
and deselects materials.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296APPENDIX ABOX A.1Use of UNCÕs Web-based Educational SuiteStudent use of the University of North Carolina (UNC) Web-based educationalenvironment is very good and growing, according to data for September 1998.Usage increased substantially over the previous year, as first-year students ap-
peared to use electronic resources much more often than any previous class.Actual use is undoubtedly even higher than the figures suggest because UNCenables students to download the most frequently used material (e.g., histology
images, anatomy images, weekly syllabi), and downloaded material is not tracked.The September 1998 data are as follows:¥Roughly 136,000 electronic syllabus pages were retrieved (if typical Web
hits were counted, then this figure would be about five times higher).¥Computer-assisted instruction (CAI) and reference programs (separate from
UNCLE) launched from the Web were run 6,000 times.¥Digital videos and audio files were run 4,300 times.
¥1,300 searches were conducted.

¥UNCLE sessions numbered 33,400 (each session represents multiple
pages).The users were varied.  For electronic Web pages, 74 percent of retrievals
were from student laptops and the remainder were from ÒpublicÓ student worksta-tions and faculty/staff machines.  Almost all of the videos were run from student
laptops.  For CAI and reference programs, about 35 percent of access was from
student laptops and the remainder was from public or faculty/staff machines.SOURCE:  John Loonsk, University of North Carolina, site visit by committee on
February 3, 1999.A second component is teaching materials, beginning with the sylla-bus, which is distributed to students in both an online and a printed
version.  Traditional instructional materials (e.g., lecture notes and slide

images) are captured and integrated with common sources of published
information to support reference/retrieval and problem solving.  Search

engines allow students to find material easily.  Typically, course materials

are provided two weeks in advance and left on the system until updated
or replaced.  Because the full 2 years of the preclinical syllabus are online,

the School of Medicine has abandoned its curriculum management data-
base; faculty members simply search the syllabus using keywords.The third component is an image repositoryÑa collection of medicalimages with some text descriptors and titles.  Staff are trying to convert

these into flat HTML format.  A directory structure exists, but there is no
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A297database structure for generating dynamic HTML pages.  Staff are already
building an image database and case repository using a standard format;
they hope faculty will use the repositories to build instructional materials
with reusable components.  For legacy applications (PC-based, computer-

aided instruction materials), a launcher was built that can be reached
from the browser.The fourth component is a case repository, which contains specificproblems that provide an ÒevocativeÓ presentation of a particular case.
Different classes may use the same cases.  Most cases are text-based; there

are no simulations yet.The fifth component is communications technology, consisting of astandard e-mail client.  Dr. Loonsk wants to make more use of e-mail with

embedded HTML and store-and-forward capabilities.  There was an

unsuccessful attempt to provide threaded discussion lists; the students
complained of too many distracting messages.The clinical learning environment was developed for third-year stu-dents.  It contains quick references on UNCLE as well as access to full-text

articles; clinical support tools so that students can document patient
encounters (e.g., problem lists); and learning frames, which provide back-
ground and instruction on particular clinical problems.  A learning frame

is developed for each topic on a problem list that students use as they
complete clerkships.  The frame keep the basic didactic information up to

date and also includes canned searches against basic references and a
number of other custom views of the curriculum resources.  Access to the

clinical database, a noncommercial application, is provided to both local
and remote students.There are several constraints on the system.  One is bandwidth
Ñtheso-called last mile connectivity to studentsÕ homes.  There is no digital
subscriber line (a digital telecommunications protocol for sending data at
high rates over copper telephone lines) or cable modem access in the area,
and there are many different phone companies.  If bandwidth were much

higher and universally available, then UNC would use teleconferencing
for student mentoring activities in which students start as a group on
campus and then disperse to community sites.  Another constraint is

security, especially for clinical data.  The hospital uses audit trails to deter

improper access to medical records.  A related problem is the absence of

unique and secure IDs for user authentication.  On the other hand, the use

of IP authentication by vendor products limits off-campus access to some
reference materials, a growing problem because 50 percent of a studentÕsclinical time is spent outside the hospital.Other constraints include the demands of managing virtual privatenetwork (VPN) and extranet services; administrative structures are needed
to establish VPNs among sites and to distribute and revoke encryptionNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298APPENDIX Akeys as needed.  There is also inadequate QOS to enable the provision of
video and public-network-based telemedicine to academic health educa-
tion centers.  Users cannot be assured of getting the requisite 128 kbps or

more consistently across the Internet without some sort of service-level
agreement.  There is also a need for higher level standards (e.g., XML) to

supplement URLs.  Finally, there is some faculty inertia in moving toward

the use of new communications methods (e.g., newsgroups, listservs).UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTONThe visit to the University of Washington (UW) on February 10, 1999,consisted of a series of briefings on, and demonstrations of, a range of
projects related to medical informatics and human-computer interfaces, a
key factor in making the NGI more accessible to health care.  Since the

1970s, UW has engaged in a series of computing, informatics, and Internet
technology projects that have built upon one another.  The site visit team

heard about many of these projects as well as about changes in the Pacific
Northwest brought about by information technology.Computing Activities at the University of Washingtonand in the Seattle AreaEd Lazowska, chair of UWÕs Computer Science Department and amember of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, pro-
vided an overview of computing and Internet-related activities at UW
and in the Seattle area generally.Over the past few decades, Seattle has been transformed from alumber town into a community dominated by Boeing Corporation and
then into a much more diversified city.  The UW Medical Center has

played a key role in that transformation, helping to spur the development
of the local biomedical electronics, biotechnology, and software indus-
tries.  Washington State now has the largest concentration of high-tech

employees in the nation (i.e., workers employed in companies with higher

than average levels of research and development).  Although the aero-

space industry has leveled off in both dollar and employment terms, other
high-tech areas are growing quickly.A recent survey by the Washington Software Alliance found that soft-ware is a $20 billion industry in the state, with 2,500 firms employing
47,000 permanent workers.  Employment has grown by a factor of four

over the last decade, and the software industry has an employment mul-
tiplier of 5.5 (meaning that each software job creates 5.5 additional jobs in
other sectors), which is twice as high as that of the technology sector as a
whole.  The average annual wage in Washington
Õs packaged-softwareNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A299industry in 1997 was $198,000 (salary plus exercised options), not includ-ing the pay of 640 company officers.  The average salary before options

was $67,000.  The software industry has 7,300 current vacancies and

anticipates 64,000 new hires over the next 3 years.  If these jobs can be

filled, then the industry will generate an additional $12.8 billion in rev-
enues over the 3-year period.  Seventy percent of these jobs require a

bachelorÕs degree or higher.  These data have implications for local uni-
versities; namely, they find it difficult to recruit top people for academic
jobs, and there is limited practical value in 2-year academic programs,
whose graduates fail to meet the employment criteria of much of local
industry.The ARPANET was brought to the Pacific Northwest in 1979 by theUW Computer Science Department.  The NWNet (part of the NSFNet)

later formed around UW.  As of August 1997, the vBNS was not designed

to extend to the Pacific Northwest, even though there were somewhat
redundant points of presence (POPs) in regions with supercomputer cen-
ters.  (A POP is a dial-in site where a backbone network connects to access

networks and where Internet service providers house switching hard-
ware and transmission equipment.)  Now, the region has a vBNS connec-

tion to Denver and San Francisco.  Plans call for the development of

regional collaborations, which are key to developing regional expertise
and will allow for regional peering and traffic aggregation through a
single point of connectivity.  UW was one of the four original sites for

Abilene and worked with Qwest, which is laying the fiber for Abilene as
it lays its own national network, to get hooked up early, so the university
now has a 2.5 Gbps fiber-optic connection.  The Pacific Northwest

gigaPOP, which includes Abilene and vBNS, is operated by UW, which
received money from the state legislature for equipment.  (A gigaPOP is a

point of presence for accessing high-speed networks, sometimes called
gigabit networks.)A 10 Gbps link connects UW to the Westin Building, where thegigaPOP is located, in downtown Seattle.  UW is working with Microsoft
and U.S. West on a regional bandwidth experimentation program.  UW

also has requested National Science Foundation (NSF) funds for connec-
tions to regional universities, including Oregon Health Sciences and Oregon
State.  The remaining challenge is to convince agencies other than the NSF

to connect to the gigaPOP.  Private networks (such as those run by the

departments of Defense and Energy and NASA) tend to serve the same
geographic areas, often missing the Pacific Northwest.  If agencies carried

each otherÕs traffic, then aggregate demand could be considered in deter-mining the need for network/POP connections.  However, shared net-

works might pose availability and security problems.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300APPENDIX AInformatics and Internet-related ActivitiesBrent Stewart provided a brief overview of the School of MedicineÕsinformatics and Internet-related activities.  A number of early projects

were not discussed in detail during the site visit.  For instance, UW was

one of the first sites in the Integrated Advanced Information Management
Systems program of the National Library of Medicine (NLM).  It also

participated in the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite pro-
gram, a NASA effort that started in 1972 with a satellite providing a
connection to Alaska.  A project on ultrasound telemedicine, sponsored

by the Defense Advanced Research Projects AgencyÕs TechnologyReinvestment Program, was designed to develop dual-use ultrasound
telemedicine technologies that could be used in ambulances in both battle-
field and civilian situations.Other efforts included the Bench-to-Bedside project, which extendedthe reach of the UW School of MedicineÕs Internet resources to commu-nity hospitals and libraries.  It encompassed research, deployment, and

testing activities.  Bench to Bedside and Beyond (B3):  Building and Testing

a Regional Telemedicine Testbed was sponsored by the NLM; it expanded
the original program to allow the sharing of clinical information among
participants in the Washington, Wyoming, Alaska, Montana, and Idaho
(WWAMI) Rural Telemedicine Network.  It includes a secure Web inter-

face to medical records, secure clinical e-mail, and access to medical
library resources.Projects that were discussed in some detail at the site visit are summa-rized in the following subsections.  They include the distributed radiol-

ogy oncology network, the MINDSCAPE interface to a clinical data re-
pository,  the WWAMI network, medical projects at the Human Interface
Technology laboratory, the gigaPOP, NGI projects, Biomedical Library
programs, and the Digital Anatomist electronic repository of anatomical
images and teaching programs.Distributed Radiation Oncology NetworkIra Kalet, of the Radiation Oncology Division, discussed radiationplanning software that he helped develop.  It uses a client-server architec-

ture to enable collaborative planning of radiation treatments by physicians
in different locations.  The software creates detailed three-dimensional

visualizations of cancerous regions of the body by building up sequences
of two-dimensional CT images.  The images can then be sent across the

network to be viewed and manipulated by the collaborating physicians.
Radiation oncologists can use the system to identify tumors and plan
treatments in collaboration with dosimetrists.  The collaborators can view
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A301various radiation portals and beam trajectories to aid in planning treat-ments; the software synchronizes the images shown on each userÕs screen.Such collaboration formerly was possible only by faxing images to and
from collaborating physicians.  In its current configuration, the system

allows sharing of images across a LAN.  In the future, it will allow true

remote collaboration.System development poses a number of technical challenges.  The
difficult programming task, carried out in collaboration with the Com-
puter Science Department, resulted in several papers published in com-
puter science journals.  Latency is a significant concern, as it currently

ranges from 1 to 2 seconds and could increase across a wider area net-
work.  Obtaining funding for continuing research on such projects is dif-

ficult.  While health organizations such as the National Cancer Institute

understand the need for research on ways to calculate radiation doses, for
example, they generally fail to see why they should fund research on
collaboration software or new software design tools, according to
Dr.Kalet.  Industry resists supporting work like this, too, viewing it is as

too risky and as taking too long to produce results that can be com-
mercialized.MINDSCAPETom Martin, director of systems development for UW Medical CenterInformation Systems, demonstrated MINDSCAPE, a Web-based interface
for viewing a clinical data repository.  MINDSCAPE is based on the Medi-

cal Information Networked Database (MIND) data repository developed
at the medical center between 1991 and 1994.  The system contains about

60 gigabytes of data, including clinical data (e.g., electronic medical
records), and offers links to library reference materials (e.g., drug data-
bases, MEDLINE, laboratory tests reference data, and clinical guidelines)
as well as other decision support tools.   MINDSCAPE generates remind-
ers about exams that patients will need soon, lists of medications, and
dynamic reports for several measures, such as hemoglobin levels in
diabetic patients.  Other reports also can be generated on a clinic- or

provider-specific level.  For example, the system can generate informa-

tion about compliance rates of patients in a particular clinic or under a
particular physicianÕs care.  Users can pull up patient records so they cancall and remind them to come in for appointments.Terminals and/or computers with access to MINDSCAPE are locatedin all exam rooms at the medical center.  The system is also accessible

through dial-up modems.  Because it is primarily text-based, MINDSCAPE

does not currently generate unusual requirements for bandwidth; how-
ever, images are being added to records, and that will increase bandwidthNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302APPENDIX Arequirements.  MINDSCAPE uses commercially available Web-server
encryption technologies (128-bit SSL) and server authentication for secu-
rity, along with access controls.  Access to system information is granted

on a need-to-know basis, and overrides are in place to allow access in
emergencies.  All access can be audited to ensure compliance with confi-

dentiality policies.  The confidentiality and security policies are derived

from policies in place for paper records.  All physicians and other staff

members with access to the system must sign a confidentiality agreement
and complete training on confidentiality policies.WWAMI Rural Telemedicine NetworkUW serves as the tertiary care center for the five member states of theWWAMI (Washington, Wyoming, Alaska, Montana, Idaho) Regional
Medical Program and is the regional medical school for those states.
WWAMI links the UW School of Medicine, the UW Medical Center, the
Harborview Medical Center, and the ChildrenÕs Hospital sites and clini-cal teaching sites throughout WWAMI.  The participating states
Ñwhichtogether cover about one-fourth of the U.S. land mass but have sparse
populationsÑcreated an affiliated education and care program.  Students
complete their first year of medical school in their home states and then
come to Washington for their second year.  The third year is decentralized

rotations; about half of these students go out into the field.  The residency

program places students in member states.WWAMI has undertaken many telemedicine activities since the 1970s,especially to Alaska, to support its education programs.  Funds from the

Rural Health Policy Agency allowed the consortium to set up six tele-
medicine consultation sites in small communities.  The local primary care

physicians are also preceptors for medical students, and an average of
one or two consultations, mainly specialty consultations, are held at each
remote site every month.  Psychiatry, cardiology, and dermatology are

the most common telemedicine specialties, although there is some use of
the system with peripheral instruments and for trauma consults.
Telemedicine has not worked for rheumatology.  The network also is

used as an administrative link among the UW sites.The system uses a frame-relay setup with 56-kb switched lines to therural sites, which lack either the capacity or funding to get digital lines.
Communications are imperfect at this speed and produce  video artifacts,

for example.  The local Seattle locations have T1 linkages.  For tele-

dermatology, the participants use store-and-forward capabilities; other
consultations are synchronous.  The telephone lines cost, on average,

$3,000 to $5,000 monthly, which could not be covered without grant

money. The system uses PictureTel equipment.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A303The local physicians are satisfied with the program; they use the
libraryÕs resources and learn to like the Internet.  But several issues must
be resolved before the telemedicine program can be expanded.  First, the

program crosses state lines and requires licensed physicians at either end,
so beginning students cannot present patients.  When students do clinical

rotations in rural areas (as half of the students must do), they must get
licensed in both statesÑunless they are participating in telemedicine pro-grams operated by the federal government (such as the Veterans Admin-
istration), which are exempt from state licensure requirements.  Second,

insurance is an issue; some patients will not use this medium for consul-
tations because their insurance will not cover it.  Third, telemedicine can

affect local referral patterns.  Finally, reimbursement is a major problem.

Consulting doctors are currently paid from the grant money.  The HCFA

and the Rural Health Policy Agency support only 80 percent of a normal
payment, and the doctor has to split the fee with the referrer.  Montana

approved telemedicine for Medicaid because it saves money normally
spent on patient travel.Medical Projects at the Human-Interface Technology LabThe Human-Interface Technology (HIT) laboratory is a research unitin the UW College of Engineering.  It has a roster of 108 people; 18 are

regular staff members and the rest are made up of faculty associates,
visiting scholars, graduate students, and so on.  The income of the labora-

tory is about $17 million, two-thirds of which comes from grants and
contracts.  Forty companies participate as members of the Virtual Worlds

Consortium, providing a little less than one-sixth of the revenue.  Spin-

offs from the laboratory include 13 different companies; 10 of these are
still active, including 3 created recently.Suzanne Weghorst, assistant director, introduced the HIT laboratory,which has a goal of developing and demonstrating mission-transferable
technology.  Tom Furness, the director, elaborated on the laboratory
Õshistory.  He worked for many years at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base,

designing human-machine interfaces in airplane cockpits.  He came to

Seattle in 1989 to found the laboratory, by which he hoped to extend the
scope of his work, with the general goal of providing better coupling of
humans to advanced machines.Furness emphasized his view of the future as technology that simu-lates Òbeing there,Ó improving humans
Õ ability to transport themselves by
moving their eyes to different places and times.  Such experiences range

from teleconferencing to ÒtransportÓ through an endoscope to view hid-
den portions of the body.  For instance, a videotape made 5 years ago

showed an interactive teleconference in which participants in the UnitedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304APPENDIX AStates and Japan wore virtual reality (VR) helmets and cooperated in thetask of herding virtual creatures across a conference table with paddles.
The telecommunications link consisted of four ISDN lines.  The images

displayed were somewhat flat and cartoonish, but the interaction was
successful.The committee was shown three active laboratory efforts.  In the vir-
tual operating room, the participant wears a VR helmet and holds a con-
trol stick.  The helmet
Õs location and orientation are sensed by a devicemounted on a fixed stand over the space, and this information is used to
drive the displays to the video helmet (much in the manner of current VR
games).  The environment is based on photographs and equipment from

Harborview Medical Center.  There is a patient on an operating table; by

using the control stick, the participant can manipulate displays, such as
the electrocardiogram output, and instruments, such an endoscope inserted
in the patientÕs lower abdomen.  The displays can be controlled so that
they are visible regardless of the participantÕs perspective, or they can befixed at various positions in the virtual room.  There were some noticeable

lags in the following speed of the display if the participant turned quickly,
and the overall precision of the location sensors appeared to be on the
order of inches rather than millimeters.The second active effort involved simulation of surgical suturingthrough a computer-controlled force-feedback device.  The user interacts

with the environment through a pair of scissors holding a virtual needle.
A standard video monitor displays the position of the needle relative to a
wound in a small area of skin.  A finite-element model of the skinÑit hasabout 200 nodes, with a relatively higher concentration of nodes near the
woundÑsimulates the restoring force of the skin against the needle andcontrols the force feedback.  If the user inserts the virtual needle into the

skin orthogonally to the skin surface, for example, then little force is felt,
but if he or she holds it at an oblique angle, then considerable force is
needed to pierce the skin.  The force-feedback device requires updates

about 1,000 times per second; the visual display runs at a standard 30-
cycles-per-second refresh rate.The third effort is the Virtual Retinal Display.  The idea is to paint animage directly on the retina with photons instead of projecting the dis-
play elsewhere and requiring the person to follow it visually.  The image

appears only on the participantÕs retina.  The lab bench setup included
low-power red, green, and blue laser light sources fed through an optical
fiber, with the fiberÕs output scanned mechanically over the retina by amoving mirror.  Although the lab setup seemed cumbersome, a company

called Microvision was spun off in 1993 to commercialize this technology
and evidently has had some success in reducing it to a practical size and
weight for portable use.  Because the image can be focused so that it
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A305passes through only a small part of the userÕs cornea and can potentiallybe focused on a specific part of the retina, the technology holds promise
for assisting persons with impaired vision and providing bright, high-
precision displays for VR applications.  A number of surprising results

have been found in experimental use.  For instance, users do not perceive

flicker in the static images even at relatively low refresh rates (e.g., 15
frames per second), meaning that the system offers twice the resolution of
other displays at the same bandwidth.Seattle/Pacific Northwest GigaPOPJim Corbato discussed the evolution, current architecture, and ex-pected future evolution of high-bandwidth IP network infrastructures for
UW and its Seattle-area health care partners, which include the Harbor-
view Medical Center, ChildrenÕs Hospital, and the Fred Hutchinson Can-cer Research Center.  Network interconnections in Seattle are simplified

by the physical proximity of data networks from various interexchange
carriers (e.g., Qwest and US West) and ISPs at the gigaPOP facility in
downtown Seattle.  The network connections have relatively poor site

security (because they are in a general-use office building) and present a
potential single-point-of-failure for Internet access for the entire Pacific
Northwest.Next Generation Internet ProjectsUW received a phase 1 award from the NLM to examine biomedicalapplications that would benefit from the NGI and has since received a
phase 2 award from NLM to further this work. This project is titled
Patient-Centric Tools for Regional Collaborative Cancer Care Using the
NGI.  Brent Stewart outlined the project, in which a high-performance

metropolitan area network is being designed to transmit clinical data,
including radiology images (with a capacity to deliver eight simultaneous
10-MB image sets simultaneously, using a 622-Mb channel), to a planned
cancer care facility on the south shore of Lake Union.  The center is sched-

uled to be completed within a year.  The bandwidth requirement is based

on fully digital radiology, with interpretation of images by radiologists at
UW and a digital archive at UW rather than at the clinic site.The development of this center is based on three hypotheses:  that
health care is becoming highly distributed and differentiated; that health
care is operating in a resource-limited environment; and that the NGI will
enable more collaborative practice, regardless of where patients are
located at a given time.  The NGI will enable the formation of the cancer

care alliance; facilitate teaching and research; enable a fully integratedNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306APPENDIX Ateam approach to diagnosis, treatment, and management of cases; andaccelerate the discovery and dissemination of knowledge.The underlying technology will consist of the local gigaPOP as wellas a virtual, enterprise-wide multimedia electronic medical record based
on MINDSCAPE.  There will be a backup line in place, perhaps a leased

DS-3 line.  The system will transmit real-time video (e.g., ultrasound,

fluoroscope, and synchronous telemedicine consultations), store-and-
forward video, and interactive radiation oncology treatment planning
(e.g., graphics, images, and video).  Additional multimedia knowledge

resources, such as the Digital Anatomist and streaming video for patient
education, also will be available.Technical requirements are based largely on the needs of remoteradiological image archiving and display.  To allow the simultaneous

downloading of eight different 10-MB images within one second, the sys-
tem needs bandwidth of 640 Mbps.  The UW and Harborview radiology

departments are all digital now, but they use computed radiography (in
which an imaging plate is scanned by a laser) rather than flat-panel digital.
The centers will become fully digitized once the technology comes down
in price.  Stewart envisions that a radiologist covering at a remote site

might use the system to perform work that he or she would have done at
the home site, downloading images remotely.There are no formal plans for evaluating the technical infrastructure.Because the Internet today provides no QOS, UW will put in place as
much bandwidth as possible and use whatever service level results.  Dr.

Stewart viewed medicineÕs demand for bandwidth as similar to that ofother industries; he compared multisite telemedical collaboration to auto-
mobile companies linking together their remote research and develop-
ment sites.Biomedical Library ServicesThe UW Health Sciences Library is moving all of its services to Web-based delivery (see <healthlinks.washington.edu>).  Geographic issues

related to supporting the WWAMI program (i.e., mountains, small towns,
long distances between towns) make this transformation necessary.  In

addition to the WWAMI medical education program, the pharmacy, nurs-
ing, public health, and social work programs have distance education
programs.  Faculty want to deliver digital video to their WWAMI-based

students and provide them with access to course materials and the clini-
cal digital library resources.  This program will require high bandwidth

and many servers.  At present, the schools use scanned PDF format to

deliver interlibrary loan and course materials (e.g., course notes andNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A307reserve materials) to distant students.  The documents are an estimated
300 kb in size each.The Health Sciences Libraries offers over 1,400 full-text online elec-tronic journals to UW faculty, staff, and students.  A major issue is com-

pliance with licensing agreements.  UW librarians negotiate aggressively

for licenses allowing digital materials to be available to faculty, staff, and
students at any location.  They control access with user IDs and passwords

and UW IDs and are increasingly making materials available through a
proxy server.  Access is also a problem, because not all materials are

locally loaded, and network latency for materials stored at remote sites
(NLM, journal publishers, etc.) is an issue.  The plan is to support nomadic

computing because students, faculty, and residents move around con-
stantly.  Network latency is a serious problem for accessing remotely

stored full-text journals and other resources.UW was part of the NLM test on access time for PubMed over theInternet that was published recently in the Journal of the American MedicalInformatics Association.  NLM has tried to track the latency problem and
3 years ago performed a minor test for the Utah link for the online jour-
nals (because it intended to provide all resources remotely).  Users see

real degradation of performance from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Pacific Standard
Time, but that latency is due in part to issues within the UW network (in
other words, the latency formerly observed in NLMÕs MEDLINE for thattime period now is observed on the Internet.)  However, the latency de-

pends on the connection.  UW is upgrading the network to 10 Mbps

Ethernet (10Base-T) to improve throughput; moving to 100 Mbps Ethernet
(100Base-T) on every public library machine is a much more costly ven-
ture (about $400 per station).  The UW Health Sciences Library has many
public stations, including about 150 in the microcomputer lab it manages
for the Health Sciences Center and over 100 public workstations in the
three Health Sciences Library sites.  Remote users may have trouble with
commercial connections to library online resources (e.g., through MSN or
AOL), which can impose latency problems during certain time periods.Digital AnatomistThe Digital Anatomist is an NLM-sponsored project to develop anelectronic repository of anatomical images.  Anatomy is, of course, funda-

mental to health sciences education, and it provides a framework for
organizing other biomedical information.  Jim Brinkley presented the

work of the UW Structural Informatics Group.  The group works in three
areas:  representations of structural anatomical information, from the level

of individual cells to gross anatomy;  methods for accessing and using

structural information; and practical applications of their tools forNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308APPENDIX Aresearch, education, and clinical work.  It tries to exploit opportunities for
online systems dealing with anatomical information.  The key data struc-
ture for its work is an ontology of anatomy, developed by Cornelius
Rosse, that serves as a common data structure for most of the applica-
tions.  They call this the foundational model of anatomy.
The system demonstrated for the committee provides authoring toolsusing both symbolic information (e.g., names, semantics, structures) and
spatial images (typically three-dimensional images) of anatomical struc-
tures.  It consists of a symbolic information database and a separate three-

dimensional image database accessed through a single server.  A number

of intelligent agents have been developed to assist in retrieving and
assembling data sets and images.  The agents have knowledge of both the

information available on the system and the userÕs level of sophistication.In response to the command ÒShow me the structures of the left lung,Ó for
example, the system will check the symbolic database to find out what
structures are in the left lung, then go to the image database to determine
what images are available, and then use a scene-generator to assemble the
pieces properly.  The user then can highlight particular elements of inter-

est, rotate or zoom in on the image, and remove objects that block the
view of other objects of interest.  All processing is done on the server.
On the authoring side, the system contains a knowledge-builder foradding information to the symbolic database.  It is a relational database

containing 25,000 terms describing all structures with dimensions of 1mm

or greater in a particular set of organisms, including humans.  For the

spatial database, the system can create volumetric, three-dimensional
models of anatomical structures from two-dimensional images.  It also

can create and perform animations.  A brain image demonstrated for the

committee superimposed vascular structures onto the brain and contained
some 100,000 polygons.  Images can be annotated for clinical and educa-

tional purposes.On the user side, the system contains an annotated image server.Users can call up images and click on individual structures within the
image.  The system outlines the selected structure and generates its name.

This system is used in anatomy education, but the images are so large and
the networks so slow that students tend to use a CD-ROM rather than
access the database through either campus or remote networks.  The

systemÕs quiz mode can test studentsÕ knowledge of anatomy.  A tutorial
system can embed images from the atlas into other documents.  The Digi-

tal Anatomist and interactive atlas get an estimated 10,000 hits per day.In a separate effort called the Brain Project, a digital neuroscientistsystem is being built that will overlay neurological images on images of
the brain.  The system will allow cutaways of volume-rendered images.

These data are collected operatively by neurosurgeons who do real-timeNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A309stimulation and mapping of critical regions for various neurological func-tions, such as speech.  NGI technology could streamline this process by

enabling real-time superposition of neurological data on an open brain;
the system then could sense the surgeonÕs probes and automatically main-tain information about the location of the probe and the result.  This

would require capabilities similar to telesurgery, but the system would
also be linked to databases for documentation and postmortem analysis.The NGI offers several other opportunities for applying this technol-ogy.  One is anatomical education, in the form of virtual dissections and

intelligent scene generation.  Another opportunity is brain mapping for

either research (e.g., language mapping to identify correlations between
brain structures and language skills/development) or clinical purposes,
such as surgical planning.  The technology also could provide structure-

based visual access to biomedical information.  Indeed, some have sug-

gested that the ideal user interface to biomedical information resources is
a model of human structure, which can serve as the organizing principle
for this information.REGENCE BLUESHIELDThe visit to the corporate offices of Regence BlueShield, the largesthealth care insurer in the Pacific Northwest with annual revenues of

approximately $2 billion, took place on February 11, 1999.  The committee

heard presentations on Internet-related activities within Regence as well
as related activities in the Seattle area.  The related activities include pro-

grams operated by the Foundation for Health Care Quality (FHCQ); the
Washington State Department of Public Health; and the Community
Health Information Technology Alliance (CHITA), working with a group
called Agora.Regence Web-based ServicesSteve Moe, manager of electronic business practices for the RegenceGroup, presented a Web-based interface application called Network Data
Express (NDEX) for determining beneficiary eligibility and making refer-
rals.  The Web-based system offers claim status inquiries, provider direc-
tories, reference materials (such as the formulary), e-mail, and managed
care data and reports.  It processes about 20,000 transactions per month

(peak times are early in the day and during lunch), doing the work of two
or three full-time employees who otherwise would give the same infor-
mation out by phone (Regence processes millions of claims a month).
Regence has deployed 1,500 workstations (including 800 intranet and 700
dial-up systems linked to a private Web server), of which about 30 per-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.310APPENDIX Acent are in use on a regular basis.  All users are assigned an ID and
password and sign a confidentiality agreement.  Patient and customer

information is indexed by social security number.Kirk Bailey, manager of security policy, stated unequivocally that theInternet is considered unsafe and will not be used for RegenceÕs electroniccommerce (e-commerce) transactions until it has sufficient security mea-
sures and functionality to meet the companyÕs business requirements.The Internet raises concerns about security, privacy, and reliability.  Other

factors that have slowed the adoption and use of NDEX are a lack of
content sponsors, especially among payers; the lack of Web browsers in
many provider offices (they will get browsers during their next hardware
upgrades, but Regence does not fund such upgrades); and user behavior
(e.g., administrative workers are accustomed to using the phone instead
of the computer to get information).Foundation for Health Care QualityRick Rubin, president of the FHCQ, gave an overview of the founda-tion, a not-for-profit entity created in 1988 to meet the shared health infor-
mation needs of the Seattle region.  The foundation serves as a neutral

meeting ground for providers, payers, plan purchasers, consumers, and
others involved in health care.  It participates in or sponsors programs in

three areas.  One area is e-commerce pilot projects, including a multistate

effort funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to define eligibil-
ity and referrals, and CHITA, described in further detail below.  The

second area is performance measurements for health plans and provid-
ers, and the third is consumer affairs.The FHCQ, which views itself as an economic development agencyfor the region, has learned a number of lessons about operating in the
highly competitive health care marketplace.  These lessons emphasize the

importance of (1) enabling instead of mandating standards, because man-
dates may change willingness but do not affect capabilities; (2) making a
business case that differentiates needs (i.e., things that stakeholders are
willing to pay for) from wants (i.e., things they are not willing to pay for);
(3) the Internet, which is widely viewed in the region as a plausible means
of achieving long-held visions of seamless integration of information
across organizations and which allows organizations to assume that net-
working capabilities will be in place so they can concentrate on higher
order functionality; (4) information security and privacy, which can be
either a barrier or an enabler, depending upon the circumstance; (5) the
widespread sharing of expertise and information; (6) education as a means
of facilitating the migration of information technology into health care,
especially through efforts to reengineer the way organizations operate (aNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A311process that can be more important than the technology itself); (7) work-ing to refine national standards and develop implementation manuals;
and (8) balancing competition and cooperation (firms can cooperate on
some subsets of issues but not on others that are seen as having greater
proprietary value).Current or recent projects include an effort to standardize eligibilityinformation, for which there is agreement on data items but not on pre-
sentation.  Other regional projects are aimed at exchanging data on pedi-

atric immunizations, referrals, claims, and lab transactions.Community Health Information Technology Alliance Projectwith AgoraPeter B. Summerville, director of CHITA, and Kirk Bailey, manager ofsecurity policy for the Regence Group and founder of Agora, presented
an overview of the Three-State Model Security Prototype.  CHITA was

chartered in 1997 and has 60 member organizations, including providers,
payers, and state agencies.  It is part of the FHCQ but has a separate board

of directors.  Agora, a local group interested in computer security, has

about 450 members representing 120 Pacific Northwest region corpora-
tions.  It was formed by chief information officers and security officers

who became increasingly concerned about network vulnerabilities as their

companies began to move online.CHITAÕs early work focused on eligibility and referral transactionsÑnegotiating agreements on data fields and standards to facilitate the elec-
tronic interchange of information.  CHITA and the FHCQ worked with

organizations in Massachusetts and Minnesota on a three-state project
focusing on electronic security.  The goals were to determine how elec-

tronic security could be implemented affordably and to develop a business
case for a community-wide, secure infrastructure for electronic business.
The group worked with Science Applications International Corporation
(SAIC) to develop a security and risk management plan for business-to-
business health information networks.The plan identifies seven levels of increasing health care security.Together with Agora, CHITA is working to implement health security
level 6 (HSL 6) within participating organizations.  HSL 6 includes speci-

fications for three network-based information services:  authenticated,

secure messaging; authenticated, secure file escrow and transfer; and
authenticated, role-based access.  The security model has been developed

and published, and CHITA is in the process of identifying a bridge opera-
tor organization that will function as a trusted intermediary to oversee a
prototype implementation, followed by a wider pilot project in the region.
Issues to be addressed include the identification of a certificate authority,Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312APPENDIX Awhich might be a nonprofit organization, the government, or a privatecorporation such as Verisign.CHITA has no plans to attempt to change the Internet or its directionsbut rather will attempt to accommodate whatever weaknesses it exhibits
with respect to information security.  While asserting that businesses need

to move too quickly to wait for the NGI, Mr. Bailey wondered if it would
be possible to allocate part of the Internet 2 (perhaps one or two frequen-
cies) for health care.  He also would consider the formation of a separate

health information network as a means of avoiding some of the security
concerns associated with the Internet.According to him, security officers in health care have responsibilitiesthat differ from those of their counterparts in other industries.  The appli-

cable state and federal laws are different, the privacy and security con-
cerns are greater, and health care organizations must meet requirements
for successful electronic data interchange.  At the same time, the health

care industry is driven by economics, not privacy.Washington State Laboratory Reporting ProjectJac Davies, representing the Washington State Department of Health,described the Electronic Laboratory Reporting System (ELBRS) project,
which involves the electronic submission and tabulation of reportable
events within the state, of which there are fewer than 100,000 every year.
(Physicians and testing laboratories are required to report certain condi-
tions to their county health department.)Such reports generally are sent by regular mail, fax, or voice mail.Public health officials then are required to follow up with the doctor and
patient to further investigate possible causes, paths of contagion, and so
on.  Often, reports are sent to the wrong county and/or are not subse-

quently forwarded to the state.  Furthermore, different states and coun-

ties tend to have their own lists of reportable conditions, which are tied
closely to local concerns (the conditions vary, for example, between urban
and agricultural counties), and they have different rules for where to send
the information.  As laboratories (and health organizations generally)

consolidate into national entities, tracking different reporting require-
ments has become time-consuming.  SmithKline Beecham, for example,

operates a number of clinical laboratories and has three or four people
dedicated to tracking different reporting requirements.Under WashingtonÕs planned system, lab reports would be sentdirectly to the state rather than to local health departments.  The state

then would process the reports and forward information down to local
communities and up to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), as necessary.  Such centralization would allow the state to better
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A313track incidents across county lines.  Planners hope that the system will
encourage greater communication between the state and local commu-
nities or the CDC and that it will improve compliance with reporting
requirements.  Several issues have informed the planning for this pro-

posed system.  One is the use of the Internet, which is not only a logical

choice but also the only viable option.  Another issue is the sensitive

nature of the data; there is, for example, a state requirement for reporting
AIDS cases.  A third issue is privacy, which is a major concern of the

governor and residents of Washington.A pilot program is under way with Group Health of Puget Sound.Labs encrypt their test reports and send them to the state health
departmentÕs file transfer protocol server, which sits outside a firewall.State personnel move the file behind the firewall, check for errors, run it
through an HL-7 formatter, put the data on an SQL database server, and
send them to the county.  They use a public key cryptography system

(Pretty Good Privacy) described as minimal.  There is no formal program

in place for changing keys.  According to a preliminary evaluation, the

pilot program improved the completion and timeliness of reports.  The

time required to send information to the local health office improved
modestly (to less than 1 day) and the time required to send information to
the state improved by an average of 40 days (to about 1 day).NOTE1.Bernie H.K. Huang relocated to the Children
Õs Hospital of Los Angeles and the Uni-versity of Southern California as professor and director of Informatics effective January 1,
2000.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314APPENDIX BNational Library of Medicine Awards to
Demonstrate Health Applications of the
Next Generation InternetThe National Library of Medicine (NLM) announced a new, three-phase program in 1998 to develop innovative medical projects that dem-
onstrate the use of the capabilities of the Next Generation Internet (NGI),
such as improved quality of service, security, network management, and
support for nomadic computing.  Phase I awards were announced on

October 14, 1998, and included 24 contracts totaling $2.3 million that were
intended to improve understanding of ways the NGI can affect health
care, health education, and health research systems in such areas as cost,
quality, usability, efficacy, and security.  Phase II awards were announced

in late 1999 and consisted of 15 projects aimed at implementing capabili-
ties in local testbed settings.  Some of the Phase II awards build on projects

begun under Phase I of the program, while others build on work origi-
nally conducted under other research programs.  Summaries of each of

the Phase I and Phase II projects announced to date are provided below.
Additional information regarding these NGI awards and NLMÕs
telemedicine evaluation program is available on the NLM home page at
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov>.PHASE I AWARDS1.  Pathology Image Database System
Yale University is planning a pathology image database system, Path-master, accessible via the World Wide Web.  When a pathologist is con-
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B315fronted with a slide containing a cell whose nature is uncertain, a digitalimage of the cell can be submitted to Pathmaster, along with certain
clinical information about the specimen. Pathmaster will automatically
compute descriptors and pass back images to the user, along with their
cell types and diagnoses.Contact: Perry L. Miller, M.D., Ph.D.Yale School of Medicine
Center for Medical Informatics
333 Cedar Street
P.O. Box 208009
New Haven, CT 06520-8009
203-785-67532.  Networked 3D Virtual Human Anatomy
The goal is to build a virtual human cadaver based on the Visible Humandata set. An online virtual cadaver would be available to a wide range of
students who could explore the virtual cadaver with a variety of tools.
High-end applications will have a haptic interface.Contact: Victor M. Spitzer, Ph.D.University of Colorado Health Sciences Center
4200 East Ninth Avenue
Denver, CO 80262
303-274-05013.  Rural Health Science Education
This project will develop a plan to evaluate the use of computer andinteractive compressed video technologies to support rural health science
education. It will enable delivery of interactive educational programming,
such as grand rounds and continuing medical education, clinical informa-
tion systems, library services, and consultation. Beneficiaries will be stu-
dents, residents, and health care professionals.Contact: Dr. Leo Bairnsfather, Ph.D.Louisiana State University Medical Center
1501 Kings Highway
Shreveport, LA 71130-3932
318-675-6536
318-675-7757 faxNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316APPENDIX B4.  Biomedical Teleimmersion
By combining teleconferencing, telepresence, and virtual reality, tele-immersion enables teachers and students to interact with three-dimensional
models. Teleimmersion combines several virtual reality systems with
advanced network capabilities for learning especially in surgical educa-
tion. NGI guarantees data privacy and security and will allow tele-
immersive environments derived from models of patient data.Contact: Jonathan C. Silverstein, M.D.University of Illinois at Chicago
School of Biomedical and Health Information Services
1919 W. Taylor
Chicago, IL 60612-7249
312-996-5112
312-996-8342 fax5.  National Emergency Medicine Information Extranet
The National Emergency Information Infrastructure Consortium (EIIC)will create a plan for implementation of a secure National Emergency
Medicine Information Extranet to improve emergency care across the
nation. The primary application to be developed will enable interlinked
standards-based emergency encounter registries, then feed back to pro-
viders just-in-time multimedia educational and treatment protocol ser-
vices. The project will create an open architecture to enable other layered
applications in the future.Contact: Edward Barthell, M.D.Infinity Healthcare, Inc.
1251 Glen Oaks Lane
Mequon, WI 53092
414-290-6700
414-290-6781 fax6.  Personal Internetworked Notary and Guardian
The Personal Internetworked Notary and Guardian (PING) project is
designed to address the control of a personal record that can be integrated
with more traditional sources of clinical information for patient use in the
home, at work, and at school. In particular, PING is focused on (1) recon-
stitution of the patient longitudinal records from both provider-based
information systems and portable, personal record systems, on theNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B317Internet; (2) providing simple and secure authentication mechanisms; and
(3) evaluation of the impact of PING upon the process of health care.Contact: Isaac S. Kohane, M.D., Ph.D.Director, ChildrenÕs Hospital Informatics Program300 Longwood Ave.
Enders 150
Boston, MA 02115
617-355-7821
617-730-0456 fax7.  Implementation to Serve Visible Human Datasets
This project plans to implement an NGI production system to interactivelyserve Visible Human data sets and anatomical data evaluation software.
The image and knowledge data objects will be accessed by NGI-enabled
World Wide Web users and evaluators. The system will provide to the
user multi-resolution, anatomically labeled images within these Visible
Human data sets as requested.Contact: Brian D. Athey, Ph.D.The University of Michigan Medical School
4771 Medical Science Building II
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology
1335 Catherine St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0616
734-763-6150
734-763-1166 fax8.  G-CPR and the NGI
The Louisiana State University (LSU) Medical Center proposes to imple-ment a system of longitudinal electronic health records over the NGI that
will integrate its ten public hospitals. This project is based on the G-CPR,
or Government Computer Based Patient Record, a collaborative effort
between the Department of Defense, Department of Veterans Affairs, In-
dian Health Service, and the LSU Medical Center. The objective of this
project is to enable secure access and sharing of clinical information.Contact: Richard Ferrans, M.D.Louisiana State University
Medical Center Department of Public Health
1600 Canal Street, Suite 800Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318APPENDIX BNew Orleans, LA 70112504-588-3507
504-588-3938 fax9.  Secure Radiologic Collaboration on the Next Generation Internet
The goal is to plan the implementation and deployment of a suite ofcollaborative medical applications to provide a secure, real-time, inter-
active environment for viewing, analyzing, and comparing radiological
images in a clinical environment. This will provide clinicians and tech-
nologists the ability to share, in real time, diagnostic imagery and medical
data.Contact: Douglas L. Long, Sr., Principal ScientistOdyssey Research Associates, Inc.
Cornell Business & Technology Park
33 Thornwood Dr., Suite 500
Ithaca, NY 14850-1250
607-257-1975
607-257-1972 fax10.  Open Architecture Multispecialty Data and Telemedicine
Integration on the Next Generation InternetThe purpose of this project is to plan the implementation of a multi-specialty telemedicine testbed using NGI. The plan will identify existing
and new multispecialty applications in patient care, continuing medical
education, and patient education to be integrated into this platform. The
planning activity is to be conducted by a team of scientists and clinicians
from all pertinent parts of the proposing organization.Contact: Joseph C. Kvedar, M.D.Corporate Director Partners Telemedicine
1 Longfellow Place, Suite 216
P.O. Box 8941
Boston, MA 02114
617-726-4447
617-726-7530 fax11.  Patient-centric Healthcare Management over NGI
This project will demonstrate a patient-centric approach for health caremanagement over the NGI. The demonstration will build upon the Elec-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B319tronic House Call system developed by Georgia Tech and the MedicalCollege of Georgia to allow patients to videoconference with their health
care providers and to monitor medical measurements over a secure net-
work. A simple graphical user interface enables patients to control the
system themselves. The system combines videoconferencing, vital signs
measurements, patient education resources, and medical records, and
enables patients to participate in their own health care.Contact: Mr. John W. PeiferSenior Research Scientist
Biomedical Interactive Technology Center
Georgia Institute of Technology
250 14th St., NW
Atlanta, GA 30332-0200
404-894-7028
404-894-7025 fax12.  Adopting the NGI as a Tool for Healthcare and Information Access
This project will assemble a team of medical informatics users and net-working advisors to analyze biomedical and healthcare information pro-
cesses and select those that best demonstrate the application of NGI
technologies and tool sets, while simultaneously providing demonstrable
benefit to healthcare practitioners and end users. Many information pro-
cesses in health care clinical services, biomedical education, and research
will be assessed. Once applications have been identified, the assessment
team will select viable candidates, then formulate an implementation
strategy for one application area.Contact: Brent K. Stewart, Ph.D.University of Washington Grant and Contract Services
3935 University Way NE
Seattle, WA 98195
206-616-1314
206-543-3495 fax13.  The Empathy Network: Improved Healthcare Delivery for
Survivors of Mild Traumatic Brain InjuryThe objective of the Empathy Network is to employ virtual reality (VR)technology, high performance computing centers, and NGI capabilities to
dramatically improve the health care delivered to mild traumatic brain
injury (MTBI) patients. VR technology will allow clinicians to construct aNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320APPENDIX Bvirtual world that simulates the cognitive and perceptual deficits experi-enced by an MTBI patient. VR and NGI technologies will then enable a
patientÕs other health care providers, family, friends and co-workers toexperience the MTBI patientÕs problems in coping with everyday life.This will engender empathic insight, support, and understanding that are
crucial elements of an MTBI patientÕs recovery and adaptation.Contact: David L. ZeltzerSarnoff Corporation
201 Washington Road
Princeton, NJ 08540
609-734-2975
609-734-2662 fax14.  Remote, Real-Time Simulation for Teaching Human Anatomy
and SurgeryThis project plans to demonstrate remote, real-time teaching of humananatomy and surgery, using the NGI. A simulator architecture will be
developed to deliver real-time simulation and visualization technologies
to a diverse audience. The client component is a desktop PC or work-
station. The simulation server receives sensor and control input from the
client and transmits response streams. The NGI network-based architec-
ture will allow for a heterogeneous mix of client configurations ranging
from simple mouse and color displays to multiple high-resolution stereo-
graphic displays and haptic devices.Contact: Parvati Dev, Ph.D.Stanford University
School of Medicine SUMMIT
1215 Welch Road, Modular A
Stanford, CA 94305-5401
650-723-8087
650-498-4082 fax15.  Interactive Medical Data on Demand: A High-Performance
Image-Based Warehouse Across Heterogeneous EnvironmentsThe goal of this project is to determine the requirements of a system forintuitive, real-time access to patient-specific data records based on
multimodal images and multimedia. They will evaluate and select system
architectures, software, and network configurations to provide access over
different network bandwidths and platforms. This design will includeNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B321scalability of the system and extensibility to other health care applica-tions.Contact: Donald L. StredneyOhio State University
Research Foundation
Health Sciences Offices, B-030 Graves Hall
333 West Tenth Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
614-292-9248
614-292-7168 fax16.  NGI-Aware, Scalable, Secure, and Adaptive Technology for Rural
TelemedicineThe goal of this project is to develop a plan to demonstrate telemedicineapplications that will utilize NGI infrastructure. Telemedicine scenarios
include (1) nomadic clinics; (2) a public health station; and (3) a consulting
health station in rural clinics and hospitals. These systems will be config-
ured with a set of videoconferencing, diagnostic, and patient monitoring
equipment.Contact: Y.V. Ramana Reddy, Ph.D.West Virginia University
Research Corporation
886 Chestnut Ridge Road
Morgantown, WV 26506
304-293-7226
304-293-7541 fax17.  Medical Nomadic Computing Applications for Patient Transport
The goal of this project is to transmit multimedia diagnostic informationin real time from ambulances to receiving physicians using NGI technolo-
gies, thus enabling diagnostic and treatment opportunities during trans-
port.Contact: David M. GaglianoTRW, Inc.
One Federal Systems Park Drive
Fairfax, VA 22033
703-345-7497Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322APPENDIX B18.  Distributed Revolutionary Medical Education Environment
The objective of this project is to develop a plan to implement and evaluatea distributed, medical education environment on a network testbed that
simulates the characteristics of the NGI. These applications will be deliv-
ered across the spectrum of medical instruction, from undergraduate to
postgraduate to continuing education.Contact: Lael C. Gatewood, Ph.D.University of Minnesota
Office of Research and Technology
1100 Washington Avenue So., Suite 201
Minneapolis, MN 55415
612-625-4909
612-625-7166 fax19.  Radiation Oncology Treatment Planning/Care Delivery Application
The goal of this project is to develop, implement, and evaluate NGI capa-bilities for radiation oncology treatment planning and care delivery. The
application will provide diagnostic support, treatment planning, and remote
verification of proper operation of treatment equipment from the Com-
prehensive Cancer Center to a remote Johns Hopkins University treat-
ment facility. The proposed project will have a strong evaluation compo-
nent focused on quality of service, security, privacy, and data integrity.Contact: Joseph S. LombardoJohns Hopkins University
Applied Physics Laboratory
11100 Johns Hopkins Road
Laurel, MD 20723-6099
240-228-6287
240-228-6834 fax20.  Applications Layer Security Solution for Stationary/Nomadic
EnvironmentsThis project will evaluate extant security techniques within the context ofan open security architecture. The solution is based on security shared
among collaborating parties, nomadic computing, and the privacy of
medical information. The architecture includes user authentication, remote
access to medical databases, nomadic computing, and confidentiality of
data.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B323Contact: Brenda GarmanMotorola Space and Technology Group
1190 Winterson Road
Airport Square #14, Suite 350
Linthicum, MD 21090
410-859-4761
410-859-0787 fax21.  Human Embryology Digital Library
The goal of this study is to develop a research and education network formedical image acquisition and analysis. A high-performance optical net-
work testbed will link government labs and universities with traditional
medical research facilities. The focus of the project is on the analysis and
delivery of digital histopathology image data. The proposal includes the
definition of a set of demonstration projects that use a collaborative con-
sultation system for research, surgical planning, and basic research.Contact: George S. Michaels, Ph.D.George Mason University
Office of Sponsored Programs
4400 University Drive
Fairfax, VA 22030
703-993-1998
703-993-1993 fax22.  Integration of Security Mechanisms for Internet Applications
The goal of this project is to develop a plan to integrate the PCASSO(Patient Centered Access Secure Systems Online) with biomedical appli-
cations. It will be demonstrated through a testbed involving medical treat-
ment facilities in Delaware, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and New Jersey and
the Frederick (Md.) Biomedical Supercomputer Center in an information
technology infrastructure. The NGI infrastructure for this region is being
developed under the HUBS (hospitals, universities, business schools, and
communities) Initiative.Contact: Raymond E. Cline, Jr.Science Applications International Corp. (SAIC)
1710 Goodridge Drive, M/S 2-3-1
McLean, VA 22102
703-749-8648
703-821-1134 faxNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.324APPENDIX B23.  Telemammography Using the NGI
The goal of this project is to plan and implement a testbed to demonstratethe feasibility of a national breast imaging archive and network infra-
structure to support telemammography using NGI technologies. The pro-
posed infrastructure would support traditional breast screening; provide
the opportunity to maintain and apply standard image processing and
computer-aided diagnosis software; permit access to breast imaging
experts for primary and secondary interpretations; and provide an oppor-
tunity to study and understand epidemiologic issues in breast cancer.Contact: Mitchell SchnallUniversity of Pennsylvania
Research Services
133 S. 36th Street, Suite 300
Philadelphia, PA 19104-3246
215-662-7238
215-662-3013 fax24.  Teletrauma and the NGI
The goal of this project is to plan the implementation of an integratedsystem of trauma care for Southern Louisiana using an NGI telemedicine
network. This network will provide instant access to the Trauma Team at
the Medical Center of Louisiana at New Orleans, which will provide
online assistance. Distance education training for emergency personnel,
network management, and quality of service issues are all elements of the
project.Contact: Richard Ferrans, M.D.Louisiana State University
Medical Center
Department of Public Health
1600 Canal Street, Suite 800
New Orleans, LA 70112
504-588-3507
504-588-3938 faxPHASE II AWARDS1.  Personal Internetworked Notary and Guardian
The Personal Internetworked Notary and Guardian (PING) proposal aimsto provide a patient-controlled personal medical records system. TheNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B325PING record is available to the patient from any Internet-connecteddevice. It is encrypted and accessible only to authorized parties for health
care and/or research or public health purposes. It will include integration
of data from two birth hospitals, a tertiary care pediatric hospital, a pedi-
atric practice network, public health authorities, and the patients and
their families. The goals of the PING project include (1) providing access
for highly mobile postpartum mothers at work, school, and home to their
infantsÕ records; (2) enabling patients and families to manage a funda-
mentally collaborative process of clinical documentation over the Internet;

and (3) ensuring that all PING transactions provide the highest available
confidentiality of the patientÕs data, under their control.Contact: Isaac S. Kohane, M.D., Ph.D.Director, ChildrenÕs Hospital Informatics Program300 Longwood Ave., Enders 150
Boston, MA 02115
617-355-7821
617-730-0456 fax2.  Biomedical Teleimmersion
By combining teleconferencing, telepresence, and virtual reality, tele-immersion enables teachers and students to interact with three-
dimensional models, point, gesture, converse, and see each other. Tele-
immersion combines CAVE and ImmersaDesk virtual reality systems with

advanced network capabilities to make learning environments so com-
pelling that people will use them even when they are in the same room.
They plan to demonstrate and assess teleimmersive environments for
surgical education.Contact: Jonathan C. Silverstein, M.D.University of Illinois at Chicago
School of Biomedical and Health Information Services
1919 W. Taylor
Chicago, IL 60612-7249
312-996-5112
312-996-8342 fax3.  Patient-Centric Tools for Regional Collaborative Cancer Care
Using NGIThis project plans to investigate the application of collaborative tools in adistributed and differentiated medical enterprise, the Seattle area CancerNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.326APPENDIX BCare Alliance (CCA). The applications should (1) enhance the CCA part-nersÕ existing clinical care programs into new highly collaborative patient-
centered interdisciplinary efforts; (2) allow for a fully integrated team
approach to cancer, i.e., state-of-the-art diagnosis, treatment, and man-
agement of cancer patients through collaboration of distributed cancer
care clinicians and researchers; and (3) accelerate the dissemination and
application of new knowledge related to the diagnosis and the treatment
of cancer, both inside the enterprise and throughout the region. They
propose to examine the application of collaborative technologies to the
three areas of physician interaction with patient information in the diag-
nosis, management, and treatment of cancer: consultations between refer-
ring physicians and CCA physician, including the patient; tumor board
conferencing; and radiation oncology treatment planning.Contact: Brent K. Stewart, Ph.D.University of Washington
Grant and Contract Services
3935 University Way NE
Seattle, WA 98195
206-616-1314
206-543-3495 fax4.  Connectivity, Security, and Performance of an NGI Testbed for
Medical Imaging ApplicationsThe objective of this project is to implement an NGI testbed in northernCaliforniaÕs San Francisco Bay Area for medical imaging applications.The two regional sites are the University of California at San Francisco
(UCSF) and Stanford University. This NGI testbed will be built on two
existing high-performance networks. The goal is to provide insight into
NGI capabilities with respect to performance in a regional environment,
potential for extension to the national level, and improvements needed.
The clinical applications to be evaluated include telemammography consul-tation service in a regional compared with a local environment and how
real-time interactive teaching in breast imaging would improve the confi-
dence level of general-practice radiologists. The two characteristics of
NGI that will be utilized include file size capability and near-real-time
transmission.Contact: H.K. Huang, D.Sc., FRCR (Hon.)ChildrenÕs Hospital of Los Angeles/University of Southern California
Department of Radiology, Mailstop #81
4650 Sunset BoulevardNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B327Los Angeles, CA 90027818-889-9411 (telphone and fax)5.  Indianapolis Testbed Network for NGI Applications to
TelemedicineIndiana University proposes to convert the Indianapolis Network forPatient Care (INPC) into a testbed of NGI technologies including IP Secu-
rity (IPSec), quality of service (QOS) in televideo applications at a nursing
home, and IP roaming capabilities with portable wireless workstations in
clinical settings. The project plans to conduct randomized trials to test the
effects of nursing home televideo and nomadic computing in the clinical
environment. They plan to perform a trial to determine the effects of
patient-physician videoconferencing and batch video applications (linked
to Web-based electronic medical records) on health services utilization
and physician/patient satisfaction at a 250-bed remote nursing home. The
project will also perform a crossover trial of handheld personal computers,
evaluating the effects on physician behavior by time-motion studies, physi-
cian satisfaction, and patient encounter data. These handheld computers
will be equipped with capabilities for computerized order-entry, access to
patient data, task-list management, and e-mail.Contact: Clement  MacDonald, M.D.
Regenstrief Institute for Health Care
101 West 10th Street, RG 6th Floor
Indianapolis, IN 46202
317-630-7070
317-630-6962 fax6.  Internet Protocol Video Telemedicine and Patient Cardiology
EducationThe purpose of this project is to address the technical issues impacting thedelivery of telemedicine and sophisticated medical education using IP
video over the Next Generation Internet (NGI). IP video over NGI has the
potential to provide a common telecommunication infrastructure for real-
time high bandwidth medical applications that cannot be supported by
the commodity Internet. NGI solutions for real-time telemedicine with
high-bandwidth video and audio requirements could eventually elimi-
nate the need for expensive dedicated telemedicine networks and give
broader access to these services. As part of the project, extensive evalua-
tion, including impact on patient care, will be done. Technical and clinical
protocols will be developed for all applications.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.328APPENDIX BContact: Susan S. Gustke, M.D.East Carolina University School of Medicine
Center for Health Science Communication
Brody Medical Science Building, 1S-10
600 Moye Blvd.
Greenville, NC 27854
252-816-5219
252-816-8596 fax7.  A Multicenter Clinical Trial Using NGI Technology
NGI technology will be applied to provide the infrastructure of a multi-center clinical trial of new therapies for adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), a
fatal neurologic genetic disorder. This project involves the formation of a
worldwide imaging network of clinical institutions to evaluate ALD thera-
pies. This network is required to provide a sufficient number of patients
for evaluating ALD therapies. This can serve as a model for many other
disorders. Three centers will collaborate on this project. The Imaging
Science and Information Systems (ISIS) Center at Georgetown University
Medical Center, the Kennedy Krieger Institute, and the Department of
Radiology at Johns Hopkins University. NGI technology will be used to
speed the transmission and evaluation of high quality MRI images.
Another important feature of this proposal is to gain insight into proce-
dures that will ensure medical data privacy and security.Contact: Hugo W. Moser, M.D.Kennedy Krieger Research Institute, Inc.
707 North Broadway
Baltimore, MD 21205
410-502-9405
410-502-9839 fax8.  PathMaster: A Web-Accessible Cell Image Database Indexed by
Mathematical Descriptors and Supported by Parallel ComputationThe project will develop the PathMaster computer system as a testbed.PathMaster is designed to help the pathologist with the process of making
a diagnosis in a cytologic specimen. Phase II focus will be on the analysis
of lymphoma touch preparations and thyroid aspirates. To use
PathMaster, the pathologist creates digitized images of a selected set of
cells from a specimen and submits these to PathMaster over the Web.
Each image is automatically subjected to a computational analysis toNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B329determine more than 2,000 mathematically derived descriptors. Eachimage will then be compared to a database using network-based parallel
computation. The analysis will produce ranked sets of images from speci-
mens whose diagnosis is known. Images will be returned to the user to
help in making a diagnosis. A variety of NGI testbed evaluations will be
performed.Contact: Perry L. Miller, M.D., Ph.D.Yale University School of Medicine
Center for Medical Informatics
333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208009
New Haven, CT 06520-8009
203-785-6753
203-785-6664 fax9.  Remote, Real-Time Simulation for Teaching Human Anatomy and
SurgeryStanford University proposes to develop two teaching applications and alocal NGI testbed network for evaluating their effectiveness. The first
application will support instruction in human anatomy and the second
the performance of surgical manipulations. Both applications will sup-
port synchronous collaboration through a shared virtual workspace and
use haptic feedback to augment the visual sense.  This technology will

allow the definition of new curricular elements including the repeated
dissection of anatomical structures, the visual segmentation of raw data
sets, the creation of three-dimensional organ models, and the practice of
fundamental surgical skills. The investigators anticipate that a wide com-
munity of teachers and users will, through a distributed client-server
system, share online, image-rich data and professional experiences.Contact: Parvati Dev, Ph.D.Stanford University
1215 Welch Road, MOD B
Stanford, CA 94035-5401
650-723-8087
650-498-4082 fax10.  Human Embryology Digital Library and Collaboratory Support
ToolsGeorge Mason University proposes to develop and demonstrate tech-nologies to enable collaboration between multiple, distributed research-Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.330APPENDIX Bers and to make progress toward advanced clinical and educational goals.The offeror plans to integrate existing data capture and analysis proce-
dures at the National Museum of Health and Medicine (NMHM) into a
high performance testbed network that will include a petabyte archive
and analysis capability. The project will use an existing, government-
funded gigabit network to connect the NMHM to key sites across the
nation. The testbed requires a minimum data transport rate of 622 Mbps
in the key regional networks and quality of service.Contact: J. Mark Pullen, Ph.D.George Mason University
Computer Science MS 4A5
4400 University Drive
Fairfax, VA 22030
Phone: 703-993-1538
703-993-1710 fax11.  Medical Nomadic Computing Applications for Patient Transport
The objective of this project is the real-time transmission of multimediapatient data from an incident scene and during transport to a receiving
center enabling diagnostic and treatment opportunities prior to arrival.
The offeror will use the diagnosis and treatment of challenging clinical
modelsÑincluding acute ischemic stroke and trauma scene responseÑtodefine a range of quality of service (QOS) requirements for multiple criti-
cal care applications, evaluate the effectiveness of the system, and derive
principles of nomadic computing applicable in other time sensitive emer-
gency care models in which treatment options are constrained by the
delay between onset/injury and definitive diagnosis. TRW and the Uni-
versity of Maryland, Baltimore had previously developed a mobile tele-
medicine system for remote, real-time diagnosis using narrow bandwidth
wireless technologies, but suffered from QOS problems. Phase III will
extend the trial in a larger regional setting.Contact: David M. GaglianoTRW, Inc.
One Federal Systems Park Drive
Fairfax, VA 22033
Phone: 703-345-7497Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B33112.  Remote Treatment Planning System
This proposal addresses the development, implementation, and evalua-tion of an application to support remote treatment planning for radiation
therapy. This application, Remote Treatment Planning System (RTPS),
relies on network infrastructure technology for collaboration; on high
bandwidth and QOS to support interactive review sessions; and on data
privacy and security to protect patient privacy, confidentiality, and data
integrity. Review sessions provide a collaborative environment for
dosimetrists at the planning site, the oncologists at the care delivery site,
and peer reviewers. It utilizes video teleconferencing and a shared view
of the images to support treatment planning. The evaluation will measureoutcomes at the care delivery site, process improvements at 
the treatment-planning site, and estimate cost impact on the remote treatment planning
process. Phase III is proposed to deploy the application and testbed fea-
tures to Peninsula Regional Medical Center in Salisbury, Maryland. Con-
nectivity will be provided by the Maryland State Asynchronous Transfer
Mode (ATM) backbone, NetWork.Maryland.Contact: Joseph S. LombardoJohns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
11100 Johns Hopkins Drive
Laurel, MD 20723-6099
240-228-6287
240-228-5026 fax13.  Next Generation Internet Implementation to Serve Visible
Human Datasets Phase II:  Development of Testbeds
The University of Michigan (UM) Visible Human (VH) project team willdevelop an NGI production system to serve visible human data sets. These
include a comprehensive set of interactive 2D and 3D VH browsers with
arbitrary 2D cutting and 3D visualizations. An interactive Web naviga-
tion engine will be deployed to create and visualize anatomic fly-through,
under haptic control of the user, and to deliver fly-through developed by
expert anatomists and clinicians.  Anatomical labels will enhance these

visualization sequences and enable real-time links with appropriate re-
sources on the Web using XML.  The UM NGI VH system will comple-

ment and extend currently deployed passive Web information systems
with active computational services. This will allow for delivery of several
simultaneous high-quality digital streams, creating structured medical
knowledge using the VH datasets.  An evaluation team will continually
Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.332APPENDIX Brespecify and focus the testbed deployments and measure performanceand educational effectiveness.Contact: Brian D. Athey, Ph.D.University of Michigan School of Medicine
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0616
734-763-6150
734-763-1166 fax14.  Networked 3D Virtual Human Anatomy, Phase II
The University of Colorado Health Sciences Center proposes to demon-strate and assess the use of Web-based, 3D-explorable virtual humans to
enhance traditional anatomic teaching. This will be accomplished with
audio, graphic, and haptic interfaces. The application will be assessed in
anatomy curricula developed for undergraduate to postgraduate levels of
education. Modules teaching the anatomy, function, and pathology of the
knee will be used for this demonstration. The investigators will also dem-
onstrate an extension of the virtual environment to include surgical simu-
lation applied to arthroscopy.Contact: Victor M. Spitzer, Ph.D.University of Colorado Health Sciences Center
13001 East 17th Place, PO Box 6508, Mail Stop F-435
Aurora, CO 80045-0508
303-724-0501
303-724-0911 fax15.  Mammography for the Next Generation Internet, Phase II
The University of Pennsylvania proposes to develop a testbed to demon-strate the feasibility of a national breast imaging archive and network
infrastructure to support digital mammography using NGI technologies.
They plan to improve access and performance of breast cancer screening
with an imaging archive that supports storage, retrieval, and distribution
of breast images for clinical and research purposes and ensures privacy
and confidentiality with multilevel security embedded throughout the
system. The proposed infrastructure would (1) support traditional breast
screening through the maintenance and distribution of a digital record of
prior breast examinations and relevant medical history for primary inter-
pretation and expert consultation; (2) provide the opportunity to main-
tain and apply computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) software at central, well-
maintained computing resources to studies from all women; (3) provideNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B333unique tools for creating educational and training programs; and (4) cre-ate an unparalleled opportunity to study and understand many epide-
miologic issues in breast cancer through searches of a national breast
screening database. NGI technologies will be used to transfer large data
files, execute real-time queries, and access information securely. The
testbed will demonstrate that quality of service, medical data privacy and
security, nomadic computing, network management research and devel-
opment, and infrastructure technology for collaboration are NGI tech-
nologies that are integral to widespread deployment and optimal utiliza-
tion of digital mammography.Contact: Mitchell Schnall, M.D.University of Pennsylvania
Radiology Department
1 Silverstein
3400 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
215-662-6470
215-662-3013 faxNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.334APPENDIX CBiographies of Committee MembersEdward H. Shortliffe (chair) 
recently moved from Stanford University toColumbia University, where he serves as professor and chair of the Depart-
ment of 
Medical Informatics.  He also holds appointments as professor in
the Medicine and Computer Science Departments.  Dr. Shortliffe is a

member of the Institute of Medicine and has served on the Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board, the Federal Networking Advi-
sory Committee (National Science Foundation), and the Biomedical
Library Review Committee (National Library of Medicine) and was the
recipient of a research career development award from the NLM.  In 1993,

he co-chaired a CSTB planning meeting on the role of information infra-
structure in health care.  He currently sits on the PresidentÕs Information

Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  Dr. Shortliffe combines ex-

pertise in medicine and computer science.  He received an A.B. in applied

mathematics from Harvard College in 1970, a Ph.D. from Stanford in
medical information sciences in 1975, and an M.D. at Stanford in 1976.
During the early 1970s, he was principal developer of the medical expert
system known as MYCIN.  After a pause for internal medicine house-staff

training at Harvard and Stanford between 1976 and 1979, he joined the
Stanford internal medicine faculty, where he directed a research program
in medical expert systems development.  Dr. Shortliffe is interested in a

broad range of issues related to integrated decision-support systems and
their effective implementation. He spearheaded the formation of a
Stanford degree program in medical informatics and at Columbia is con-
tinuing to divide his time between clinical medicine and medicalNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C335informatics.  Dr. Shortliffe is a member of the American Society for Clini-cal Investigation, the American Association of Physicians, and the Ameri-
can Clinical and Climatological Association.  He has also been elected to

fellowship in the American College of Medical Informatics and the Ameri-
can Association for Artificial Intelligence.  He sits on the editorial boards

of several medical computing and artificial intelligence publications.  In

addition, he received the Grace Murray Hopper Award of the Association
for Computing Machinery in 1976 and has been a Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation Faculty Scholar in General Internal Medicine. Dr. Shortliffe
has authored over 180 articles and books in the fields of medical comput-
ing and artificial intelligence.  Volumes include 
Computer-Based MedicalConsultations: MYCIN (Elsevier/North-Holland, 1976), 
Readings in Medi-cal Artificial Intelligence: the First Decade (with W.J. Clancey; Addison-
Wesley, 1984), Rule-Based Expert Systems:  The MYCIN Experiments of the
Stanford Heuristic Programming Project (with B.G. Buchanan; Addison-
Wesley, 1984), and Medical Informatics: Computer Applications in Health Careand Biomedicine (with L.E. Perreault, G. Wiederhold, and L.M. Fagan;
Addison-Wesley, 1990; 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, Spring 2000).Russ Biagio Altman is associate professor of medicine (and computer
science by courtesy) at Stanford University.  His primary research inter-

ests are in the application of computing technology to basic molecular
biological problems of relevance to medicine.  He is currently developing

techniques for collaborative scientific computation over the Internet,
including novel user interfaces to biological data.  Other work focuses on
the analysis of functional microenvironments within macromolecules and
the application of nonlinear optimization algorithms for determining the
structure and function of biological macromolecules, particularly the bac-
terial ribosome.  He is on the executive committee (as Molecular Science

Thrust leader) for the National Partnership for Advanced Computational
Infrastructure (NPACI), the NSF-sponsored program at the San Diego
Supercomputer Center.  Dr. Altman holds an M.D. from Stanford Medical

School, a Ph.D. in medical information sciences from Stanford, and an
A.B. from Harvard College.  He has been the recipient of the U.S. Presi-

dential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers, a National Sci-
ence Foundation CAREER Award, and the Western Society of Clinical
Investigation Annual Young Investigator Award.  He is a fellow of the

American College of Physicians and the American College of Medical
Informatics.Patricia Flatley Brennan is Moehlman Bascom Professor at the School ofNursing and College of Engineering at the University of Wisconsin.
Dr.Brennan
Õs research is in the area of nursing informatics and examinesNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.336APPENDIX Cways to use the Internet, home-based computer systems, and specializedinformation resources to promote self-care and disease management skills
among patients and their family caregivers.  She earned a Ph.D. and an

M.S. in industrial engineering from the University of Wisconsin at Madi-
son, an M.S. in nursing from the University of Pennsylvania, and a B.S. in
nursing from the University of Delaware.Bruce Davie works at Cisco Systems in Chelmsford, Massachusetts, where
he is a Cisco Fellow.  He received his B.E. (electrical) from the University

of Melbourne, Australia, in 1984.  He completed his Ph.D. in computer

science at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1988 before starting
work in the Computer Networking Research Department at Bell Commu-
nications Research (Bellcore) in Morristown, N.J.  While at Bellcore, he

worked on the Aurora gigabit testbed, the first wide-area gigabit net-
work.  At Bellcore he held the positions of director of Internetworking

research and chief scientist and led research efforts on the Next Genera-
tion Internet Protocol, IP-over-ATM, and the support of real-time applica-
tions over the Internet.  Dr. Davie joined Cisco Systems in 1995.  He leads

a group working on the development of multiprotocol label switching
and quality-of-service capabilities for IP networks.  He is the author of

numerous journal articles, conference papers and book chapters, and three
books on computer networks.  He is an active member of both the Internet

Engineering Task Force and the End-to-End research group.William M. Detmer is president and chief executive officer of a newInternet-based digital publishing company and is adjunct assistant pro-
fessor of health evaluation sciences at the University of Virginia.  He was
formerly vice president of clinical information products for Ovid Tech-
nologies, Inc.  Dr. Detmer
Õs interests lie in the characterization of theknowledge needs of clinicians and the development of content, informa-
tion science methods, and technologies that collectively meet those needs.
In 1994 he developed WebMedline, the first World Wide Web interface to
Medline, and he since has developed a variety of Internet-based applica-
tions and methods that bring medical knowledge to the point of care.
Dr.Detmer holds a B.A. degree from the University of North Carolina at

Chapel Hill, where he was a Morehead Scholar, an M.D. from the Univer-
sity of California San Francisco, and a masterÕs degree in medical infor-mation science from Stanford University.  He is board certified in internal

medicine.Valerie Florance is project director for better_health@here.now, the infor-mation technology futures initiative of the Association of American Medi-
cal Colleges (AAMC), and principal investigator for IAIMS: The NextNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C337Generation, a state-of-the-art review of information management in aca-demic health sciences centers. Before joining AAMC, she was director of
academic information at the University of Rochester Medical Center.  Dr.
Florance has over 17 years of experience in health sciences libraries and
information services at the University of Utah, Johns Hopkins, and the
University of Rochester. She holds a B.A. in anthropology and an M.A. in
medical anthropology from the University of Utah, an M.L.S. from
Brigham Young University, and a Ph.D. in library and information sci-
ence from the University of Maryland. She has served in a number of
professional leadership roles, most recently as editor of Annual Statistics ofMedical School Libraries in the United States and Canada. In 1995 and 1997,she won the Ida and George Eliot Prize from the Medical Library Associa-
tion. Her scholarly interests center on technology, infrastructure, and

policy issues in health sciences information management.Andrew Friede is a physician executive with the Cerner Corporation, a
major supplier of health care information systems and services.   Dr. Friede

writes expert systems, designs information systems for medical researchers,
and advises health care organizations on strategy.   He was formerly at

the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), where he led the
development of CDC WONDER, an integrated information and commu-
nications system that provides online access to over 30 public health data-
bases, and has specialized features for CDC surveillance programs.  His

epidemiological research interests focused on maternal and child health
conditions, including immunizations, injuries, infant and maternal mor-
tality, teenage pregnancy, and obstetrical complications.  He has been a

consultant to the World Bank and the U.N. for public health and clinical
information systems in China and Madagascar.  He is the author of

numerous publications and served as the chief editor of CDC PreventionGuidelines.Mark Frisse is vice president of clinical information services at Express
Scripts, Inc., a pharmaceutical benefits management company.  Until

December 1999, he served as director of the Bernard Becker Medical
Library; director of the Medical Informatics Laboratory; associate dean
for Academic Information Management; professor of medicine, and aca-
demic director of the Health Services Management Executive M.B.A. Pro-
gram in the John M. Olin School of Business at Washington University.  In

these roles he was responsible for a broad array of medical informatics
research and teaching activities.John Glaser is vice president and chief information officer for Partners
Healthcare System. He was founding chair of the College of HealthcareNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.338APPENDIX CInformation Management Executives, is past president of the HealthcareInformation Management Systems Society, and was the 1994 recipient of
the John Gall award for health care chief information officer of the year.
Dr. Glaser previously managed the health care information systems con-
sulting practice at Arthur D. Little. He is the author of more than 40
publications on health information systems and holds a Ph.D. in health
care information systems from the University of Minnesota.John Huffman is chief technology officer at Stentor, Inc., a company spe-cializing in digital medical applications.  He was previously in the Corpo-

rate Research and Development Group of Silicon Graphics Inc. (SGI) and
managed its medical market technology and business development efforts.
Mr. Huffman has concentrated on medical imaging applications for the
last 10 years.  Additional responsibilities while at SGI were the design and

specification of next-generation processor and graphics architectures,
development of image- and signal-processing methods, and numeric com-
putation methods.  Prior to joining SGI, Mr. Huffman was the cofounder

and chief technology officer for Aware, Inc., where he developed image
and video compression systems.  Mr. Huffman holds several of the early

wavelet patents in this field and wrote the only FDA-approved package
for medical image compression.  In addition, he worked on the develop-

ment of adaptive signal processing methods, numeric solution of nonlin-
ear partial differential equations, and video compression methods.  Prior

to joining Aware, Mr. Huffman spent two years working in the artificial
intelligence group at the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Cor-
poration under Doug Lenat, developing CYC, the largest, most compre-
hensive artificial intelligence system integrating all known methods into
one reasoning system.  Before that, Mr. Huffman was one of the original

employees at Thinking Machines Corporation, where he designed the
VLSI chip and contributed to microcoding the Connection Machine.  Mr.

Huffman also developed automated circuit placement methods that are
in use in the industry today.  Mr. Huffman began his professional career

at the National Security Agency as a VLSI design engineer while perform-
ing graduate work in computer science and electrical engineering at the
University of Maryland. He completed his undergraduate work in chemi-
cal physics at the University of Chicago in 1979.Isaac Kohane is director of the Children
Õs Hospital Informatics Programin Boston and assistant professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School.
Dr. Kohane was one of the lead developers of the W3EMRS system, a
system that allows secure Internet-based sharing of medical information
among emergency room doctors in five Boston-area hospitals.  From 1995

to 1997, Dr. Kohane was leader of the Boston Collaborative Group forNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C339Web access to electronic medical systems.  He is currently working on the
Health Information Identification and De-Identification Toolkit to enable
the specification of health information systems with multiple trade-offs in
confidentiality. He is also principal investigator of the Personal
Internetworked Notary and Guardian project to enable patients to fully
control their own medical records over multiple institutions from the
Internet. Dr. Kohane earned a joint M.D./Ph.D. from Boston University in
1987 and a B.Sc. in biology from Brown University.  He conducted his

doctoral research in collaboration with the Clinical Decision Making
Group in MITÕs Laboratory for Computer Science, with which he main-tains an affiliation.Carl E. Landwehr is a senior fellow and acting director of the Information
Security Center at Mitretek Systems, a nonprofit center conducting
research and development in the public interest.  For many years,

Dr. Landwehr headed the Computer Security Section of the Center for
High Assurance Computer Systems at the U.S. Naval Research Labora-
tory.  He has led a variety of research projects to advance technologies for

computer security and high-assurance systems and has served on review
panels for high-assurance research and development programs at the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the National Secu-
rity Agency. Dr. Landwehr serves as an expert consultant to the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and for 10 years chaired an international
defense panel on secure information systems.  The International Federa-

tion for Information Processing (IFIP) awarded him its Silver Core for his
work as founding chair of IFIP Working Group 11.3 on database security,
and the IEEE Computer Society awarded him its Golden Core for his
work on behalf of its Technical Committee on Security and Privacy. He
has served on the editorial boards of the High Integrity Systems Journal,IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, and the Journal of ComputerSecurity.  Dr. Landwehr also served on the CSTB committee that pro-
duced the report For the Record:  Protecting Electronic Health Information
.He received a B.S. (engineering, 1968) from Yale University, an M.S. (com-
puter and communication sciences, 1970) from the University of Michigan,
and a Ph.D. (computer and communication sciences, 1974) from the Uni-
versity of Michigan.Daniel R. Masys is director of biomedical informatics at the University of
California, San Diego School of Medicine, and associate clinical professor
of medicine. An honors graduate of Princeton University and the Ohio
State University College of Medicine, he completed postgraduate training
in internal medicine, hematology, and medical oncology at the University
of California at San Diego and the Naval Regional Medical Center, SanNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.340APPENDIX CDiego.  He served as chief of the International Cancer Research Data Bank
of the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, and from
1986 through 1994 was director of the Lister Hill National Center for
Biomedical Communications, which is the computer research and devel-
opment division of the National Library of Medicine.  He also served as

the NIH representative to the federal High Performance Computing, Com-

munications, and Information Technology committee, which advised the
PresidentÕs Office of Science and Technology Policy in the area ofadvanced computing and national information infrastructure.  Dr. Masys

is a diplomate of the American Board of Internal Medicine in medicine,
hematology, and medical oncology.  He is a fellow of the American Col-

lege of Physicians and a fellow of the American College of Medical
Informatics. He is a founding associate editor of the Journal of the AmericanMedical Informatics Association and has received numerous awards, includ-
ing the NIH DirectorÕs Award, the Public Health Service OutstandingService Medal, and the U.S. Surgeon GeneralÕs Exemplary Service Medal.Dr. MasysÕ research interests are in Internet-accessible health information
and information systems support for clinical research.  He is co-principal
investigator of the Patient-Centered Access to Secure Systems Online

(PCASSO) research project funded by the National Library of Medicine,
which is developing and evaluating a secure Web-based access method
for clinical data.Jane E. Sisk is a professor in the Department of Health Policy and co-
director of the Center for Evidence-Based Medicine and Aging at Mount
Sinai School of Medicine in New York City.  She was formerly a professor

in the Division of Health Policy and Management and director of the
MasterÕs Program in Effectiveness and Outcomes Research at ColumbiaUniversity School of Public Health.  Before joining Columbia, she directed

projects at the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment as a senior
associate and project director in the Health Program.  She also served as

president, International Society of Technology Assessment in Health Care,
of which she was a founding member.  Dr. Sisk is a fellow of the Associa-

tion for Health Services Research and sits on the editorial boards of HealthServices Research and the 
International Journal of Technology Assessment inHealth Care.  She served on the IOM committee that produced the report
Telemedicine: A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in Health Care and is
currently a member of the IOM Committee on Immunization Finance
Policies and Practices and the NRC-IOM National Cancer Policy Board.
Dr. Sisk earned a B.A. in international relations (Phi Beta Kappa, magna
cum laude) from Brown University, an M.A. in economics from George
Washington University, and a Ph.D. in economics from McGill University.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C341Thorsten Von Eicken is assistant professor of computer science at CornellUniversity.  His research has focused on high-performance communica-

tion in clusters of workstations and developed the U-Net user-level net-
working architecture to close the dramatic gap between the bit rate of
high-speed networks and the communication performance seen by appli-
cations.  He recently started a new project: the Safe Language Kernel

(SLK), which is an operating system infrastructure for customizable
Internet servers and application-specific gateways.  The primary goal of

SLK is to allow users to download custom services into servers in the
network in a secure yet flexible manner.  Just as Java enables Web brows-

ers in which users safely download applets, SLK will enable safe Internet
servers into which users can upload servlets.  Dr. Von Eicken received his

Ph.D. from the University of  California  at  Berkeley.  He was the recipi-

ent of an NSF CAREER Award in 1997.  He has published widely on high-

performance computing architectures, parallel computing/programming,
and low-latency data communications.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.342APPENDIX DIndividuals Who Participated in SiteVisits or Briefed the Study Committee
SITE VISIT PARTICIPANTSDecember 16, 1998California (San Francisco, Oakland, Palo Alto, and Mountain View)University of California at San Francisco, Laboratory for RadiologicalInformatics:  Fei Cao, Tony Chou, Bill Dillon, Steve Frankel, David
Hoogstrate, H.K. (Bernie) Huang, Andrew Shyh Liang Lou, Laura
Snarr, Johannes Stahl, Albert Wong, and X.Q. Zhou.Kaiser-Permanente:  Peter Juhn, Richard Leopold, Anna-Lisa Silvestre,and Valerie Tolous-Shams.Stanford Center for Professional Development (SCPD):  Andrew DiPaolo,
Aubrey Harris, Jay Kohn, and Mike Rouan.NASA Ames Research Center:  Cynthia Bruyns, Shirley Burg, Rei Cheng,Muriel Ross, and Xander Twombly.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D343February 2-3, 1999North Carolina (Greenville and Chapel Hill)East Carolina University Center for Health Sciences Communication, Tele-medicine Program:  David C. Balch, Doug Barnum, Christi Brewer,
Thomas Feldbush, Susan Gustke, Gloria Jones, Marc Krien, Ted
Kummer, Lori Maiolo, Lance Rogers, and Ron Rouse.University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Computer Graphics Laboratory:Andrew Ade, Henry Fuchs, and Lars S. Nyland.University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine:  John
Loonsk.February 10-11, 1999Seattle, WashingtonUniversity of Washington:  Thomas Anderson, James Brinkley, SteveCorbato, Sherrilyne Fuller, Tom Furness (Human Interface Technol-
ogy (HIT) Laboratory), Harold Goldberg, Ira Kalet, Debra Ketchell,
Edward Lazowska, Henry Levy, James LoGerfo, Tom Martin, Jean O.
Nelson, Tom Norris, Peter Oppenheimer (HIT Laboratory), Brent
Stewart, and Suzanne Weghorst (HIT Laboratory).Regence BlueShield: Magdalene Aliu, Kirk Bailey, Jac Davies (Wash-ington State Department of Health), Steven Moe, Donn Morse,
Richard Rubin (Foundation for Health Care Quality), Peter Summer-
ville (Community Health Information Technology Alliance), and
Jerry Tonkovich.BRIEFERS DURING COMMITTEE MEETINGSSeptember 13-14, 1998Washington, D.C.Michael Ackerman and Donald Lindberg, National Library of Medi-cine; George Strawn, National Science Foundation.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.344APPENDIX DDecember 16-18, 1998Palo Alto, CaliforniaAlan Hannan, Frontier/Globalcenter; Hon Hso, SBC Communica-
tions; Gary Leiber, WebTV Education; Milo Medin, @Home; Jackie

Parker, Intel; Geoff Rutledge, Healtheon; J.J. Singh, Caresoft; Mark
Stefik, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center; Hal Varian, dean, School of
Information Systems & Management, University of California at
Berkeley.March 1, 1999 - March 2, 1999Washington, D.C.Donald Detmer, former chair of the National Committee on Vital andHealth Statistics; Michael Fitzmaurice, Agency for Health Care Policy
Research; Margaret Hamburg, Department of Health and Human
Services; Thomas Kalil, National Economic Council; James Ostell,
National Center for Biotechnology Information; Richard Satava, Yale
University; and William Yasnoff, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.345IndexAAccess controls, 64-65, 145, 157-160, 242-243, 256, 302Adrenoleukodystrophy, 328Aetna U.S. Healthcare, 60Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality (AHRQ), 120, 223, 228,
229, 234 (n. 25), 255Agora, 311AIDS, 55 (n. 12), 60, 95, 103, 313
Alternative medicine, 60American Medical Association, 155-156American Medical Colleges, 261
American Medical Informatics Association,14, 22, 261, 307American National Standards Institute, 85
Anatomy, 48, 102, 108, 114-115, 244, 296,300, 306, 307-309, 315, 317, 320,329, 331, 332Anonymity, 167-173anonymous e-mail, 169-170anonymous data, 172-173
anonymous payment, 172protected Web browsing, 170-172Association of American Medical Colleges,130 (n. 30), 261Asynchronous transfer mode, 39, 56 (n. 19),72, 117, 134, 163-166, 272, 281,
290, 331AT&T, 172Audio, 31, 50, 100, 104, 105, 106, 157, 164,220, 280, 285, 286, 288, 290, 293,294, 296, 327, 332see also Video and teleconferencing
Authentication, 17-18, 63-65, 70, 145, 253,279, 297biometric, 18, 55 (n. 13), 279certification authorities, 151-152, 155-156, 253encryption and, 151-153protocols, 150, 151-156
remotely controlled medical devices, 69token-based, 17-18, 83, 84Availability (network and system), 9, 11,15, 24, 40, 45, 87-88, 93, 122, 124,144, 160-162, 191, 237, 242-244defined, 10
digital divide, 14-15, 71, 125, 195, 209,210, 211, 245-246e-mail between patients and providers,63, 70in consumer health applications, 63, 70,87-88, 124in professional education, 107-108in public health, 101see also Data security; Intellectual
property; Privacy; Ubiquity ofaccessNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.346INDEX BBackbone networks, 11, 41, 42, 49, 50, 78, 134,135-137, 140, 253, 284, 299, 331Very high performance BackboneNetwork Service (vBNS), 49, 51,115, 116, 284, 294, 299Balanced Budget Acts, 92, 219, 220-221, 224
Bandwidth, ix, 6, 9, 11-12, 39, 41, 51, 123,132-134, 240, 244-245, 252-253,289, 305cable modems, 12, 18, 34, 39, 40, 49, 67,132, 163-166costs of increases, 135, 166-167, 209
defined, 10, 39digital subscriber line services, 132, 164,165, 166for administrative and financialapplications, 93for biomedical research, 110, 111, 121-122, 123, 240-241for clinical care, 72-73, 75, 77-79, 82-83,87, 88for consumer health applications, 61,65, 67-68, 69, 71, 280for e-mail between patients andproviders, 63for emergency care, 133
for home care, 67-68, 71, 267for images, 73-74, 77-79, 80, 123, 134,136, 162, 164, 241, 244, 272, 288-
289, 301-302for patient records, 65, 82-83, 320-321for professional education, 104, 105,107, 123, 126, 241, 281, 282, 290-291, 297-298for public health, 100
for video and teleconferencing, 11, 73-74, 100, 132-133, 241, 244, 290integrated services digital networks(ISDN), 74, 287, 288, 289, 290, 304local loops, 61, 162-167National Health Alert Network, 99-100
Next Generation Internet, 16, 49, 250-251overprovisioning, 137, 138-139
private networks, 43reconfigurable, 18, 164, 253satellite telecommunications, 166-167
Very high performance BackboneNetwork Service (vBNS), 49, 51,115, 116, 284, 294, 299Biomedical research, ix, 1, 2, 3, 5, 16, 57,108-123, 255, 306-307, 319bandwidth needed, 110, 111, 121-122,123, 240-241clinical trials, 55(n.2), 120-121, 328collaborative research, 118-120
data access controls and, 110-111, 122,159, 316databases, 109-112, 240-241, 295-298,331-332Digital Anatomist, 307-309MEDLARS, 33, 55 (n. 5), 135
MEDLINE, 3, 33, 37, 55 (n. 5), 103-104, 109, 110, 215, 295, 301, 307pathology image data system, 314-315
private sector, 109-110digital images, 211, 245-246expert systems, 227, 228-229
patient records, 65, 169, 173-174publication of results, 116-118, 215-217,239; see also Intellectual property;
MEDLARS; MEDLINEremotely controlled equipment, 5, 113-116, 240simulations, 112-113, 118, 320technical requirements, 6, 8, 108-123,159, 240-241, 255Biomedical Teleimmersion, 316, 325Biometric authentication, 18, 55 (n. 13), 279
Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 89Breast cancer, 55 (n. 12)telemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142-143,236, 244, 272-273, 324, 332-333Bureau of the Census, 172-173CCable modem technologies, 12, 18, 34, 39,40, 49, 67, 132, 163-166Cancer, 55 (n. 12), 62, 300-301, 305-306, 322,325-326, 328-329National Cancer Institute, 120-121, 273,300-301, 305, 322, 324, 325-326telemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142-143,236, 244, 272-273, 324, 332-333Cardiology, 30, 66-67, 73, 74, 128, 158, 266,272, 273, 275, 280, 285, 286, 287-
288, 289, 291, 302, 304, 327-328Centers for Disease Control andPrevention, 95, 96, 99-100, 225,
264, 312-313Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX347Certification authorities, 151-152, 155-156,253Chat groups, ix, 5, 60, 191, 192-193, 196,239, 261, 290see also Support groups
Chronic illness, general, 13-14, 34, 55, 58,60, 191home care, 68risk factors, 3, 31, 34, 58, 59, 60, 95-96,274, 288Cities, see Urban areas
Clinical care, 2, 55 (n. 2), 55 (n. 11), 57, 71-88, 120-121and e-mail, 62, 261, 262patient/provider exchanges, 14, 22,37, 62-64, 66, 70, 189, 192, 197,248, 279bandwidth needs, 72-73, 75, 77-79, 82-83, 87, 88data security, 65, 68, 82-84, 88expert systems, 227, 228-229
latency needs, 81-83, 87-88, 124Next Generation Internet, 48, 319organizational factors, 182-184, 188, 189,192, 195, 196remote consultations, 6, 8-9, 16, 17, 18,20, 30-33, 36, 57, 71, 72-76, 88,220-221, 228-229, 236-237, 238-239, 244, 247, 258, 266-267, 280,
285-286, 288-289, 292, 323standards/guidelines, 5, 14, 22, 57, 238-239, 275, 278technical requirements, 4-5, 71-76, 87-88, 238-239, 246, 258see also Diagnosis; Emergency care;
Hospitals; Primary carephysicians; Patient records;SpecialistsClinical trials, 55 (n. 2), 120-121, 328Collaboratory for Microscopic DigitalAnatomy, 114-115Collections of Information Antipiracy Act,218Community Health InformationTechnology Alliance (CHITA),90, 91, 309, 311-312Comprehensive Telehealth Act, 224
Compression technology, 72, 77, 78-79, 80,114, 115, 116, 129, 272, 286, 288,290, 315The Computer-Based Patient Record, 204Computed tomography (CT), 4, 65, 72, 78,134, 164, 238, 274, 300Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, 1-2,144, 173, 229Conference on Fair Use, 217
Confidentiality, see Encryption; Privacy;
SecurityConsumer Assessment of Health PlansSurvey, 90Consumer health, 2-3, 27, 35, 37-38, 57, 58,71, 152, 235, 245-246, 262alternative medicine, 60availability of access, 63, 70, 87-88, 124bandwidth needs, 61, 65, 67-68, 69, 71, 280
chat groups, ix, 5, 60, 191, 192-193, 196,239, 261, 290data security for, 61, 63, 64-65, 68, 70-71,238-239, 249e-commerce and, 9, 10-11, 35, 60-61, 63,71, 85, 168, 179-182, 310e-mail, patient/provider exchanges, 14,22, 37, 62-64, 70, 189, 192, 197,248, 279foreign language speakers, 119-120, 266-267latency needs, 62, 69-70, 279organizational factors, 9, 10-11, 179-182,183, 191, 195primary online activities, ranked, 61quality control, 2, 14, 61-62, 246-247,255-256, 292remote consultations, 6, 8-9, 16, 17, 18,20, 30-33, 36, 57, 71, 72-76, 88,220-221, 228-229, 236-237, 238-
239, 244, 247, 258, 266-267, 280,285-286, 288-289, 292, 323risk factors, 3, 31, 34, 58, 59, 60, 95-96,274, 288support groups, ix, 5, 60, 61, 196, 239technical requirements, 4-5, 6, 8-9, 66-68, 69-71, 238-239, 245-246Web sites, 9, 10-11, 59-62, 64-65, 69, 190,196-197, 216, 256, 262, 277-280pharmaceutical companies, 60, 71,189, 221see also Clinical care; Data security;
Home care; Insurance; Managedcare; Privacy; Records ofpatients; Telemedicine; cross-references under DemographicfactorsNetworking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.348INDEXCopyright, see Intellectual property
Cost and cost-benefit factors, 8, 13, 37, 179-180, 184, 185, 186-187administrative, 89, 91-92, 97-98, 279bandwidth increases, 135, 166-167, 209clinical trials, 120-121
data security, 144, 279demonstration projects, 257digital images, 211, 245-246
electronic publishing, 216e-mail, 62, 63-64integrated delivery networks (IDNs),35-36integrated services models, 140-141managed care, 59, 184
medical imaging, 77, 79, 186organizational factors, 59, 179-180, 184,185, 186-187, 194-195, 196patient monitoring and home care, 66patient record sharing, 81-82, 144price of Internet services and PCs, 209-210private networks vs Internet, 44-45
professional education, 282-283
property, urban areas, 210-211publication of biomedical research, 216public health surveillance and, 97-98,101-102remote consultation via privatenetworks, 74remotely controlled devices, 76spot market purchase of health care,191-192telemedicine, 184, 204, 287, 302, 303Cryptography, see Encryption
CT, see Computed tomography
DDefense Advanced Research ProjectsAgency, 46, 47, 49, 51, 250, 300Demographic factors, see Educational
attainment; Geographic factors;
Language factors, human; Rural
areas; Socioeconomic status;Urban areasDemonstration projects, 15, 19-22, 250, 257-261Internet 2, ix, 1, 50-51, 52National Library of Medicine awards,314-333payment methods, 221private sector, 20, 260-261scalability of protocols, 16-17
testbed networks, 2, 16, 17, 20-21, 28, 47,250-252, 259, 283-284, 323, 326-327see also Next Generation Internet
Department of Agriculture, 212, 215Department of Commerce, 33, 209-210, 212,225, 226Bureau of Census, 172-173Department of Defense, 20, 21, 24, 43, 161,221, 223, 225, 226, 258, 259, 264,
299Department of Energy, 43, 46, 49, 225, 226,250, 299Department of Health and HumanServices, 14, 20, 23, 24-25, 62, 86,92, 208, 215, 221, 223, 225-227,
255, 257, 259-260, 262-265Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality (AHRQ), 120, 223, 228,
229, 255Indian Health Service, 20, 21, 24, 258, 259see also Health Care Financing
Administration; NationalInstitutes of Health; NationalLibrary of MedicineDepartment of Veterans Affairs, 20, 24, 221,223, 225, 258, 259, 264Dermatology, 73, 184, 191, 274, 285, 286,289, 291, 302Diabetes, 55 (n. 11), 61, 66, 68, 275
Diagnosis, 8, 37, 48, 106, 306, 321, 322, 326,328-329, 330see also Digital images; Specialists
Differentiated services model (diff-serv),12, 18, 45, 137-140, 143, 151, 251,252-253Digital Anatomist, 307-309Digital divide, 14-15, 71, 125, 195, 209, 210,211, 245-246Digital images, 5, 8, 55(n.4), 65, 71, 76-79,82, 134, 140, 236, 272-274, 300-301, 304-305, 320-321, 323, 328-
329, 332bandwidth, 73-74, 77-79, 80, 123, 134,136, 162, 164, 241, 244, 272, 288-
289, 301-302biomedical research applications, 114-115, 239cost factors, 77, 79, 186Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX349CT scans, 4, 65, 72, 78, 80, 134, 164, 238,272, 274, 300Digital Anatomist, 307-309
latency, 115-116MRI, 4, 72, 77, 80, 113, 134, 238, 248,272, 274, 284, 328Next Generation Internet, 48-49, 305-306, 309, 317, 320-321, 323, 324,326, 329, 331-333Picture Archiving and CommunicationsSystem (PACS), 76, 79, 80, 274telemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142-143,236, 244, 272-273, 324, 332-333ultrasound technology, 77, 273, 284,293, 294, 300, 306X rays, 4, 36, 65, 74, 78, 80, 84, 113, 134,164, 238, 244, 294see also Video and teleconferencing
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 217Digital subscriber line services, 132, 164,165, 166Disasters, 18, 99-100, 239, 254see also Terrorism
Discrete multitone, 164, 166
Diseases and disorders, general, ix, 30-31,34, 57, 98, 182surveillance, 3, 4, 8, 57, 94-99, 101-102,238-239, 258, 312-313see also Chronic illness; Risk factors
Distance education, 6-7, 214, 217-218, 238,240-241, 249, 261, 266, 280-283,289-291, 293-298, 306-307, 324Distance medicine, see Telemedicine
Drugs, 5, 10, 32, 37, 38, 61, 182, 189, 190,239clinical trials, 120-121data security, 11, 71insurance claims for, 89
intellectual property, 168-169online ordering, 60, 71, 189, 221public health surveillance, 8, 97, 98EEast Carolina University, 72-73, 76, 222,284-293E-Biomed, 116
E-commerce, 9, 10-11, 35, 60-61, 85, 179-182, 310encryption, 63, 71
privacy and, 168Economic factors, 13, 248, 298-299market forces, 33-35, 185-186, 191-192see also Cost and cost-benefit factors; E-
commerce; Funding; Health carefinancing; Socioeconomic status;Underserved areasEducation, professional, see Professional
educationEducational attainment, 14, 61, 195, 210
Elderly persons, 83E-mail, 35, 169, 260-261, 286anonymous, 169-170, 256
cost factors, 62, 63-64encryption, 156-157, 167-168, 169, 300latency, 39
patient/provider exchanges, 14, 22, 37,62-64, 66, 70, 189, 192, 197, 248,279, 300Embryology, 199, 323, 330Emergency care, 3, 11, 18, 26 (n. 1), 133,210, 288, 324data security as impediment to, 144, 159disasters, 18, 99-100, 239, 254; see alsoTerrorismpatient records, 81, 83, 144, 159, 160, 206patient transport, 321, 330videoconferencing, 4-5Encryption, 17, 30, 32, 40, 62, 63-65, 70, 79,145, 147, 150-155, 325authentication and, 151-153bioterrorism response, 100e-commerce, 63, 71
e-mail, 156-157, 167-168, 169, 300firewalls, 149home care, 68, 267
in administrative and financialtransactions, 91, 172MINDSCAPE, 302
patient record sharing, 82-83, 84, 292-293Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption,17, 63, 64, 154-155, 252time factors, 150-151European Union, 208-209
Evaluation issues, 15, 19-22, 193, 250, 257-261biomedical research, 117-118
consumer health information, 61-62,255-256e-mail between patients and providers,62Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.350INDEXquality of information, 2, 14, 61-62, 246-247, 255-256, 292scalability of protocols, 16-17
technical considerations, 38-41see also Demonstration projects;
StandardsExpert systems, 227, 228-229Extensible Markup Language (XML), 85,86, 198, 331FFDA Modernization Act, 120Federal Communications Commission, 211Federal government, ix, 20-21, 24-25, 29, 96,202-203, 211-212, 223-227, 254-260National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration, 24, 46, 47-48, 49,
221, 250, 283-284, 299, 300National Center for BiotechnologyInformation, 109, 111, 117National Center for Microscopy andImaging Research, 114-116National Committee on Vital andHealth Statistics, 25, 264, 265National Institute of Standards andTechnology, 46, 47National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, 212see also Funding; Next Generation
Internet; Regulatory issues;Legislation; terms beginningDepartment ofFinancial issues, see Health care financing
Firewalls, 147, 148-150
For the Record: Protecting Electronic HealthInformation, 204Foundation for Health Care Quality, 91,310-311Funding, 51, 186, 202-203, 223-227, 254,287-288, 303certification authorities, 156clinical research, 120Department of Health and HumanServices, 20, 23, 257-258distance learning and telemedicine, 214Next Generation Internet, 46-48
payment mechanisms, 221remote consultations, 36, 287-288, 301underserved areas, 211-212, 213-215
workforce study, 262-263GGeographic factors, 125, 195biomedical research, bandwidth, 110clinical care, 71, 72
Kaiser-Permanente, 275-276payment policies, 220professional education, 102, 203; see alsoDistance learningsee also Home care; Remotely controlled
equipment; Rural areas; Ubiquity
of access; Underserved areas;Urban areasGovernment role, 27see also Federal government;
Legislation; Public health; Publicpolicy; Regulatory issues; State
governmentHHackers, 4-5, 11, 144, 145, 203, 240anonymous e-mail, 169-170
firewalls, 147, 148-150viruses, electronic, 145, 160Health Alert Network, 99, 225Health care financing, ix, 2, 57, 88-94, 125,186-187payment mechanisms, 2, 10, 24, 28, 32,44, 89-92, 186, 194-195, 219-221,235, 264anonymous, 172encryption, 91, 172integrated services model, 140-141
patient monitoring, 66-67secured transactions, 61, 190-191,205, 242, 243technical requirements, 4-5, 13, 90-91,93-94, 238-239see also Insurance; Medicaid; Medicare
Health Care Financing Administration, 13,20-21, 89-90, 91-92, 219-221, 225,258, 264, 286see also Medicaid; Medicare
Health Care Personal InformationNondisclosure Act, 206Health Data in the Information Age: Use,Disclosure, and Privacy, 204-205Health Insurance Portability andAccountability Act, 86, 92, 185,205, 208Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX351Health Level Seven (HL7), 84, 85Health maintenance organizations, 89, 103,179, 186, 195, 196, 266-267Health Plan Employer Data andInformation Set (HEDIS), 90Health plans, see Insurance; Managed care;
Medicaid; MedicareHealth records, see Patient recordsHome care, 57, 66-69, 75, 76, 128 (n. 7), 196,209, 235, 240, 258, 287-288, 290bandwidth requirements, 67-68, 71, 267encryption requirements, 68, 267
patient/provider e-mail exchanges, 14,22, 37, 62-64, 66, 70, 189, 192, 197,248, 279, 300technological issues, 66-68, 267time factors, 68, 70video, 129 (n. 9)
vignettes, 29-32, 266-267see also Telemedicine
Hospitals, 13, 188-189, 287, 290consumer information, 5insurance claims for, 89, 195integrated delivery networks (IDNs),35, 44patient record sharing, 81-82public health surveillance and, 97-98see also Emergency care; Surgery
Hypertext transfer protocol, 84, 147, 261
Hypertext markup language (HTML), 86,104, 196, 290, 295, 296-297IImages, see Digital images
Indian Health Service, 20, 21, 24, 258, 259Infrastructure, see Technological issues
Insurance, 5, 8, 11, 12, 35, 37, 44, 89-90, 186,195, 239, 247data security, 11, 145, 241Health Insurance Portability andAccountability Act, 86, 92, 185,205, 208payment mechanisms, 2, 10, 24, 28, 32,44, 219-221spot market purchases, 191-192standards for claims and payments, 92-93, 186, 219-221see also Health maintenance
organizations; Managed care;
Medicaid; MedicareIntegrated Advanced InformationManagement Systems program,300Integrated delivery networks (IDNs), 35-36,44, 79, 179Integrated services digital networks(ISDN), 74, 287, 288, 289, 290, 304Integrated services model (int-serv), 12, 17,18, 45, 137, 140-141, 142, 251, 253Intellectual property, 14, 24, 99, 168-169,188-189, 196, 202, 204, 215-218access controls, 159
biomedical research databases, 110-111,249, 307educational materials, 14, 217-218, 249,307pharmaceutical companies, 168-169Internet Engineering Task Force, 12, 18, 45-46, 138, 141, 143, 153, 174, 252-253, 254Internet Protocol (IP), 42, 49, 140, 161-162,260-261, 291, 294, 305Internet Protocol Security (IPSec), 17, 150,153-154, 251-252Internet 2, ix, 1, 50-51, 52JJohns Hopkins University, 60Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG),286Joint Working Group of Telemedicine/Telehealth, 224KKaiser-Permanente of Northern California,184, 196, 274-280LLanguage factors, human, 119-120, 266-267Latency, 9, 39-40, 123, 124, 134, 136, 240administrative and financialapplications, 93biomedical research, 122clinical care, 81-83, 87-88, 124
consumer health applications, 62, 69-70,279defined, 10, 39Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.352INDEXemergency care, 133guaranteed, 134-135imaging, 115-116
professional education, 107, 124public health, 100satellite telecommunications, 167Legislation, 58, 91, 205-208Balanced Budget Acts, 92, 219, 220-221,224Collections of Information AntipiracyAct, 218Communications Act of 1934, 211
Comprehensive Telehealth Act, 224Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 217European Union, 208-209, 218
FDA Modernization Act, 120Health Care Personal InformationNondisclosure Act, 206Health Insurance Portability andAccountability Act, 86, 92, 185,205, 208Medical Information Privacy andSecurity Act, 206-207Medical Information Protection Act, 206
Privacy Act, 207Public Health Service Act, 224Telecommunications Act of 1996, 211Triple-A Rural Health ImprovementAct, 224Licensing of health care providers, 14, 24,105, 186, 189, 221-223, 224, 267Litigation, malpractice, 14, 221-223, 263
Local area networks (LANs), 33, 67, 79, 80,104, 137, 153, 154, 284firewalls, 147, 148-150
images, 80, 301Internet Protocol Security, 153Local communities, 38, 312bioterrorist response, 99-100health care claims and payments, 90professional education, 104
public health surveillance, 96Local multipoint distribution systemtechnology, 166-167Louisiana State University Medical Center,317-318MMagnetic resonance imaging, 4, 72, 77, 80,113, 134, 238, 248, 272, 274, 284, 328Malpractice, 14, 221-223, 263Mammography, 48, 78, 79, 142-143, 236,244, 272-273, 324, 332-333Managed care, 11, 35, 95, 179, 182, 183-184,186, 190, 191, 195, 244, 247efficiency and cost-effectiveness efforts,59, 89integrated delivery networks (IDNs), 35see also Health maintenance
organizationsMedicaid, 13, 21, 89, 264Medical Information Privacy and SecurityAct, 206-207Medical Information Protection Act, 206Medical records, see Patient recordsMedicare, 13, 21, 89-90, 219-220, 223, 224,225, 264Medications, see Drugs
MEDLARS, 33, 55 (n. 5), 135MEDLINE, 3, 33, 37, 55 (n. 5), 103-104, 109,110, 215, 295, 301, 307Medtronic Inc., 66Microsoft Corp., 66, 210, 291Microwave technology, 74, 166, 289, 290
MINDSCAPE, 300, 301-302, 306MRI, see Magnetic resonance imaging
Multicast protocols, 7, 49, 50, 119, 143-144,176, 241, 283, 284NNational Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration, 24, 46, 47-48, 49,221, 250, 283-284, 299, 300National Cancer Institute, 120-121, 273, 301
National Center for BiotechnologyInformation, 109, 111, 117National Center for Microscopy andImaging Research, 114-116National Committee on Vital and HealthStatistics, 25, 264, 265National Emergency Medicine InformationExtranet, 316National Heart Attack Alert Program, 128(n. 7)National Health Alert Network, 99-100National Institute of Standards andTechnology, 46, 47National Institutes of Health, 19, 20-21, 46,47, 116, 120-121, 216, 223, 225,
226, 228-229, 255-257, 258, 264Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX353National Laboratory for the Study of RuralTelemedicine, 74National Library of Medicine (NLM), 15,16, 18-19, 254, 255, 258, 263clinical transaction standards, 84demonstration project awards (NGI),314-333Integrated Advanced InformationManagement Systems program,
300MEDLARS, 33, 55 (n. 5), 135MEDLINE, 3, 33, 37, 103-104, 109, 110,215, 295, 301, 307Next Generation Internet, 46-47, 305-306, 314-333public health initiative, 95National Museum of Health and Medicine,330National Network of Libraries of Medicine,95National Science and Technology Council,46National Science Foundation, 46, 47-49, 50-51, 111, 225, 226, 250National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, 212Native Americans, Indian Health Service,20, 21, 24, 258, 259Naval Research Laboratory, 171
Network availability, see Availability;
Ubiquity of accessNetwork Data Express, 309
Networked 3D Virtual Human Anatomy,315Neurology, 73, 74, 112, 131 (n. 38), 158, 272,274, 284, 285, 289, 308-309, 319-320, 328Next Generation Internet, ix, x
, 1-2, 16-18,28, 46-49, 52, 291, 305-306, 312,318-333 (passim)authentication, 17-18
bandwidth, 16, 49, 250-251clinical care, 48, 319data security, 17, 251-252
digital images, 48-49, 305-306, 309, 317,320-321, 323, 324, 326, 329, 331-333Internet 2 and, 50-51security, 17, 312, 317-318telemedicine, 48, 318-319, 321, 324, 327-328, 332-333testbed networks, 2, 16, 17, 20-21, 28, 47,250-252, 259, 323, 326-327video and teleconferencing, 48-49, 306OOffice of the Future, 293-294Onion routing, 171-172Open Systems Interconnection model, 146
Organizational factors, 13-14, 15-16, 25, 28-29, 37-38, 58, 178-201, 204-205,236, 244-245, 247-248, 265, 310-
311barriers, external, 185-187barriers, internal, 187-189, 194, 262
clinical care, 182-184, 188, 189, 192, 195,196consumer health, 9, 10-11, 179-182, 183,191, 195costs, 59, 179-180, 184, 185, 186-187, 194-195, 196data security, 38, 43, 147, 159, 203-205,253firewalls, 147, 148-150
information systems staff requirements,14, 23, 196-199, 227-230, 260, 261-263, 298-299integrated delivery networks (IDNs),35-36Kaiser-Permanente, 184, 196, 274-280leadership, 197-199, 227patient records, 82-83, 182-183
public health decision making, 98Web hosting, 162see also Administrative support; Health
care financing; Insurance;Managed careOverprovisioning, 137, 138-139PPartners in Information Access, 95PathMaster, 328-329Patient records, 4-5, 10, 20, 34, 57, 64-65, 70,71-72, 80-87, 94, 194-195, 197, 236,262, 264, 301, 320-321, 325audit capabilities, 19, 83, 159, 207, 242,256, 297, 302availability needs, 11, 30, 64-65, 124, 133e-mail, incorporation into, 64Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.354INDEXin emergency care, 81, 83, 144, 159, 160,206organizational factors, 82-83, 182-183
professional education and, 106public health workers use of, 94quality of service needs, 134, 164
standards, 84-86, 129 (n. 17), 186, 188see also Data security; Privacy
Patient-Centered Access Secure Systems(PCASSO), 65Pharmaceuticals, see Drugs
Physical fitness and exercise, see Exercise
Picture Archiving and CommunicationsSystem (PACS), 76, 79, 80, 274Pilot projects, see Demonstration projects
Platform for Internet Content Selection,62Policy issues, see Public policy
PresidentÕs Information TechnologyAdvisory Committee, 229Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 63, 150, 152,156-157, 313Preventive care, see Risk factors
Primary care physicians, 13, 30, 31, 61, 191,220certification authorities, 155-156Prison telemedicine, 72, 76, 215, 286-287,289, 290Privacy, 2, 5, 15, 24, 28, 38, 40, 56, 61, 68,153, 167-173, 186, 193, 205-206,235, 264, 310and home care, 68
in financial and administrativetransactions, 90-91patient records, 64, 65, 68, 82-84, 124,242, 249, 256, 262, 279, 292-293,300, 310, 316-317, 324-325, 332-333encryption, 82-83, 84, 292-293public policy, 203-209, 212, 214, 262see also Pretty Good Privacy; Security
Privacy Enhanced Mail, 152Private networks, 34, 41, 43-45, 74, 154, 297see also Local area networks
Private sector, general, ix, 50-51, 264biomedical research databases, 109-110demonstration projects, 20, 260-261
protocols, 21-22regulatory issues, 14, 25, 205, 207-208see also Insurance; Internet 2; Managed
careProfessional education, 2, 3, 6-7, 14, 15, 22-23, 28, 57, 102-108, 240-241, 261-263, 315-316and intellectual property, 14, 217-218,249, 307availability, 107-108, 241
bandwidth needs, 104, 105, 107, 123,126, 241, 281, 282, 290-291, 297-298continuing education, 105-107, 322cost factors, 282-283data security for, 108
distance education, 6-7, 214, 217-218,238, 240-241, 249, 261, 266, 280-283, 289-291, 293-298, 306-307,
324graduate education, 102-105, 322information systems staffs, 14, 23, 227-230, 261-263latency needs, 107, 124Next Generation Internet, 48-49, 318,319, 322remotely controlled apparatus, 113-114simulations, 103, 104-105, 123, 124, 250,293-294, 320, 329ubiquity of access, 108, 241video and teleconferencing, 6-7, 104,106, 240-241, 266, 273, 280-283,290, 291, 293-294, 297-298, 315,
325Proprietary information, see Intellectual
propertyProtocols, 21-22, 34, 42, 45, 55-56 (n. 15),244, 260-261authentication, 150, 151-156
demonstration projects, scalability, 16-17hypertext transfer protocol, 84, 147, 261
Internet Protocol (IP), 42, 49, 140, 161-162, 260-261, 291, 294, 305Internet Protocol Security (IPSec), 17,150, 153-154, 251-252latency and, 39-40multicast, 7, 49, 50, 119, 143-144, 176,241, 283, 284quality of service protocols, 12, 18, 45,132, 135-141, 142, 143, 251, 252-
253scalability of, 16-17, 32, 48, 72, 140, 252-253, 320-321Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX355security, 17, 49, 63, 150-157, 251-252; seealso Encryption
Transmission Control Protocol, 39-40,42, 136-137, 260-261Public health, ix, 1, 2, 27, 36-37, 58, 94-102
and data security, 98-99, 101
Centers for Disease Control andPrevention, 95, 96, 99-100, 225,264, 312-313cost savings, 97-98, 101-102privacy and, 169standards for, 101-102, 186
state government and, 95, 96, 97surveillance, 3, 4, 8, 57, 94-99, 101-102,238-239, 258, 312-313technical requirements for, 4-5, 100-102,238-239ubiquity of access, 101-102
video and teleconferencing needs, 4-5,238-239, 100Public Health Service Act, 224
Public key infrastructure, 17, 63, 64, 152-156, 252, 264, 275, 276-277Public policy, 14-15, 23-25, 29, 202-234, 236,248-249, 263-265consumer health security, 70data security, 151-152, 203-209, 212, 214,225, 264privacy, 203-209, 212, 214, 262
see also Federal government; Intellectual
property; Legislation; Regulatoryissues; State government; cross-references under Demographic
FactorsPubMed Central, 216QQuality of health care, general, 28, 191, 236Quality of information, 2, 14, 61-62, 246-247, 255-256, 292Quality of service (QOS), 10, 12, 15, 16-17,19, 41, 45-46, 51, 132, 133-144,173, 235-236, 237, 243-245, 254,
256-257, 259, 293, 297-298, 331availability of network, 160defined, 10, 41, 55 (n. 14)
guarantees, 18, 41, 134-135, 140, 141,142, 253-254, 256-257Next Generation Internet, 46, 49, 251overprovisioning, 137, 138-139patient records, 134, 164private networks vs Internet, 43, 44, 45private sector, other, 50protocols, 132, 134-144bandwidth, 132, 135-138
diff-serv/int-serv, 12, 18, 45, 137-141, 142, 143, 251, 252-253QOS policy, 141-143
recommendations related to, 16-18,251-253research needed, 17-18, 252-253
video and teleconferencing, 133, 134virtual overlay networks, 141see also Differentiated services model
(diff-serv); Evaluation issues;Integrated services model (int-serv); StandardsRRealizing the Information Future: The Internetand Beyond, 204Regence BlueShield, 309-313
Regulatory issues, 186, 202, 219-223, 248-249, 263insurance, 56 (n. 16)licensing of health care providers, 14,24, 105, 186, 189, 221-223, 224,
249, 267malpractice, 14, 221-223, 263privacy and security, 14, 25, 205, 207-208public health surveillance and, 98see also Intellectual property;
Legislation; StandardsRemotely controlled equipment, 3, 4-7, 20,36, 39, 68-69, 70, 75-76, 113-116,
121, 128 (n. 7), 133, 209, 235, 236,240, 243, 247, 253-254, 266-267,331Next Generation Internet, 46, 48-49, 331Remote, Real-time Simulation for TeachingHuman Anatomy and Surgery,
320Research, 15, 29, 174, 223-227Department of Health and HumanServices, 24-25National Institutes of Health, 19National Library of Medicine role, 18-19Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.356INDEXnetwork availability, 161-162see also Biomedical research;
Demonstration projects;
Evaluation issues; Funding;Internet 2; Next GenerationInternetRisk factors, 3, 31, 34, 58, 59, 60, 95-96, 274,288Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 156, 310
Rural areas, ix, 6, 48, 72, 74, 77, 96, 103, 104,120, 195, 209, 210, 211-212, 213-214, 215, 220, 222, 224, 236, 240,
245-246, 300, 315, 321Rural Health Science Education, 315SSatellite telecommunications, 166-167, 300see also National Aeronautics and Space
AdministrationScalability, 16-17, 32, 48, 72, 140, 252-253,320-321see also Bandwidth
Science Applications International Corp., 65
Seattle/Pacific Northwest GigaPOP, 305Secure/Multipurpose Internet MailExtension (S/MIME), 157Secure Radiologic Collaboration on theNext Generation Internet, 318Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption, 17,63, 64, 154-155, 252Security, ix, 9-11, 15, 17, 22, 28, 29, 40, 45,46, 123, 124, 136, 144-162, 167-173, 186, 193, 235, 237-243, 262,310, 322-323access controls, 64-65, 145, 157-160, 242-243, 256, 302attribution/nonrepudiation, 146
authentication, 17-18, 63-65, 70, 145,253, 279, 297confidential e-mail, 156-157
cost factors, 144, 279defined, 10firewalls, 147, 148-150
for digital images, 79for patient records, 64, 65, 68, 92-84,124, 242, 249, 256, 262, 279, 292-
293, 300, 310, 316-317, 324-325,332-333encryption, 82-83, 84, 292-293in biomedical research, 110-111, 122,159, 316in clinical care, 65, 68, 82-84, 88; see alsofor patient records suprain clinical trials, 121in consumer applications, 61, 63, 64-65,68, 70-71, 238-239in e-mail between patients andproviders, 63, 66, 300in emergency care, 144, 159in financial and administrativetransactions, 61, 90-92, 94, 145,
172, 190-191, 205, 241, 242, 243in home care, 68in private networks, 34, 41, 43-44, 74,154, 297in professional education, 108in responding to bioterrorist attacks, 99-100information warfare, 5Internet Protocol Security (IPSec), 17,150, 153-154network availability, 6, 9-11, 160-162Next Generation Internet, 49
on consumer Web sites, 61, 64-65, 249organizational factors, 38, 42, 147, 159,203-205, 253; see also firewallssupraperimeter control, 146
protocols, 32, 48, 72, 140, 252-253, 320-321public health information, 98-99, 101
public key infrastructure, 17, 63, 64,152-156, 252, 264, 275, 276-277public policy, 151-152, 203-209, 212, 214,225, 264recommendations regarding, 16-17, 251-253regulatory issues, 14, 25, 205, 207-208rural areas, 48Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption,17Transport layer security, 154-156see also Authentication; Encryption;
Intellectual property; PrivacySHINE project, 130 (n. 31)Simulationsbiomedical research, 112-113, 118, 320professional education, 103, 104-105,123, 124, 250, 293-294, 320, 329Smart cards, 17-18, 30Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX357Socioeconomic status, 95digital divide, 14-15, 71, 125, 195, 209,210, 211, 245-246Southern GovernorsÕ Association, 223
Specialists, 8, 11, 13, 76-77, 82, 182, 184, 191consultations, 6, 8-9, 16, 17, 18, 20, 30-33, 36, 57, 71, 72-76, 88, 220-221,228-229, 236-237, 238-239, 244,247, 258, 266-267, 280, 285-286,
288-289, 292, 323see also specific specialitiesStandards, 186, 188, 194, 196, 239, 280, 286,292, 310clinical practice standards/guidelines,5, 14, 22, 57, 238-239, 275, 278discrete multitone, 164, 166distance education, intellectualproperty, 218insurance claims and payments, 92-93,186, 219-221patient records, 84-86, 129 (n. 17), 186,188public health, 101-102, 186quality of service guarantees, 18, 41,134-135, 140, 141, 142, 252-253,256-257see also Protocols; Regulatory issues
Stanford University, 130, 131, 280-283,329State government, 317-318insurance regulation, 56(n.16)licensing of health care providers, 14,24, 105, 186, 189, 221-223, 224,249, 267malpractice, 14, 221-223, 263
public health surveillance, 95, 96, 97Washington State Laboratory ReportingProject, 312-313Washington, Wyoming, Alaska,Montana, and Idaho (WWAMI)Rural Telemedicine Network,
300, 302-303, 306-307see also terms beginning University ofSUPERNET, 49
Support groups, ix, 5, 60, 61, 196, 239see also Chat groups
Surgery, 3, 4-5, 8, 36, 71, 105, 123, 124,239, 244, 250, 294, 316, 320, 323,329Synchronous Optical Network equipment,135, 146TTechnology Opportunities Program, 212,213-214Teleconferencing, see Video and
teleconferencingTelemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142-143,236, 244, 272-273, 324, 332-333Telemedicine, 21, 47, 52-53, 56, 69, 71, 186,189, 197, 209, 224, 235, 236, 243,
248-249, 259, 300, 321chat groups, ix, 5, 60, 191, 192-193, 196,239, 261, 290Comprehensive Telehealth Act, 224costs, 184, 204, 287, 302, 303defined, 56
funding, 214licensing of health care providers, 14,24, 105, 186, 189, 221-223, 224,
249, 267malpractice, 14, 221-223, 263Next Generation Internet, 48, 318-319,321, 324, 327-328, 332-333payment policies, 219-220prisons, 72, 76, 215, 286-287, 289, 290private sector (Internet 2), 50remote consultations, 6, 8-9, 16, 17, 18,20, 30-33, 36, 57, 71, 72-76, 88,220-221, 236-237, 238-239, 244,247, 258, 266-267, 280, 285-286,
288-289, 292, 323site visits by committee, 280, 284-289,290support groups, ix, 5, 60, 61, 196, 239telemammography, 47, 78, 79, 142-143,236, 244, 272-273, 324, 332-333ultrasound technology, 77, 273, 284,293, 294, 300, 306vignettes, 29-32, 266-267
Washington, Wyoming, Alaska,Montana, and Idaho (WWAMI)Rural Telemedicine Network,
300, 302-303see also Home care; Remotely controlled
equipmentTelemedicine: A Guide to AssessingTelecommunications in Health Care,204Telequest, 77Teletrauma and the NGI, 324Terrorism, 4-5, 99, 100, 101, 225, 239Networking Health: Prescriptions for the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.358INDEXTestbed networks, 16, 17, 20-21, 28, 47, 250-252, 259, 283-284, 323, 326-3273Com Corp., 210
Time factors, 11, 28, 184, 240bandwidth, impacts of increases inInternet use, 136continuing medical education, 107e-mail responses, 22, 63encryption/decryption, 150-151
home care, 68, 70image transmission, 78see also Availability; Bandwidth; LatencyToken-based authentication, 17-18, 83, 84Transmission Control Protocol, 39-40, 42,136-137, 260-261Transport layer security, 150, 154-156Transport of patients, 321, 330Triple-A Rural Health Improvement Act,224UUbiquity of access, 9, 12, 15, 38, 40-41, 71,88, 124-126, 195, 235, 239, 245-246administrative and financialapplications, 94biomedical research, 122-123defined, 10, 40digital divide, 14-15, 71, 125, 195, 209,210, 211, 245-246patient records, 65professional education, 108, 241
public health, 101-102underserved areas, ix, 14, 210-212; seealso Rural areas
see also Bandwidth
Ultrasound technology, 77, 273, 284, 293,294, 300, 306UNCLE system, 295, 297Underserved areas, ix, 14, 72, 210-212Unified medical language system, 84-85
Universal Resource Locators (URLs), 170-171, 295, 298Universal Service AdministrationCompany, 211-212, 213Universal Service Fund, 211, 215University Consortium for AdvancedInternet Development, 46, 50-51University of California, 65, 76, 77, 272-274University of Iowa, 74
University of North Carolina, 293-298University of Washington, 298-309Urban areas, 72, 96, 103, 120, 176, 195, 210-211, 220, 245-246URLs, see Universal Resource Locators
VVery high performance Backbone NetworkService (vBNS), 49, 51, 115, 116,
284, 294, 299Video and teleconferencing, 3, 4-7, 71, 74,75, 129(n.10), 179, 220, 238-239,
240-241, 273, 304-305, 315, 321,326bandwidth, 11, 73-74, 100, 132-133, 241,244, 290Biomedical Teleimmersion, 316bioterrorism response, 100
consumer use of, 30-31, 266, 288home care, 129(n.9)image transmission and, 78, 115-116
Next Generation Internet, 48-49, 306professional education, 6-7, 104, 106,240-241, 266, 273, 280-283, 290,
291, 293-294, 297-298, 315, 325public health, 4-5, 238-239, 100quality of service, 133, 134see also Digital images; Simulations
Viruses, electronic, 145, 160see also Firewalls; Hackers
WWashington, Wyoming, Alaska, Montana,and Idaho (WWAMI) Rural
Telemedicine Network, 300, 302-303, 306-307Wavelength division multiplexingtechnology, 135WebTV, 210, 291Western GovernorsÕ Association, 222
World Wide Web Consortium, 62World Wide Web Electronic MedicalRecord System, 81-83XX rays, 4, 36, 65, 74, 78, 80, 84, 113, 134, 164,238, 244, 294XML, see Extensible Markup Language
