DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9829Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Researchto Meet Society's Needs272 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06991-5 | DOI 10.17226/9829Committee on Information Technology Research in a Competitive World, ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board, National Research CouncilMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Information Technology Researchin a Competitive WorldComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.


Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW ¥ Washington, DC 20418NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Boardof the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of theNational Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute ofMedicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their

special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under SponsorAward Number ANI-9616857.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views ofthe sponsor.         Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataMaking IT better : expanding information technology research to meetsociety's needs.
       p. cm.
ISBN 0-309-06991-21.  Information technology. 2.  Information technologyÑSocial

aspects.  I. Title.
T58.5. M35 2000303.48'33--dc21
                                                             00-009738
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs is available
from the National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Box 285, Washington, DC
20055 (1-800-624-6242 or 202-334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area; Internet: http://
www.nap.edu).Copyright 2000 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in
1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-ment on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the

National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility foradvising the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also

sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.Dr.Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both theNational Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-
viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHIN A COMPETITIVE WORLDSAMUEL H. FULLER, Analog Devices, Inc., Co-chairDAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley,Co-chairPAUL BARAN, Com21, Inc.
LINDA COHEN, University of California at IrvineJOHN A. COPELAND, Georgia Institute of Technology
ALBERT M. ERISMAN, The Boeing CompanyDANIEL T. LING, Microsoft Corporation
ROBERT L. MARTIN, Lucent TechnologiesJOEL MOSES, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyNORINE E. NOONAN, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency(formerly of the Florida Institute of Technology)DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at BerkeleySTEWART PERSONICK, Drexel University (formerly of Bellcore)ROBERT SPROULL, Sun Microsystems LaboratoriesMARK WEISER,* Xerox Palo Alto Research CenterPATRICK WINDHAM, Windham Consulting
IRVING WLADAWSKY-BERGER, IBM CorporationStaffJERRY R. SHEEHAN, Senior Program Officer (Study Director)LISA L. SHUM, Project Assistant (through August 1998)
D.C. DRAKE, Project Assistant (after August 1999)*Deceased.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairJAMES CHIDDIX, Time Warner Cable
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
JUDITH HEMPEL, University of California at San Francisco
JEFFREY M. JAFFE, Lucent Technologies Incorporated
ANNA KARLIN, University of Washington
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, WhizBang! Labs, Inc.
DONALD NORMAN, UNext.com
RAYMOND OZZIE, Groove Networks
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
CHARLES SIMONYI, Microsoft Corporation
BURTON SMITH, Tera Computer Company
TERRY SMITH, University of California at Santa Barbara
LEE SPROULL, New York UniversityStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
JERRY R. SHEEHAN, Senior Program Officer
ALAN S. INOUYE, Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Program Officer
GAIL PRITCHARD, Program Officer
JANET D. BRISCOE, Office Manager
DANIEL LLATA, Project Assistant
SUZANNE OSSA, Project Assistant
MICKELLE RODGERS RODRIGUEZ, Senior Project Assistant
D.C. DRAKE, Project Assistant
MARGARET MARSH, Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Office AssistantMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES, MATHEMATICS, ANDAPPLICATIONSPETER M. BANKS, Veridian ERIM International, Inc., Co-chairW. CARL LINEBERGER, University of Colorado, Co-chairWILLIAM F. BALLHAUS, JR., Lockheed Martin Corporation
SHIRLEY CHIANG, University of California at Davis
MARSHALL H. COHEN, California Institute of Technology
RONALD G. DOUGLAS, Texas A&M University
SAMUEL H. FULLER, Analog Devices, Inc.
JERRY P. GOLLUB, Haverford College
MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD, University of California at Santa Barbara
MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University
WESLEY T. HUNTRESS, JR., Carnegie Institution
CAROL M. JANTZEN, Westinghouse Savannah River Company
PAUL G. KAMINSKI, Technovation, Inc.
KENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota
JOHN R. KREICK, Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Company (retired)
MARSHA I. LESTER, University of Pennsylvania
DUSA M. McDUFF, State University of New York at Stony Brook
JANET NORWOOD, Former Commissioner, U.S. Bureau of LaborStatisticsM. ELISABETH PAT…-CORNELL, Stanford UniversityNICHOLAS P. SAMIOS, Brookhaven National Laboratory
ROBERT J. SPINRAD, Xerox PARC (retired)MYRON F. UMAN, Acting Executive DirectorMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This book is dedicated to the memory of Mark Weiser, whose untimelydeath in April 1999 prevented him from seeing the reportÕs completion,but whose ideas, energy, and enthusiasm live on in its pages.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixThe United States enjoys an enviable position in the Information Age.The nationÕs information technology (IT) industry is thriving, and virtu-ally every facet of society has been influenced by it.  Indeed, IT is trans-

forming a largeÑand growingÑportion of the nationÕs economic andpersonal activities.  As a result, IT-related issues are of interest to a widen-

ing circle of users, not just the vendors of IT products and services.  These

obvious trends do not, however, ensure continued progress in IT and its
applications because they do not indicate whether sufficient investments
are being made in IT research.As previous reports by the Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council demonstrate,1 the
nationÕs leadership in the development and application of IT derives inlarge part from an effective program of research that has been conducted
and managed jointly by industry, universities, and government since the
end of World War II.  Today
Õs IT systems continue to draw on the knowl-edge base constructed by research conducted over the past five decades.Preface
1 The role of federal research funding in the innovation process has been examined in
two CSTB reports:  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research

Council.  1995.  
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative toSupport the NationÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.;
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1999
.  Fund-
ing a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research
.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEContinued leadership and innovation in ITÑand the continued flow ofsocietal benefits that derive from such leadershipÑdepend on suitableinvestments in IT research today and in the future.  A critical examination

is needed to define the kinds of research investment needed for the early
twenty-first century, a time when IT will play a much more prominent
role than it did in the second half of the twentieth century, when most of
todayÕs IT capabilities and expectations were built.THE COMMITTEE AND ITS CHARGETo improve understanding of these issues and help guide futureendeavors, the National Science Foundation (NSF) asked CSTB to con-
duct a study of IT research that would examine ongoing trends in indus-
try and academic research, determine the possible effects of those trends
on the well-being of the nationÕs IT industry and the nation as a whole,and explore options for strengthening the research base, if necessary.  Of

particular interest is support for research that advances our fundamental
understanding of capabilities, architectural designs, and principles that
can have a pervasive influence on innovation throughout the IT industry
(called Òfundamental researchÓ in this report) rather than advancing a
single product, process, or service (called Òapplied researchÓ in this re-
port).2  Is the nation investing sufficient resources in the types of research
that will ensure its capability to innovate in the future, or have research
investments become more narrowly targeted to near-term efforts?  Repre-

sentative issues include the following:3¥Trends in IT research and development spending.  What trends in com-
puting and communications industry research and development (R&D)
spending can be documented, and at what level of detail?  How has

support for fundamental and more targeted research programs shifted?
Is the overall level of effort sufficient?¥The scope of IT research.  Are the scope and scale of computing and
communications R&D changing?  Is IT research sufficiently broad to
2 The federal government tends to classify research as either ÒbasicÓ or Òapplied.Ó  Thereis some correspondence between these terms and the terminology used in this report, asdescribed in greater detail in Chapter 1.3 The original concept for the study also included attention to international issues, in
particular, the relative position of U.S. research efforts in IT compared with those of othercountries.  As the project unfolded, issues of international competitiveness became less of a
motivational factor.  The growth of the Internet and U.S. IT industries led to a perception

that the greatest threats to the nationÕs IT base were not external, but internalÑthe lack offundamental understanding of large-scale systems and their broad range of societal appli-cations.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiaddress new challenges resulting from the convergence of computing andcommunications?  Are government, universities, and industry well orga-

nized to conduct research across disciplinary boundaries?¥Changes in private-sector support for research.  How do major technol-
ogy market trends, such as the growing emphasis on and pervasiveness
of network-based systems, affect private sector R&D investments?  How

do computing and communications companies of different sizes and types
make R&D decisions, and how have the decision processes and outcomes
been changing?¥Mechanisms for strengthening IT research.  What are some promisingapproaches to filling in gaps in the research portfolio and/or sustaining
the flow of R&D?  Is the government investment adequate?  What types of

institutional approaches might be the focus of experimentation?  What

factors, structures, and mechanisms enable success in research collabora-
tions?To conduct the study, CSTB assembled a committee of 16 memberswith expertise in the IT industry, IT research, applications of IT in govern-
ment and industry, the organization of IT research, and federal support
for research.  Members were drawn from both industry and academia and

brought with them technical expertise in computing, communications,
software, and devices.  Several committee members had experience with

federal research programs and backgrounds in economics and public
policy.The committee met five times between July 1997 and August 1998 toplan its course of action, solicit testimony from relevant experts, deliberate
over its findings, and draft its final report.  It continued its work by

electronic communications throughout 1999 and into the beginning of
2000.  During the course of the project, the committee heard from researchers

and research managers in industry and universities and from directors of
government agencies involved in funding computing research.  It met

with engineers involved in the development and deployment of sophisti-
cated information systems for clients in a range of fields.  The committee

also gathered available statistics on IT research investments in the public
and private sectors.  These data have a number of limitations (as described

in this report) so they could not by themselves provide definitive insight
into trends in IT research.  Accordingly, the committee supplemented the

data with information provided by its members and by those who briefed
the committee.  This range of input was used to develop the conclusions

and recommendations contained in the report.  The unusually long time it

took the committee to do its work reflects the challenges involved in
integrating diverse inputs and perspectives and in shaping a contribution
to the rapidly evolving national debate about IT and IT research.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiPREFACEDuring the committeeÕs working period, a number of importantdevelopments took place that were factored into the committeeÕs conclu-sions.  Most notably, an advisory committee authorized by the High Per-

formance Computing and Communications Act of 1991 and encouraged
by earlier CSTB reports was finally established in 1997, albeit in a form
tailored to suit the times:  the President
Õs Information Technology Advi-sory Committee (PITAC).  The CSTB study committee and PITAC shared

one common member (Irving Wladawsky-Berger), but the work of the
two committees proceeded independently, preserving the CSTB com-
mitteeÕs ability to offer its own perspective and comment on PITACÕswork.  The CSTB committee reviewed the interim and final reports from

PITAC, as well as information on the Clinton AdministrationÕs Informa-tion Technology Research initiative (originally constituted as Information
Technology for the Twenty-First Century, or IT2) and ongoing federalprograms, ensuring that the present report would be relevant to the evolv-
ing environment for federal support of IT research.  Similarities between

the main conclusions of this report and the PITAC report, which were
arrived at independently, reflect a degree of consensus within the field
regarding the research base for IT.Although it attempted to complement the work of PITAC, the CSTBcommittee differentiated itself by (1) concentrating on two specific areas that
it deemed to be of great importance to the nation and also insufficiently
addressed by ongoing IT research initiatives and (2) relating its substantive
research recommendations to an assessment of trends and supportive
mechanisms for IT research.  Rather than compete with PITAC or duplicate
its work, the committee monitored the reception given to PITACÕs recom-mendations and attempted to address questions that were raised about their
rationale.  The resulting report is a vehicle for maintaining the momentum

imparted by PITACÑwhich itself drew on the evolution of thinking andprograms throughout the 1990sÑand for furthering the realignment of ITresearch to which PITAC and others have contributed.  It draws on the work

of other CSTB committees, which have looked in great detail at a number of
specific components of the IT research arena and developed recommenda-
tions for IT research (both its substance and process) related to those compo-
nents.  Finally, the committee strove to present its conclusions in a form

consistent with its intention to target the report at a broad, high-level
audience, including policymakers, research managers in government and
industry, corporate executives, and the research community.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSAs with any project of this magnitude, thanks are due to the manyindividuals who contributed to the work of the committee.  First, thanks
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiiiare due to the members of the committee itself, who volunteered consid-erable time during the course of the study to attend meetings, engage in
e-mail and telephone discussions, draft sections of the report, and respond
to comments from external reviewers.  Although they shared a common

interest in IT research, committee members brought to the table a wide-
ranging set of perspectives, concerns, and vocabularies that took time and
effort to blend into a common view.  Their overwhelming consensus on

the main themes of this report is a testament to the importance of these
themes to the field.Beyond the committee, numerous persons provided valuable infor-mation through briefings to committee meetings.  These presenters include

John Best (IBM Almaden Research Center); Joel S. Birnbaum (Hewlett-
Packard Co.); Timothy F. Bresnahan (Stanford University); Joseph K.

Carter (Andersen Consulting); Vinton G. Cerf (MCI WorldCom); Ashok
K. Chandra (IBM Almaden Research Center); Melvyn Ciment (then with
NSF, now with the Potomac Institute); James A. Desveaux (UCLA); Fred
Fath (Boeing Shared Services Group); Jim Gray (Microsoft Corporation);
Anoop Gupta (Microsoft Corporation); Peter Hart (Ricoh); Juris Hartmanis
(then with the NSF, now at Cornell University); John L. Hennessy
(Stanford University); John Jankowski (NSF); Don E. Kash (George Mason
University); Chuck Larson (Industrial Research Institute); Edward A. Lee
(University of California at Berkeley); David Liddle (then with Interval
Research, now with U.S. Venture Partners); Larry Lynn (then director of
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)); Peter G.
Neumann (SRI International); Greg Papadopoulos (Sun Microsystems);
Richard Pledereder (Sybase, Inc.); Robert W. Rycroft (George Mason Uni-
versity); David Tennenhouse (then with DARPA, now with Intel Corpo-
ration); and Gilbert Weigand (then with the Department of Energy).Others also provided valuable assistance to the committee behind thescenes.  Raymond Wolfe at the NSF provided detailed statistics on indus-

try R&D spending and answered numerous questions about the data.
Elinor Champion, Andrew Hildreth, Nelson Lim, Janet Shapiro, Mary
Streitwieser, and Ron Taylor at the Census Bureau helped committee
members and staff navigate the process of accessing detailed data on
corporate R&D spending.  Hoyle Curtis provided information on research

expenditures at Hewlett-Packard Co.  Jed Gordon, an undergraduate in

the Science, Technology, and Society program at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, worked with the CSTB during the summers of 1997,
1998, and 1999, collecting and analyzing corporate expenditures on R&D,
writing summaries of his investigations, and conducting a wide range of
related research and writing assignments.  As she has done so many times

in the past, Laura Ost, a free-lance editor, provided invaluable assistance
in preparing the final manuscript under incredibly tight deadlines.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivPREFACETheresa Fisher and Claudette Baylor-Fleming of the National ResearchCouncilÕs Space Studies Board assisted with the final preparation of thisreport.  Marjory Blumenthal, director of the CSTB, provided critical com-
mentary, advice, and writing in the final stages of the project to help bring
the project to a successful conclusion.Finally, thanks are due to Aubrey Bush at the NSF, whose interestand vision gave impetus to the project and who provided ongoing
encouragement during the course of the study.  The committee and staff

are thankful for his continued patience and support throughout the dura-
tion of this project.Samuel H. Fuller and David G. MesserschmittCo-chairs
Committee on Information Technology
Research in a Competitive WorldMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved
by the NRCÕs Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this indepen-
dent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the
authors and the NRC in making the published report as sound as possible
and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.  The contents of the

review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the
integrity of the deliberative process.  The committee wishes to thank the

following individuals for their participation in the review of this report:Duane Adams, Carnegie Mellon University,John Armstrong, IBM Corporation (retired),
Robert Epstein, Sybase, Inc.,
Kenneth Flamm, University of Texas at Austin,
Peter Freeman, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Robert Frosch, Harvard University,
Paul Gray, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Juris Hartmanis, Cornell University,
John Hopcroft, Cornell University,
John King, University of Michigan,
Robert Lucky, Telcordia Technologies,
Thomas Malone, MIT Sloan School of Management,
Linda Sanford, IBM Corporation,Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSMarvin Sirbu, Carnegie Mellon University, andKeith Uncapher, Corporation for National Research Initiatives.Although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this
report rests solely with the authoring committee and the NRC.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION18
Why Focus on Information Technology?, 20
What Is Information Technology Research? 23The Many Faces of Information Technology Research, 23
A Classification of Information Technology Research, 26The Changing Environment for Information TechnologyResearch, 29Changing Industrial Structure, 30
Expanding Applications of Information Technology, 33Implications for Information Technology Research, 37
Implications for the Research Enterprise, 42
Organization of This Report, 44
Bibliography, 44
Notes, 452RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
RESEARCH48
Diversity in the Research Base, 49
Federal Support for Information Technology Research, 51Trends in Federal Funding, 52
Sources of Federal Support, 56Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiCONTENTSStyles of Federal Support, 58Federal Information Technology Research Programs, 60Industry Support for Information Technology Research, 64Trends in Industrial Support, 66
Disincentives to Corporate Investment in Research andDevelopment, 70A Countertrend in Central Research Laboratories, 76
Gaps in the Research Base:  Systems Integration, 79

Research by End-User Organizations, 82
Venture Capital Support for Innovation, 85University Research, 87Trends in Support for University Research, 88
Gaps in Academic Research, 90
Commercialization of University Research, 91Conclusion, 93
References, 93
Notes, 953RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS99
What Is the Problem with Large-Scale Systems? 100
Technical Challenges Associated with Large-Scale Systems, 107Large Scale, 108
Complexity, 108
Heterogeneity, 110
Flexibility, 111
Trustworthiness, 114
Distributed Operation and Administration, 118Improving the Design and Implementation of Large-ScaleSystems, 118Limitations of Past Research, 119
Toward an Expanded Systems Research Agenda, 124
Designing a Research Program, 126Moving Forward, 133
References, 134
Notes, 1364RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY142
Social Applications of Information Technology, 144
Research Challenges in Social Applications of InformationTechnology, 148Group Applications, 149
Knowledge Management, 150Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxixCommerce, 151Coordination and Control, 152
Common Challenges, 153
System-Specific Research, 154Conducting Research on Social Applications, 155A Plausible Approach, 155
New Research Teams, 157Mechanisms for Social Applications Research, 160Participation of End-User Organizations, 160
Industry Internships and Sabbaticals, 166
Interdisciplinary Research in Academia, 168
Interdisciplinary Research in Industry, 179
Multidisciplinary Research Centers, 180
Embedding Information Technology Research in OtherDisciplines, 185Expanding the Scope of Information Technology Research, 187
Bibliography, 187
Notes, 1905EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH195
Recommendations for Government, 197
Recommendations for Universities, 206
Recommendations for Industry, 209
Conclusion, 211
Bibliography, 212
Notes, 212APPENDIXESATwo Research Topics Involving Social Applications217

BBiographies of Committee Members224
INDEX233
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryThe United StatesÑindeed much of the worldÑis in the midst of agreat transformation wrought by information technology (IT).
Fueled by continuing advances in computing and networking capa-bilities, IT has moved out of the laboratories and back rooms of large
organizations and now touches people everywhere.  The indicators are

almost pedestrian:  computing and communications devices have entered

the mass market, and the language of the Internet has become part of the
business and popular vernacular.  These changes are often considered to

be the outcomes of technology developmentÑthe second half of the familiar
term Òresearch and developmentÓ (R&D)Ñwhose role is to create specific
IT systems and products.  What is sometimes overlooked is the critical

role of the first half of the R&D process:  the research that uncovers under-

lying principles, fundamental knowledge, and key concepts that fuel the
development of numerous products, processes, and services.  Research

has been an important enabler of IT innovationsÑfrom the graphical user
interface to the Internet itselfÑand it will continue to enable the more
capable systems of the future, the forms of which have yet to be deter-
mined.  It has another role as well:  in universities especially, it serves to

educate and to build a knowledgeable IT workforce.The future of IT, and of the society it increasingly powers, depends oncontinued investments in research.  Despite the incredible progress made

over the past five decades, IT is anything but a mature, stable technology.
Revolutionary new technologies based on quantum physics, molecular
chemistry, and biological processes are being examined as replacementsMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2MAKING IT BETTERfor or complements to the silicon-based chips that perform basic computingfunctions.  Computing and communications capabilities are being embedded

in a widening range of existing and novel devices, presaging an age of
ubiquitous or pervasive computing, when IT is absorbed almost invisibly
into the world around us.  IT systems are being deployed to support

countless tasks, from monitoring the health of patients with chronic dis-
eases to controlling the flight paths of aircraft to analyzing mountains of
data for private corporations and government agencies.  Yet, the potential

of IT will not be harnessed to meet societyÕs needs automatically; it is notsimply a matter of producing IT products and distributing them more
widely.  Research is needed to enable progress along all these fronts and

to ensure that IT systems can operate dependably and reliably, meeting
the needs of society and complementing the capabilities of their users.
The question becomes,  Can the nation
Õs research establishment generatethe advances that will enable tomorrowÕs IT systems?  Are the right kinds
of research being conducted?  Is there sufficient funding for the needed

research?  And are the existing structures for funding and conducting

research appropriate to the challenges IT researchers must address?This report by the Committee on Information Technology Research ina Competitive World, convened by the Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council, attempts
to answer these questions.  It examines the overall funding levels for IT

research from industry and government, the scope of ongoing research
efforts, and the structures and mechanisms that support research.  It

advances the argument that the nationÕs needs for IT systems havechanged in ways that demand a much broader agenda for such researchÑone that includes more explicit support for research on large-scale IT
systems and the social applications they support (see Box ES.1)Ñandmechanisms for funding and conducting research that are better attuned
to this broadened agenda.  The report was written with an awareness of

the legacy of reports about IT research and recognizes that some of the
research it covers is not new.  What distinguishes this report is that it

considers the big picture emerging from research programs that have
been cataloged and recommended in other reports and uses this per-
spective to assess the sufficiency of todayÕs research efforts.  The report
recognizes that long-standing problems cannot be solved instantly, and it
acknowledges the institutional, cultural, and resource factors that will
make the recommended changes difficult to achieve.  But after lengthy

analysis and deliberation, the authoring committee concluded, with con-
viction, that a reorientation of IT research is vital to the well-being of the
technology base.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3TOWARD AN EXPANDED RESEARCH AGENDAOverall, the nationÕs IT research base appears to be thriving.  Federalfunding for IT research rose steadily throughout the 1990s, from approxi-
mately $1.4 billion in 1990 to $2.0 billion in 1998 (the most recent year for
which consistent data are available),1 and the Clinton Administration
Õsbudget for fiscal year 2001 proposes to increase funding for IT R&D by
$1 billion above 1999 levels.  Industrial support for R&D also appears to

be increasing dramatically.  The combined R&D expenditures of com-

panies in the six industry sectors most closely associated with IT totaled
$52 billion in 1998, of which approximately $14 billion was classified as
research.2  These figures compare to $39 billion and $8.5 billion, respec-
tively, in 1995.3  Over the past decade, a number of large IT firms, includ-
ing Microsoft Corporation, Motorola, Inc., and Intel Corporation, haveBOX ES.1Defining Large-Scale Systems andSocial Applications of ITLarge-scale systems are IT systems that contain many (thousands, millions,
billions, or trillions or more) interacting hardware and software components.  They

tend to be heterogeneousÑin that they are composed of many different types ofcomponentsÑand highly complex because the interactions among the compo-nents are numerous, varied, and complicated.  They also tend to span multiple

organizations (or elements of organizations) and have changing configurations.Over time, the largest IT systems have become ever larger and more complex,and, at any given point in time, systems of a certain scale and complexity are not
feasible or economical to design with existing methodologies.Social applications of IT serve groups of people in shared activities.  The moststraightforward of these applications improve the effectiveness of geographically
dispersed groups of people who are collaborating on some task in a shared con-text.  More sophisticated applications may support the operations of a business or
the functioning of an entire economy; systems for e-commerce are an example.
Characteristic of social applications of IT is the embedding of IT into a large organi-zational or social system to form a ÒsociotechnicalÓ system in which people andtechnology interact to achieve a common purposeÑeven if that purpose is not
obviously social, such as efficient operation of a manufacturing line (which is aconjunction of technological automation and human workers) or rapid and decisivebattlefield management (which is a conjunction of command-and-control tech-nology and the judgment and expertise of commanders).  Social applications of
ITÑespecially those supporting organizational and societal missionsÑtend to be
large-scale and complex, mixing technical and nontechnical design and opera-tional elements and involving often-difficult social and policy issues such as thoserelated to privacy and access.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4MAKING IT BETTERestablished central research laboratories, signaling their increased com-mitment to long-term research.Nevertheless, current investments in IT research are insufficient tosupport an important expansion of the IT research agenda.  Work needs

to continue in ongoing areas of research, but societyÕs growing reliance onIT also demands greater attention to problems associated with the design,
deployment, and operation of large-scale systems and social applications.
The proliferation of the Internet has greatly accelerated the deployment of
large-scale IT systems to serve a variety of personal, social, and business
needs.  Yet large-scale system efforts in both government and industry

are often characterized by cost overruns, development failures, and opera-

tional problems, ranging from limited adaptability to breakdowns of
various types.4  As more and more people, activities, and organizations
come to depend on such systemsÑthat is, as the systems become criticalsocietal infrastructuresÑtheir impact, and the cost to society of their fail-ure, grow.  But the necessity of addressing systems problems is only one

of the reasons for renewing and reorienting the focus on fundamental
research.  There is also the promise of much greater societal good from IT

systems, a promise hinted at by the systems that have already been suc-
cessfully deployed and used and by the connectedness achieved through
the Internet and the exuberant experimentation with new types of busi-
nesses, services, and social and nonprofit activity it has fostered.  This is a

future that can be attained only with significant improvements in the
science and technology base.Research is needed on the science and engineering issues associatedwith large-scale systems, to devise ways to make IT systems betterÑmorescalable, flexible, predictable, and reliable (see Box ES.2).  Work is also

needed to better understand the technical and nontechnical issues that
arise when such systems are integrated into social applications.  Socialapplications of IT are expected to motivate technical research that will
develop new capabilities to satisfy a growing set of societal needs, and
they will demand that technological needs be considered in the social and
organizational context in which they will be applied.  Such work is by its

very nature interdisciplinary, demanding insight into both the technical
capabilities of IT and the ways in which people engage or are affected by
IT systems in a variety of operational settings.  It requires computer

science and engineering, but it also requires economists and other social
scientists and business-school researchers who understand how IT sys-
tems are selected, used, and integrated into organizational processes (see
Box ES.3).  Such work also benefits from practical perspectives
Ñtheknowledge of people working in systems development and end-user
organizationsÑto ground thinking about systems in the contexts of theirdevelopment, deployment, and use.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5BOX ES.2What Makes Large-Scale IT Systems So Difficult to Design,Build, and Operate?¥Large number of componentsÑLarge IT systems can contain thousands ofprocessors and hundreds of thousands or even millions of lines of software.
Research is needed to understand how to build systems that can scale gracefullyand add capacity as needed without needing overall redesign.¥Deep interactions among componentsÑComponents of large IT systemsinteract with each other in a variety of ways, some of which may not have beenanticipated by the designers.  A single misbehaving router can flood the Internet
with traffic that will bring down thousands of local hosts and cause traffic to be
rerouted worldwide.  Research is needed to provide better analytical techniques
for modeling system performance and building systems with more comprehensiblestructures.¥Unintended and unanticipated consequences of changes or additions to thesystemsÑFor instance, upgrading the memory in a personal computer can lead totiming mismatches that cause memory failures that in turn lead to loss of applica-
tion data, even if the memory chips are themselves perfectly functional.  In this
case it is the system that fails to work, even though all its components work.Research is needed to uncover techniques or architectures that provide greater
flexibility.¥Emergent behaviorsÑSystems sometimes exhibit surprising behaviors thatarise from unanticipated interactions among components.  These behaviors are
ÒemergentÓ in that they are unspecified by any individual component and are the
unanticipated product of the system as a whole.  Research is needed to find tech-
niques for better analyzing system behavior.¥Constantly changing needs of the usersÑMany large systems are long-lived, meaning they must be modified while preserving some of their own capabilities
and within the constraints of the performance of individual components.  Develop-
ment cycles can be so long that requirements change before systems are evendeployed. Research is needed to develop ways of building extendable systems
that can accommodate change.¥Independently designed componentsÑTodayÕs large-scale IT systems arenot typically designed from the top down but often are assembled from off-the-
shelf components.  These components have not been customized to work in the
larger system and must rely on standard interfaces and, often, customized soft-ware.  Modern IT systems are essentially assembled in each home or office.  As a

result, they are notoriously difficult to maintain and subject to frequent, unexplained
breakdowns.  Research could help to develop architectural approaches that can
accommodate heterogeneity and to extend the principles of modularity to larger
scales than have been attempted to date.¥Large numbers of individuals involved in design and operationÑWhenbrowsing the Internet, a user may interact with thousands of computers and hun-
dreds of different software components, all designed by independent teams ofdesigners.  For that browsing to work, all of these designs must work sufficiently
continuedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6MAKING IT BETTERwell without anyone doing the integrating or anyone handling complaints if they failto work as a whole.  Research is needed on ways to prevent failures in one part of
a system from affecting the system as a whole in ways evident to a user.¥Large numbers of usersÑLarge IT systems must be able to support largenumbers of users, and they must be able to scale up gracefully as the number ofusers grows.  This is seldom the case today.  Changes in scale lead to new,

unforeseen problems that no company could have anticipated given the state ofthe art in understanding these systems.  Research is needed to find ways of
extending the scale of systems easily, without taking them out of operation.¥Large number of independent requirementsÑFor instance, a typical com-puter is built and manufactured without any knowledge of whether it will be usedfor word processing, scientific simulation, or game playing.  It must be good at all

of them.  Many large-scale systems must also serve a variety of functions.  New
approaches may be able to provide universal computing capabilities without pen-alties in performance compared with dedicated devices.¥Embedding within a larger social and business system contextÑLarge-scale IT systems tend to form just one element of larger sociotechnical systemsthat consist of people, organizations, and other technologies.  The most effective

applications of IT in such systems are not those that merely automate existingprocesses, but those that enable a transformation of processes that cannot becomprehended without a significant understanding of social and organizational dy-

namics.  Research is needed on the relationships among organizations, people,
and technology.¥UsabilityÑEngineering that addresses the human factors and social factorsof IT systems is paramount.  As IT systems serve more users and are used to
perform a larger number of functions, they must be made easier to use.  They will
increasingly be operated by novices rather than experts in IT design and opera-tion.  Research is needed to develop techniques for making systems easier to use.
BOX ES.2 ContinuedNeither large-scale systems nor social applications of IT are ade-quately addressed by the IT research community today.  Most IT research

is directed toward the components of IT systems:  the microprocessors,
computers, and networking technologies that are assembled into large
systems, as well as the software that enables the components to work
together.5  This research nurtures the essence of IT, and continued work
is needed in all these areas.  But component research needs to be viewed

as part of a much larger portfolio, in which it is complemented by research
aimed directly at improving large-scale systems and the social applica-
tions of IT.  The last of these includes some work (such as computer-

supported cooperative work and human-computer interaction) tradition-
ally viewed as within the purview of computer science.  Research in all
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7BOX ES.3Research on the Social Applications of Information TechnologyResearch on the social applications of information technology (IT) combineswork in technical disciplines, such as computing and communications, with researchin the social sciences to understand how people, organizations, and IT systems
can be combined to most effectively perform a set of tasks.  Such research can
address a range of issues related to IT systems, as demonstrated by the examplesbelow (more detailed discussion is contained in Chapters 3 and 4):¥Novel activities and shifts in organizational, economic, and social structures
ÑWhat will people do (at work, in school, at play, in government, and so on) when
computers can see and hear better than they can?  How will activities and organi-zations change when robotic technology is widespread and cheap?  How will
individual and organizational activities change when surveillance via IT becomes
effectively universal?  New technologies will affect all kinds of people in many
ways, and they hold particular promise for those with special situations or capabil-ities, because they will give them broader access to social and economic activities.¥Electronic communitiesÑHow can IT systems be best designed to facilitatethe communication and coordination of groups of people working toward a com-mon goal?  Progress requires an understanding of the sociology and dynamics of

groups of users, as well as of the tasks they wish to perform.  Psychologists and
sociologists could offer insight for the conceptualization and refinement of thesesocial applications, and technologists could mold their technological aspects.¥Electronic commerceÑHow can buyers and sellers be best brought togetherto conduct business transactions on the Internet?  What kinds of security technol-
ogies will provide adequate assurances of the identities of both parties and protectthe confidentiality of their transactions without imposing unnecessary burdens oneither?  How will electronic commerce affect the competitive advantage of firms,

their business strategies, and the structure of industries (e.g., their horizontal andvertical linkages)?  Such work requires the insight of economists, organizational
theorists, business strategists, and psychologists who understand consumer
behavior, as well as of technologists.¥Critical infrastructuresÑHow can IT be better embedded into the nationÕstransportation, energy, financial, telecommunications, and other infrastructures to
make them more efficient and effective without making them less reliable or moreprone to human error?  For example, how can an air traffic control system be
designed to provide controllers with sufficient information to make critical decisions
without overwhelming them with data? Such work requires the insight of cognitivepsychologists and experts in air traffic control, as well as of technologists.¥ComplexityÑHow can the benefits of IT be brought to the citizenry withoutthe exploding complexity characteristic of professional uses of IT?  Although net-
works, computers, and software can be assembled and configured by professionalsto support the mission-critical computing needs of large organizations, the tech-
niques that make this possible are inadequate for information appliances designedfor the home, car, or individual.  Research is needed to simplify and automate
system configuration, change, and repair.  Such research will require insight from

technologists, cognitive psychologists, and those skilled in user interface design.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8MAKING IT BETTERthree areasÑcomponents, systems, and social applicationsÑwill make ITsystems better able to meet societyÕs needs, just as in the medical domainwork is needed in biology, physiology, clinical medicine, and epidemiol-
ogy to make the nationÕs population healthier.Research on large-scale systems and the social applications of IT willrequire new modes of funding and performing research that can bring
together a broad set of IT researchers, end users, system integrators, and
social scientists to enhance the understanding of operational systems.
Research in these areas demands that researchers have access to opera-
tional large-scale systems or to testbeds that can mimic the performance
of much larger systems.  It requires additional funding to support sizable

projects that allow multiple investigators to experiment with large IT
systems and develop suitable testbeds and simulations for evaluating
new approaches and that engage an unusually diverse range of parties.
Research by individual investigators will not, by itself, suffice to make
progress on these difficult problems.Today, most IT research fails to incorporate the diversity of perspec-tives needed to ensure advances on large-scale systems and social appli-
cations.  Within industry, it is conducted largely by vendors of IT compo-

nents:  companies like IBM, Microsoft, and Lucent Technologies.  Few of

the companies that are engaged in providing IT services, in integrating
large-scale systems (e.g., Andersen Consulting, EDS, or Lockheed Martin),
or in developing enterprise software (e.g., Oracle, SAP, PeopleSoft) have
significant research programs.6  Nor do end-user organizations (e.g., users
in banking, commerce, education, health care, and manufacturing) tend
to support research on IT, despite their increasing reliance on IT and their
stake in the way IT systems are molded.  Likewise, there is little academic

research on large-scale systems or social applications.  Within the IT sector,

systems research has tended to focus on improving the performance and
lowering the costs of IT systems rather than on improving their reliability,
flexibility, or scalability (although systems research is slated to receive
more attention in new funding programs).  Social applications present an

even greater opportunity and have the potential to leverage research in
human-computer interaction, using it to better understand how IT can
support the work of individuals, groups, and organizations.  Success in

this area hinges on interdisciplinary research, which is already being car-
ried out on a small scale.One reason more work has not been undertaken in these areas is lackof sufficient funding.  More fundamentally, the problems evident today

did not reach critical proportions until recently.  There has been no crisis

to motivate the research community or to compel a broader set of compa-
nies to fund research, no compelling set of visions to inspire broad-based
interest.  From a practical perspective, conducting the types of research
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9advocated here is difficult.  Significant cultural gaps exist between re-
searchers in different disciplines and between IT researchers and the end
users of IT systems.  These groups tend to have different sets of motiva-

tions, interests, and even perspectives on what constitutes research.7  But
if IT is to meet societyÕs growing needs, then the challenges of collabora-tive research will have to be overcome.  Luckily, a few seeds have been

planted that, if nurtured, may sprout and blossom in ways that can sup-
port and encourage a larger, more diverse range of efforts.  Government,

industry, and universities need to ensure that this happens.  This report

provides guidance that they can follow in doing so.RECOMMENDATIONSNow is the time to adjust and expand the IT research portfolio, bothto overcome problems that have become urgent and to better meet
societyÕs needs.  Doing so will require efforts on many fronts. Increased
funding will be needed to extend the scope of IT research more fully into
large-scale systems and social applications.  At the same time, existing

mechanisms for funding IT research will have to be strengthened to ensure
that fundamental research continues to be supported in a way that will
prove most productive for the IT industry and, ultimately, the nation.
New mechanisms will be needed to fund and conduct research on large-
scale systems and social applications of ITÑthe nature of which differsfrom that of traditional components research.  In many cases, mecha-

nisms for research on large-scale systems and social applications can build
on existing programs and initiatives, expanding their scale and scope.Changes like these have been suggested before.  The less-than-
satisfactory outlook today simply reflects insufficient follow-through on
those earlier suggestions.  All of the relevant recommendations made by

CSTB committees, past and present, draw on the expertise of the IT
research community and other relevant experts; engaging the community
effectively requires listening to its advice.  The committee
Õs recommenda-tions in each of these areas are presented below, organized according to
the group that would carry them out, and elaborated on in Chapter 5.Recommendations for GovernmentRecommendation 1.  The federal government should continue to
boost funding levels for fundamental information technology
research, commensurate with the growing scope of research
challenges.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10MAKING IT BETTERThe first step toward strengthening the nationÕs IT research base is toensure that sufficient investments are made in IT research.  Increased

federal funding for such research is necessary to support continued
growth in existing component-oriented research (e.g., microprocessors,
computing systems, networking equipment, and software) while expand-
ing the research base to look at the problems of large-scale systems and
the social applications of IT, to help the nation harness ITÕs potential for arange of public and private-sector missions.  Although it is not possible to

specify precisely how much additional funding is needed, the committee
believes that the increases proposed in recent years by the PresidentÕsInformation Technology Advisory Committee ($1 billion over 5 years)
and the Clinton Administration ($1 billion between 1999 and 2001) are the
right order of magnitude and would allow the IT research community to
grow larger while providing adequate resources for each investigator.Funding increases need to be aimed primarily at fundamental research,not applied research.  Not only is such work important to the long-term

evolution of the field, but it would also shift some of the responsibility
from industry, which faces a number of strong disincentives to invest-
ment in fundamental, long-term research.  The results of such work can-

not be anticipated and their most important implications often lie far in
the future, even if some benefits can be gained more immediately.  As

experience demonstratesÑand economic theory supportsÑcompaniesthat make fundamental breakthroughs often have difficulty capturing the
benefits of these advances while preventing competitors from doing so.
Hence, they tend to underinvest in such research.8  Only the largest, most
profitable, and most dominant IT firms tend to be able to invest in long-
term research (in part because they are better positioned to capture its
benefits), and even this source of funding has been in short supply.
Increasing competition, which can erode the market share of leading firms
in an industry, and the need to introduce new products and services
rapidly into the marketplace have forced even the most forward-thinking
companies to shift more of their resources to applied research efforts.  The

federal government is much better able to provide sustained funding for
research with long-term potential, but it, too, has increased funding for
applied research more quickly than funding for fundamental research in
recent years.  IT researchers corroborate this trend, noting that federally

funded projects have become more focused on near-term objectives and
demonstrations of capabilityÑprecisely the same types of things thatindustry is likely to doÑrather than on fundamental advances in thetechnology.  As shown in earlier CSTB reports, federal funding for funda-

mental research laid the groundwork for many of todayÕs common com-mercial innovations, from graphical user interfaces and relational data-
bases to computer graphics and even the Internet itself (CSTB, 1995, 1999).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11The need for it has not diminished.  Although the IT industry has grown
and is highly profitable, the barriers to investments in long-term research
persist, and the government continues to have a role to play.Recommendation 2.  The National Science Foundation and the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency should establish sig-
nificant programs of fundamental research in large-scale information
technology systems.The National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (DARPA) each have a number of efforts under
way that address aspects of large-scale systems.  As yet, these efforts have

not been integrated into a larger programmatic thrust that attempts to
gain a more fundamental understanding of large-scale systems (as
opposed to pursuing development of specific applications).  The NSF and

DARPA should exercise the leadership they have demonstrated in the
past and create more comprehensive, cohesive programs in this area that
would allow a vibrant research community to coalesce around the prob-
lems of large-scale systems.  The programs run by the organizations

should complement one another and should together have the following
characteristics:¥Support both theoretical and experimental work;¥Offer awards in a variety of sizes (small, medium, and large) tosupport individual investigators,  small teams of researchers, and larger

collaborations;¥Investigate a range of approaches to large-scale systems problems,such as improved software design methodologies, system architecture,
reusable code, and biological and economic models (see Chapter 3);¥Attempt to address the full scope of large-scale systems issues,including scalability, heterogeneity, trustworthiness, flexibility, and pre-
dictability;9 and
¥Give academic researchers some form of access to large-scale sys-tems for studying and demonstrating new approaches.Given the wide circle of agencies interested in and involved with ITresearch and the even wider circle coming to depend on large-scale IT
systems, the NSF and DARPA should attempt to involve in their research
other federal agencies, such as the Department of Health and Human
Services and the Federal Aviation Administration, that operate large-scale
IT systems and would benefit from advances in their design.  Such involve-
ment could provide a means for researchers to gain access to operationalsystems for analytical and experimental purposes.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12MAKING IT BETTERRecommendation 3.  Federal agencies should increase support for
interdisciplinary work on social applications of information tech-
nology that draws on the expertise of researchers from IT and other
disciplines and includes end users of IT systems.Research on the social applications of IT demands the perspectives ofIT researchers, researchers in other academic disciplines, and end users of
IT systems who are familiar with the particular challenges faced and the
viability of different solutions.  A number of programs are in place, such

as the Digital Government program, the Digital Libraries Initiative, and
the NSFÕs Computing and Social System program, that combine theseperspectives and apply them to problem areas, but an initiative is needed
that has a larger scale and scope and that possesses the following charac-
teristics:¥Support provided through a variety of research mechanisms, in-cluding single-investigator grants, small teams of researchers, and larger
research centers that bring together researchers from several disciplines
and different industries for an extended period of interaction;¥Explicit participation in the research process of end users and sys-tems integrators who understand the problems faced in using large-scale
systems and social applications;¥Participation of the federal agencies that are major users of IT sys-tems and that invest considerable resources in the development of IT
systems (such as the Internal Revenue Service, the Social Security Admin-
istration, and the Federal Aviation Administration), not just the tradi-
tional funders of IT research;¥Access to large systems or testbeds so that researchers can gaininsight into operational problems and appreciate the relationships be-
tween an IT system and the larger social or organizational context in
which it operates; and¥Management and oversight by traditional funders of IT research toensure that the work retains a research focus and does not become linked
too closely to development efforts at particular end-user organizations.The NSF has already allocated some funding for IT research centersfocusing on social, economic, and workforce issues associated with IT.
These centers could make valuable contributions to research and educa-
tion in this area if they incorporate end-user perspectives as well as the
perspectives of disciplines such as business, law, economics, and other
social sciences.  They should also be sure to complement their attention to

the effects of IT on society and the economy with parallel efforts to develop

the scientific and engineering knowledge needed to improve the designMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13of IT systems. Additional effort will be needed to review proposals forinterdisciplinary work related to IT and for assuring its quality.  Quality

controls are especially important in fields with growing research budgets,
and interdisciplinary research can be especially difficult to evaluate.
Review and evaluation processes will need to reflect the full range of
perspectives involved in the research.Recommendation 4.  The Bureau of the Census should work with
the National Science Foundation to develop more effective proce-
dures for classifying data on federal and industry investments in
information technology R&D that better account for the dynamic
nature of the industry.Before they can make better decisions on IT research, policy makersneed better data on current expenditures by the federal government and
industry on such research.  Existing data fluctuate from year to year,

largely because of reclassifications of companies among sectors.  These

reclassifications occur as a result of changes within the individual compa-
nies (e.g., new lines of business, mergers, outsourcing of production) as
well as the rules for the classification process itself, which are based on
the composition of the payrolls of individual firms.  The result is inconsis-

tent data that make it difficult to discern trends, even very general ones.
The NSF and the Census Bureau need to develop ways to collect and
disseminate more-consistent data describing past, present, and future
investments in IT R&D.  Additional efforts will be needed to develop

more consistent time-series data for the IT industries in particular and to
develop robust procedures for classifying firms within industrial sectors.Recommendations for UniversitiesRecommendation 5.  Universities should take steps to increase the
ability of faculty members and students to participate in inter-
disciplinary research related to information technology and research
on large-scale systems.Universities have the potential to make significant strides in large-scale systems and social applications research because they have all the
key ingredients:  researchers in a broad range of related areas, from com-
puter science and electrical engineering to business, law, economics, and
other social sciences.  They are also able to complement this research with

educational initiatives that can teach students about large-scale systems
and social applications, thereby helping create a future workforce capable
of researching, developing, and using them.  For the most part, universities
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14MAKING IT BETTERare not currently set up properly to make progress on these issues.  With
some degree of change, they could contribute to the research base at the
same time as they educate students and imbue them with an appreciation
of the issues.  Because getting diverse researchers to work together has

never been easy, incentives must be provided and barriers to collabora-
tion removed.  The availability of funding for work on large-scale IT

systems and the social applications of IT would motivate academic
researchers to pursue the sorts of interdisciplinary research needed to
make progress in these fields, but additional efforts will also be needed to
create a more suitable environment for interdisciplinary research and one
that ensures the quality of such research.The first step should be to ensure that hiring, reviewing, and tenureprocesses are aligned to suit the interdisciplinary nature of the research
that this report recommends and to ensure its quality.  This can be accom-

plished through a variety of mechanisms, including the creation of inter-
disciplinary schools or departments that have their own hiring and pro-motion processes10 or the establishment of guidelines for evaluating faculty
in traditional academic departments who pursue interdisciplinary work.
The sharing of information should be encouraged between university
researchers (both faculty and students) and their counterparts in industry,
especially in companies that urgently need to resolve problems of large-
scale systems and social applications of IT.  The purpose of industry

involvement should not be to facilitate the commercialization of university
research (although this is a welcome outcome) but to provide researchers
with the knowledge they will need to make progress in large-scale sys-
tems and social applications.  In particular, universities should work with

industry to establish more internship opportunities for students and
sabbatical opportunities for faculty, especially in end-user organizations
that do not have established programs aimed at technologists.  Although

such activities may take students away from their faculty supervisors for
a time, the committee believes the experience will ultimately prove valu-
able to the work that these students perform at the university.  Universities

should also bring industry leaders into the classroom and the research
lab.Recommendation 6.  Senior faculty members should take the lead in
pioneering research on large-scale systems and social applications
of information technology.Even though they may have innovative ideas, junior faculty membersare at a distinct disadvantage when they set off in new research directions
that are not considered part of the intellectual core of their disciplines.
Concerns about tenure can limit their willingness to work on topics suchMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15as large-scale systems and social applications of IT that do not fall neatlywithin established research areas.  Senior faculty members, by contrast,

sometimes seek a refreshing change in emphasis.  They should be encour-

aged to establish interdisciplinary research projects, to attract funding
and people to them, and to articulate a vision for such work.  Their

involvement would help legitimize these areas of inquiry and provide an
umbrella under which junior faculty could join them, bringing new ideas
and insights.Recommendations for IndustryRecommendation 7.  Organizations that are significant end users of
information technology systems should actively seek opportunities
to engage in IT research.Large end-user organizations in industries ranging from banking tohealth care to manufacturing face significant challenges in designing,
developing, and operating the IT systems on which they rely and in whose
development they invest large sums of money.  Ideally, they too should

support IT research that would address problems of large-scale systems
and the social applications of IT.  These organizations could benefit hand-

somely from research in these areas.  They also have knowledge of the

application and its operation (as well as its failures) that will prove vital in
these areas of research.  Involving end users in IT research will not be

easy, because few have much interest in research, let alone experience in
conducting or managing it, and the benefits of such engagement may not
be immediately apparent to them.  Nevertheless, the time is right to over-

come these obstacles and experiment with ways to bring end users more
effectively into the research process.  As a first step, end-user representa-
tives should be engaged to serve on advisory boards to IT research pro-
grams, labs, or academic departments.  Over time, they should become

more directly involved, and some end-user organizations could even fund
research for groups or centers whose capabilities match their needs.  Recent
research support by leading financial services firms shows it is possible to
meaningfully engage end-user organizations, albeit on a limited scale.Recommendation 8.  Information technology companies with estab-
lished R&D organizations should develop mechanisms for engag-
ing end users more actively in the research process.To help end users become better engaged in IT research, IT compa-nies with a tradition of research (as opposed to development) should
develop mechanisms for involving end users more extensively in inter-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16MAKING IT BETTERdisciplinary and large-scale systems-related work.  Such IT companies
have track records in research and an interest in better understanding
customer needs.  Companies such as IBM Corporation and Microsoft

Corporation have demonstrated the utility of working more closely with
customers and researchers from different disciplines.  Other companies

may be able to build on these examples and develop other mechanisms
for achieving similar results.A FINAL WORDThe committee believes that these recommendations will strengthenthe nationÕs IT research base sufficiently to help meet societyÕs growingneed for, and dependence on, IT systems.  By strengthening the existing

mechanisms for IT research and experimenting with new mechanisms to
expand IT research into large-scale systems and social applications of IT,
the nation will be able to ease its transition to an information economy.  A

strong research base will provide the industry and the nation with the
knowledge resources needed to harness IT for the common good.REFERENCESArrow, Kenneth.  1962.  
ÒEconomic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,Óin Richard Nelson, ed., The Rate and Direction of Innovative Activity.  Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, N.J.Barr, Avron, and Shirley Tessler.  1998.  
ÒHow Will the Software Talent Shortage End?ÓAmerican Programmer 11(1).  Available online at <http://www.cutter.com/itjournal/
itjtoc.htm#jan98>.Campbell, Donald T.  1969.  
ÒEthnocentrism of Disciplines and the Fish-Scale Model ofOmniscience,Ó pp.  328-348 in Muzafer Sherif and Carolyn W. Sherif, eds.,  
Interdiscipli-nary Relationships in the Social Sciences.  Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1995.  Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Supportthe NationÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999.  Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Gibbs, W.W.  1994.  
ÒSoftwareÕs Chronic Crisis,Ó Scientific American (September):86-95.
Johnson, Jim.  1999.  
ÒTurning Chaos into Success,Ó Software Magazine, December.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.softwaremag.com/archives/1999dec/Success.html>.Jones, C.  1996.  
Applied Software Measurement.  McGraw-Hill, New York.
Nelson, Richard.  1959.  
ÒThe Simple Economics of Basic Research,Ó Journal of PoliticalEconomy 67(2):297-306.Standish Group International, Inc.  1995.  
The Chaos.  Available online at <http://
www.standishgroup.com/chaos.html>.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17NOTES1.These figures represent combined federal obligations for research (basic and applied)
in computer science and electrical engineering, the two academic disciplines most closelyassociated with information technology (IT).  Some work in electrical engineering, such as

research on power systems, is not applicable to IT, and some work in other disciplines isapplicable but is not captured in these statistics.2.These sectors, as defined by the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system, are
SIC 357, office, computing, and accounting machines; SIC 366, communications equipment;SIC 367, electronic components (including semiconductor devices); SIC 48, communications(services); SIC 504, professional and commercial equipment and supplies; and SIC 737,
computer and data processing services (including prepackaged software, custom program-ming, systems integration, and other services).3.As described in greater detail in Chapter 2, federal statistics on IT industries
Õ R&D
investment are not compiled in a consistent manner from year to year because of the fre-quent reclassification of firms from one IT sector to another as well as into and out of the ITindustries.  The aggregate figures used in this report account for reclassifications among IT

sectors but not into or out of the IT industry.4.It is estimated that between 70 and 80 percent of all major system development
efforts are never completed, are late, or overrun cost projections by a wide margin.  Esti-

mates of failure rates in large-scale system development efforts are contained in severalstudies.  See Johnson (1999), Standish Group (1995), Gibbs (1994), Jones (1996), and Barr
and Tessler (1998).5.This definition of a component is much broader than the definition typically used in
the research community.6.The most notable exception to this general rule is IBM, which derives a significant
portion of its revenues from IT-related services and systems work and which maintains asubstantial research program.  About one-quarter of the work conducted by IBM Research

supports its systems and services businesses.7.A discussion of the long-standing challenges inherent in interdisciplinary work in
the social sciences can be found in Campbell (1969).8.Most notably, Xerox failed to capture much of the benefit of its pioneering work in
personal computing.  IBM
Õs work in relational databases and reduced-instruction-set com-puting seeded not only its own product development efforts but also those of numerous
competitors.  Economics provides a theoretical verification of this phenomenon.  See CSTB
(1999), Nelson (1959), and Arrow (1962).9.See Chapter 3 for a more in-depth discussion of each of these topics.
10.In recent years, a number of universities have created interdisciplinary schools that
examine issues at the intersection of IT, business, and the social sciences.  Examples include
the School of Information Management and Systems at the University of California at
Berkeley and the School of Information at the University of Michigan.  Carnegie Mellon
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology also have a number of inter-disciplinary departments and divisions in this general area.  Chapter 4 contains a more

complete list of such programs.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.181Introduction
ÒMay your wildest dreams come trueÓ is an old adage broughtto mind by the phenomenal advances in computing and
communications technology and their deployment in awidening array of business, government, commercial, and social applica-
tions.  The underlying industrial base for computing and communica-

tionsÑthe information technology (IT) industriesÑhas grown rapidly,
creating jobs, improving the standard of living, and fueling the nationÕs
transition to an information economy.  Since 1992, firms that produce

computers, semiconductors, software, and communications equipment
and provide computing and communications services have contributed
one-third of the nationÕs economic growth, and in 1998 they employed 5.2
million workers at wages 85 percent higher than the private-sector aver-
age (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2000).  Companies throughout the

economy are using IT to compete in global markets, and IT promises to
transform the way people work, play, live, and learn.  The nationÕs depen-

dence on the vitality of the technology base for IT was underscored in the
late 1990s by such voices as the chairman of the Federal Reserve, the
director of the National Science Foundation, and the President of the
United States.  This technology base and tomorrowÕs information economy

depend, in turn, on continued research on IT.The role of research in driving innovation and social transformationsis often difficult to see.  The seemingly endless introduction of new goods

and services by entrepreneurs and established corporations obscures the
fundamental science and engineering bases underlying innovation.  It
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19also creates the appearance of a self-sustaining process.  If businesses are
growing and new products are proliferating, why should national leaders
be concerned about IT research?  This question remains central to contem-

porary political debate about federal budgets for IT research, despite
recent increases in funding.  The difficulty of explaining and justifying

federal IT research spending influenced the evolution and eventual trans-
formation of the first large federal IT research initiative, the High Perfor-
mance Computing and Communications Initiative (HPCCI);1 it enlarged
the scope of the PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee(PITAC) and the associated federal proposals for new and larger research
programs, notably the 1999 Information Technology for the Twenty-First
Century (IT2) initiative, and shaped the reports that came out of them;2and it continues to color the annual budget debates about the level and
distribution of IT research funds.An enduring lack of understanding of the nature of both IT researchand industrial innovation in IT makes debates about federal programs in
this area unusually contentious.  Experts from industry and academia,

individually and as participants in groups such as Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) committees, PITAC, and professional
organizations, have asserted publicly that both government and industry
are underinvesting in IT researchÑespecially fundamental research.  Calls
for increased funding have met with skepticism from those who are

critical of the rationale for increased funding, uncertain about the nature
of IT research (which is apparently less comprehensible than, for example,
classical scientific research) and who question why it should be expensive
(a concern that reflects a limited understanding of software research).
Unless these criticisms and questions can be answered, technological
progress may be stymied by a lack of needed research funding.The nationÕs increasing reliance on IT demands a reexamination ofthe IT research base.  Both the substance of the research and how it is

carried out are at issue.  As for substance, the potential is mounting for

problems to arise and for opportunities to be lost as a result of deficiencies
in the technologies already being distributed quickly and widely into the
economy.  Society is becoming dependent on information systems that

are fragile, and companies striving to be competitive in the short term
sacrifice opportunities for IT innovations that depend on sustained or
less-constrained exploration, raising questions about long-term prospects.
Research is needed to address a host of new problemsÑmany arising as aconsequence of interactions among a large and growing number of indi-
vidual componentsÑas well as long-standing problems that are becom-ing more prominent and, once a technology is in use, more difficult to
manage.Procedurally, the situation challenges the confederation of govern-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20MAKING IT BETTERment, industry, and academia that drives IT research.  The give-and-take
among these parties was healthy for several decades, as is clear from
todayÕs commercial and societal successes with IT, but recently it hasbecome weaker.  In addition, industry has faced increasing pressures to

streamline research and development (R&D) as a result of waves of struc-
tural change in the IT industries in the 1980s and 1990s.3  These condi-
tions discourage investments of time and money in research, instead
favoring the creative exploitation of existing science and technology in
the guise of new products.  Today
Õs IT industry is thriving because it isleveraging a rich base of historical investments in research (see Box 1.1);
emblematic of the practice is the now-familiar story of the InternetÕs rootsin government-sponsored academic research (see CSTB, 1999a).  But where,

today, is the base for a thriving industry tomorrow?This report examines the approaches to sustaining IT research, includ-ing institutional support mechanisms for the nationÕs IT research base.The definition of IT research is broad, encompassing work that advances
computing and communications technologies as well as systems that com-
bine those technologies to serve a range of social needs.  The report does

not attempt to develop a detailed research agenda (that information can
be gleaned from other CSTB reports and assorted government docu-
ments).  Rather, it addresses four main topics:
1.Levels of funding for IT researchÑAre government and industrialsponsors providing sufficient funding for research to keep up with the
fast pace of innovation and the explosive growth of the IT marketplace?2.The scope of IT researchÑIs the scope broad enough to address therange of challenges to IT systems as they are increasingly integrated into
business, societal, and government applications?3.The constituencies supporting IT researchÑIs the base of organiza-tions supporting IT research broad enough to ensure sufficient financial
and intellectual contributions needed to advance the field?4.Mechanisms for supporting researchÑAre existing structures forfunding and conducting IT research adequate to address future chal-
lenges?  Are new mechanisms needed?
This report offers recommendations in each of these areas, with theobjective of ensuring that the investments in IT research will propel the
nation through the Information Age.WHY FOCUS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY?Few in the IT industryÑor elsewhereÑforesaw the dramatic progressin IT that has occurred over the last few decades.  Fewer still can read a
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION21BOX 1.1Research and Innovation in IT:  A Historical Perspective
Many of the information technologies commonly used today have roots inresearch conducted decades ago.  That research was often supported by a com-
bination of government agencies and private firms.  Federal funding for computing

research began in earnest immediately following World War II and supported thedevelopment of many of the nationÕs earliest computers.  Beginning in the late
1960s, federal support for long-term fundamental research created a growing
knowledge base for exploitation by innovators and entrepreneurs.  Industry also
funded such research and brought the new technologies to the marketplace.  Thefollowing list presents some of the better-known examples of current technologies
that leverage historical investments in research:¥The InternetÑThe seeds of todayÕs Internet were planted by the DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the late 1960s, when it began todevelop the ARPANET, a packet-switched network used to connect its computingresearchers.  This work sparked the development of the basic communications

protocols used for the Internet as well as electronic mail.¥Graphical User InterfacesÑWork sponsored by DARPA in the late 1960sled to development of the computer mouse and its use as part of a graphical user
interface.  The technology was later incorporated into the Xerox Corporation
Õs Altocomputer and then into Apple ComputerÕs MacIntosh.  It has since become the
standard interface for personal computers.¥Computer graphicsÑWork on computer graphics dates back to ProjectWhirlwind in the late 1940s and its successor, the U.S. Air Force air defense sys-
tem SAGE, which used interactive graphics consoles and displays.  Algorithms for
rendering graphical images (in three dimensions) on a computer screen were firstdeveloped during the 1960s, with many advances emerging from DARPA-funded
work at the University of Utah.¥Speech recognitionÑTodayÕs speech-recognition programs build on decadesof research in artificial intelligence and speech recognition sponsored by both
industry and government.  AT&T and IBM Corporation maintained programs in the
field, as did DARPA, which seeded early work in hidden Markov models on whichthe first commercial products were based.¥Reduced-instruction-set computing (RISC)ÑMany of todayÕs fastest com-puter workstations rely on RISC, a technology pioneered by IBM in the 1970s andfurther developed by researchers with funding from DARPAÕs Very Large ScaleIntegrated Circuit Program, which ran until the early 1980s.¥Relational databasesÑThe relational databases sold by companies likeIBM, Informix, Oracle, and Sybase are the products of research first conducted at
IBM in the 1970s.  Simultaneously, relational databases were pursued by re-
searchers at the University of California at Berkeley with funding from the NationalScience Foundation.  Today
Õs products still rely on the relational model developedby those early projects.SOURCE:  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (1999a).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22MAKING IT BETTERnewspaper today without coming across comments, articles, or specialsections that remark on trends in IT and their social and economic impacts.
Dramatic advances in computer processing speeds, communications band-
width, 
and storage capacities are almost clich”s.  A popular yardstick is
MooreÕs law:  for the last 40 years, computing capability per dollar has
doubled every 18 to 24 months, equivalent to a 100-fold improvement
every 10 to 13 years, reflected in both rapidly increasing performance and
declining price.  These performance gains, the associated development of

software applications, and falling prices for IT relative to its capabilities
have propelled IT into new markets.  For instance, controllers are now

embedded within products such as cellular telephones and automobile
transmissions, and complex information systems are used to manage air
traffic, book air travel reservations, and process electronic commerce
transactions.  Research has borne fruit in a cumulative manner, trans-

forming the IT baseline.  The early emphasis on computation, combined

with the advent, later on, of mass storage devices, focused attention on
the capture, storage, and retrieval of massive amounts of data.  Likewise,
early developments in networking led to ever more sophisticated com-
munications and to distributed processing.  With each advance came

a dramatic expansion in the uses of computing.  The expansion in the use

of communications has been more recent; the combined progress in each
field has stimulated applications of increasing scope and sophistication.To a technologist, IT is being applied to increasingly complex systems,thanks to past advances in microprocessors, algorithms, packet network-
ing, memory, and information storage and retrieval.  To a layperson, IT is

becoming infrastructure, an enabler of more and more of what people do,
even in situations in which the use of a ÒcomputerÓ is neither obvious nor
intentional.  The Internet, because of its pervasiveness and intrinsic ability

to connect many elements, epitomizes these advances, as does the prolif-
eration of personal computers for applications such as electronic banking
and home shopping and the now-routine use of cellular telephones, espe-
cially those capable of Internet access.  All of this is happening because

decades of research led to proven concepts and technologies, lowering
risks enough to enable commercialization.The lesson of the recent growth of the Internet, and the World WideWeb that rides atop it, is that technical success can generate new chal-
lenges:  in short, IT is neither stable nor static.  What will tomorrow
Õs Webbe like?  No one knows for sure, but today
Õs research and experimenta-tion hint at advances in the design and implementation of virtual reality
systems, which enable telepresence and other blends of real and virtual
environments; advances in integrating computing and biology that enable
novel approaches to computation, such as through molecular or chemical
processes; leaps in the capacity to collect, store, and retrieve bothMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION23previously generated and new information; and capabilities surpassingthose of humans for seeing, hearing, and speaking (see Box 1.2).  The

integration of such specific advances into applications and systems that
are more complex than todayÕs state of the art can only be speculated on.What is not speculation is the fact that todayÕs society depends greatly onIT, and tomorrowÕs will do so even more.  The Internet of today is a
beginning, not an end point:  it may be thought of as infrastructure, but it

is far from offering the stability and predictability associated with the
traditional infrastructures of the physical world.WHAT IS INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH?The Many Faces of Information Technology ResearchIT research takes many forms.  It consists of both theoretical and
experimental work, and it combines elements of science and engineering.
Some IT research lays out principles or constraints that apply to all com-
puting and communications systems; examples include theorems that
show the limitations of computation (what can and cannot be computed
by a digital computer within a reasonable time) or the fundamental limits
on capacities of communications channels.  Other research investigates

different classes of IT systems, such as user interfaces, the Web, or elec-
tronic mail (e-mail).  Still other research deals with issues of broad appli-

cability driven by specific needs.  For example, today
Õs high-level pro-gramming languages (such as Java and C) were made possible by research
that uncovered techniques for converting the high-level statements into
machine code for execution on a computer.  The design of the languages

themselves is a research topic:  how best to capture a programmer
Õs inten-tions in a way that can be converted to efficient machine code.  Efforts to

solve this problem, as is often the case in IT research, will require inven-
tion and design as well as the classical scientific techniques of analysis
and measurement.  The same is true of efforts to develop specific and

practical modulation and coding algorithms that approach the funda-
mental limits of communication on some channels.  The rise of digital

communication, associated with computer technology, has led to the irre-
versible melding of what were once the separate fields of communica-
tions and computers, with data forming an increasing share of what is
being transmitted over the digitally modulated fiber-optic cables span-
ning the nation and the world.Experimental work plays an important role in IT research.  One
modality of research is the design experiment, in which a new technique
is proposed, a provisional design is posited, and a research prototype is
built in order to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the design.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24MAKING IT BETTERBOX 1.2Some Research Goals for Information TechnologyDespite the incredible progress made in information technology over the past50 years, the field is far from mature.  A number of compelling goals will drive
research.  The following is just a partial list of possible research goals articulated

by Jim Gray, a leading IT researcher and recipient of the Turing Award, the topprize in computer science.  They are envisioned as well-defined goals that can
stimulate considerable research.¥ScalabilityÑDevise a software and hardware architecture that scales up bya factor of a million.  In other words, an application
Õs storage and processingcapacity would have to be able to automatically grow by a factor of a million, doingjobs faster or doing a million jobs in the same time, just by adding more resources.¥Turing testÑBuild a computer that wins the Òimitation gameÓ at least 30
percent of the time.  In a blind contest, the computer should be able to behave
convincingly like a human 30 percent of the time.¥Speech-to-textÑBuild a device that can hear as well as a native speaker.¥Text-to-speechÑBuild a device that can speak as well as a native speaker.¥See as well as a personÑBuild a device that can recognize objects andbehavior.¥Personal memexÑBuild a system that can record everything a person seesand hears and quickly retrieve any item on request.¥World memexÑBuild a system that given a text corpus can answer ques-tions about the text and summarize the text as precisely and quickly as a humanexpert in that field.  Do the same for music, images, art, and cinema.
¥TelepresenceÑBuild a system that can simulate being some other placeretrospectively as an observer (Teleobserver:  hear and see as well as actually be
there, and as well as a participant), and simulate being some other place as a
participant (Telepresent:  interact with others and with the environment as though
actually there).¥Trouble-free systemsÑBuild a system used by millions of people each dayand yet administered and managed by a single part-time person.¥Secure systemÑAssure that the system in the preceding goal services onlyauthorized users, that service cannot be denied by unauthorized users, and that
information cannot be stolen (and prove it).¥Always upÑBuild a system that is unavailable for less than 1 second perhundred years (and prove it).¥Automatic programmerÑDevise a specification language or user interfacethat (a) makes it easy for people to express designs (1,000 times easier), (b) com-puters can compile, and (c) can describe all applications (is complete).  The system

should reason about the applications, asking questions about exception cases andincomplete specifications, but it should not be onerous to use.SOURCE:  Gray (1999).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION25Although much of the effect of a design can be anticipated using analytictechniques, many of its subtle aspects are uncovered only when the proto-
type is studied.  Some of the most important strides in IT have been made

through such experimental research.  Time-sharing, for example, evolved

in a series of experimental systems that explored different parts of the
technology.  How are a computerÕs resources to be shared among severalcustomers?  How do we ensure equitable sharing of resources?  How do

we insulate each userÕs program from the programs of others?  What
resources should be shared as a convenience to the customers (e.g., com-
puter files)?  How can the system be designed so it
Õs easy to write com-puter programs that can be time-shared?  What kinds of commands does

a user need to learn to operate the system?  Although some of these trade-

offs may succumb to analysis, othersÑnotably those involving the userÕsevaluation and preferencesÑcan be evaluated only through experiment.Ideas for IT research can be gleaned both from the research commu-nity itself and from applications of IT systems.  The Web, initiated by

physicists to support collaboration among researchers, illustrates how
people who use IT can be the source of important innovations.  The Web

was not invented from scratch; rather, it integrated developments in infor-
mation retrieval, networking, and software that had been accumulating
over decades in many segments of the IT research community (Schatz,
1997; Schatz and Hardin, 1994).  It also reflects a fundamental body of

technology that is conducive to innovation and change (CSTB, 1994).

Thus, it advanced the integration of computing, communications, and
information.  The Web also embodies the need for additional science and
technology to accommodate the burgeoning scale and diversity of IT users
and uses:  it became a catalyst for the Internet by enhancing the ease of

use and usefulness of the Internet, it has grown and evolved far beyond
the expectations of its inventors, and it has stimulated new lines of research
aimed at improving and better using the Internet in numerous arenas,
from education to crisis management.Progress in IT can come from research in many different disciplines.For example, work on the physics of silicon can be considered IT research
if it is driven by problems related to computer chips; the work of electrical
engineers is considered IT research if it focuses on communications or
semiconductor devices; anthropologists and other social scientists study-
ing the uses of new technology can be doing IT research if their work
informs the development and deployment of new IT applications; and
computer scientists and computer engineers address a widening range of
issues, from generating fundamental principles for the behavior of infor-
mation in systems to developing new concepts for systems.  Thus, IT

research combines science and engineering, even though the popularÑand even professionalÑassociation of IT with systems leads many peopleMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26MAKING IT BETTERto concentrate on the engineering aspects.  Fine distinctions between the
science and engineering aspects may be unproductive:  computer science
is special because of how it combines the two, and the evolution of both is
key to the well-being of IT research.  Because of its emphasis on IT sys-

tems in the service of society, this report emphasizes the engineering
perspective, but takes an even broader view of the field that includes the
interaction between IT systems and their end users.4A Classification of Information Technology ResearchDistinguishing different types of research is problematic and politi-cized; it feeds enduring science policy debates that can seem to confuse
the issues, but it remains important for diagnosing what needs to be done
and how that might differ from what is being done.  A variety of terms

have been used to distinguish between different types of scientific and
technological research.  The most widely used distinction is between basic

and applied research.  In this classification, which is used by federal

statistical agencies, basic research is defined as work motivated by a desire
to better understand fundamental aspects of phenomena without specific
applications in mind; it is often called curiosity-driven research.  Applied

research is defined as work performed to gain the understanding needed
to meet a particular need; it is often called problem-oriented research.
Although useful in some respects, this distinction tends to place utility and
understanding at the extremes of a one-dimensional research spectrum.Another, more useful classification, developed by Donald Stokes,overcomes these limitations by explicitly separating the usefulness of
research results from the degree to which the research seeks fundamental
understanding (Stokes, 1997).  It classifies research along two dimensions:

whether use is considered, and whether or not the research pursues fun-
damental understanding (Figure 1.1).  Stokes distinguishes four types of

research:  (1) pure basic research performed with the goal of fundamental

understanding, without any thought of practical use (exemplified by Niels
BohrÕs research on atomic structure); (2) use-inspired basic research thatpursues fundamental understanding but is motivated by a particular
question or application (exemplified by Louis PasteurÕs research on thebiological bases of fermentation and disease, and by the fundamental
work done for the Manhattan Project); (3) pure applied research that is
motivated by use but does not seek fundamental understanding (exem-
plified by Thomas Alva EdisonÕs inventive work); and (4) applied researchthat is not motivated by a particular application (such as the development
of taxonomies for birds and plants, or Tycho BraheÕs work to documentthe position of the planets, which later informed KeplerÕs developmentsof laws about planetary motion).  In contrast to the basic/applied research
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION27Consideration of Use?NoYesYesPure Basic ResearchBohrUse-Inspired Basic ResearchPasteurQuest forFundamentalUnderstanding?NoApplied ResearchUnmotivated by ApplicationsBrahePure Applied ResearchEdisonFIGURE 1.1  Stokes
Õ quadrant model of research.  SOURCE:  Stokes (1997).
dichotomy, this taxonomy explicitly recognizes the category of researchthat is simultaneously inspired by use and seeks fundamental knowl-
edge.  This category of research
ÑÒPasteurÕs quadrantÓ in Stokes
Õ formu-
lationÑis especially important in IT.A considerable amount of basic IT has been developed as a result ofPasteur-style research that focuses on understanding the fundamental
principles of information representation and behavior, addresses wide-
spread and enduring problems, and yields broad capabilities rather than
a specific product or system (e.g., better ways to specify, build, and main-
tain software of all sorts).  Operating systems stem from research into

how multiple tasks can share a single computer.  Communications and

networking research seeks better ways to overcome constraints on com-
munication, such as the nature (ÒqualityÓ) of service needed for deliver-ing real-time video or audio.  Today
Õs reduced-instruction-set computing(RISC) microprocessors are based on research that showed how to increase
performance by optimizing the speed of the processor instructions that
are used most frequently in actual computer programs.  Speech recogni-

tion and machine vision technologies have matured through research into
the machine collection of information from the physical world and its
interpretation, which has to be quick and accurate to be useful.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28MAKING IT BETTERPasteur-style research in IT sometimes aims at solving new problemsthat arise in older areas.  The Internet satisfied an older research goal of

carrying many types of data traffic over a single network, and it generates
new research problems associated with multimedia (including audio and
video), congestion control, quality of service, and new communication
paradigms such as broadcast and multicast.  In wireless communications,

rapidly increasing demands for service stimulate research into smart
antenna systems and multiuser detection to achieve dramatic increases in
capacity.  More generally, IT researchers are still struggling to find the

best ways to tell computers what to doÑthat is, to write correct softwareefficiently.  They are also still struggling to find the best hardware designs

that can scale up to many thousands of processors harnessed to a single
computation.  These are difficult research problems that endure.
Pasteur-style research tends to have long time horizons.  It involves a
cycle in which novel designs are worked out, implemented, and evalu-
ated in use.  The cycle is often long because each individual stage may

require that new techniques be developed.  For example, new program-

ming language designs require developing techniques for translating pro-
grams into machine language.  Implementations of the language have to

be complete, robust, and widely available before widespread use begins;
evaluation requires that a number of programmers learn the new
language, apply it to a range of systems, and accumulate evidence about
the value of the language; only some languages will survive these pro-
cesses.  Previous reports on retrospective assessments of IT have demon-

strated how much of IT research has yielded results that became evident
only after periods of time measurable in decades, a reality that may seem
counterintuitiveÑthe new clich” of 
ÒInternet timeÓ has not erased the
inherent lags in creating and leveraging new scientific and engineering
knowledge (see CSTB, 1995, 1999a).  A long-term perspective also fosters

recognition of the key role of unexpected research results, which lay the
foundations for new technologies, products, and entire industries.In the IT sector, applied research differs from Pasteur-style  research
only in degree:  the focus is sufficiently narrow that results usually apply
only to specific applications, products, or systems.  Applied IT research

tends to be short term, with clear paths to the transfer of research results
into production.  In one example from industry, a research project inves-

tigated how to obtain maximum data rates from a specific disk drive
attached to a specific computer that was to be used to transmit digital
video data over a network in real time.  Unlike conventional disk-driver

software, which sacrifices performance to ensure that there are no errors
in the data read from the disk, this application emphasized speed above
all else.  This investigation was (arguably) research because it was not
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION29known beforehand what data rates could be achieved or how best tocontrol the disk drive.  But the research targeted a particular product, and

the results were unlikely to apply to a broad class of settings.Sometimes, what is intended to be applied research achieves far-reaching results more characteristic of Pasteur-style research.  For exam-

ple, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University who were investigating
ways to improve scheduling on a particular factory shop floor devised a
new type of optimization algorithm, called constrained optimization, that
was able to solve more complex problems than could previous algorithms.
The new algorithm went far beyond solving a shop-floor problem:  it had

applications in many other domains.  In fact, its use for optimizing the

assignment of payload to transport aircraft during Operation Desert Storm
saved millions of dollars in transportation costs.  This result epitomizes

the benefits that can emerge from research on specific problems that also
attempts to arrive at broad-based solutions.Both basic and applied research differ from development.  Develop-
ment exploits the knowledge generated by research into scientific and
technological phenomena, creating specific goods, processes, or services.
In general, Internet start-ups, electronic commerce (e-commerce) technol-
ogy, and the growing variety of information appliances are creatures of
development.  Although useful knowledge is often created in the process

of developing new goods and services (as well as in manufacturing and
selling them) and development generates new questions for research to
address, research has the primary aim of creating scientific and technical
knowledge, and in the process it serves to train people, who go on to
generate (and apply) more knowledge.  Unless the research base is replen-

ished, developmentÑand innovationÑwill eventually slow.  The distinc-
tion between research and development and the relationship of one to the
other are often obscured by glib references to R&D; tallies of industrial
investment in R&D, which tends to favor development, can produce large
numbers without, however, yielding research value.  Part of the mis-

understanding lies in the available data, part in interpretation of the data.THE CHANGING ENVIRONMENT FOR INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThe 1990s witnessed the rise of a new environment for IT researchinvestments.  The structure of the IT industry has changed, and the nature

of IT applications has greatly expanded.  A review of the changes that

have taken place underscores why now is an appropriate time to examine
the structures and mechanisms used to fund and conduct research, to
ensure that they will help the nation reach its IT-related objectives.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30MAKING IT BETTERChanging Industrial StructureThe IT industry appears to be growing faster than the research basethat has supported it, raising questions about the future in an arena where
ideas and talent, or intellectual capital, are the most critical assets.  Most

obvious is the influx of smaller firms that leverage fundamental research
undertaken in universities (and elsewhere).  Also obvious is the relative

decline of several large U.S. industrial laboratories as sources of IT
research.  Players present in the early 1990s, such as Digital Equipment

Corporation, Control Data Corporation, Cray Research, and even Apple
Computer, are no longer contributing to the research base.  Enduring

players, such as IBM Corporation and AT&T, have reorganized and now
focus their research more narrowly than they did in the 1970s and 1980s.
Newer companies, such as Microsoft Corporation, and foreign corpora-
tions, such as NEC and Mitsubishi, launched U.S. research laboratories in
the late 1980s and 1990s; the impact of these new efforts remains to be
seenÑwhat is known is that they have attracted leading researchers fromacademia.5  Industrial research relevant to IT has grown, both in absolute
terms and as a share of all such research, but that growth is dwarfed by
the IT industryÕs growth.  In this environment, any research investment
can have great leverage and influence developments across a broad spec-
trum of industry and society.Why does change in the IT industry matter?  One might expect, after
all, that as an industry matures, R&D spending would decline as a pro-
portion of revenues; such a decline could also come from expanding sales
of a stable productÑone for which the R&D has been more or less com-pleted.  An industry whose history is measured in decades cannot, however,

be called mature.  Indeed, the evidence of the 1990s points to rejuvenation

rather than senescenceÑthe rapid growth of the Internet and its associ-ated business activity, for example, are new phenomena, and that activity
will shape yet other phenomena through cumulative experimentation
with the network-based interactions of people and systems.  Information

technology is neither mature nor stable, and the structure and competi-
tive conduct of the industry continue to change.Measuring the IT research effort is difficult; the most common yard-stick is funding.  Several factors contribute to concerns about the suffi-

ciency of IT research funding.  First, attempts to reduce federal budget

deficits and trim defense spending (which historically supported a sig-
nificant portion of computing and electrical engineering research)
constrained federal funding for university research in the early 1990s,
affecting career decisions and research output in ways that are beginning
to have an impact now.  Efforts to enhance accountability in federal gov-

ernment operations and spending also led to increasing support for near-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION31term, mission-oriented research by federal agencies, at the expense ofmore fundamental long-term research.6  Yet, as the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) observed, federal funding for long-term research Òmay havea disproportionately large effect on the direction that information tech-
nology takes in the long runÓ (Webre, 1999).  Indeed many argue that thetrue value of the early research investments in IT by agencies such as the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) has been support for the creation of technolo-
gies and capabilities not known before (CSTB, 1999a).  External validation

of these claims may be gauged not only from industry growth, which lags
research investments, but also in flows of venture capital funds, which,
according to the CBO, Òraise the efficiency of existing R&D by raising therate at which ideas developed in the laboratory are brought to marketÓ(Webre, 1999).  Realizing the future potential of IT therefore depends on

continued federal support for fundamental research.Second, the private sector also faces growing disincentives to invest-ing in long-term research.  Increased competition has forced many blue-

chip firms to restructure their IT research and development programs to
concentrate on problems with greater market relevance.  The most obvi-

ous examples are the reduction in, and reorientation of, research and
development investments by historical industry leaders IBM and AT&T.
At the same time, a broader move toward a more horizontal, layered
industry structure has resulted in the transfer of research and develop-
ment to the suppliers of IT components, whether microprocessors, disk
drives, or software.  The associated specialization may militate against

sufficient progress in systems research, which unifies efforts across the IT
industries (see Box 1.3 for a description of component research vs. sys-
tems research).  At the same time, new entrants into the marketplace, and

the new mix of products, feature players without a research history.  New

software enterprises and Web-based ventures can be started with a few
highly talented people and a little capital.  The venture capital industry is

ready and willing to provide the additional funding needed if the start-up
appears to be on its way to success.Third, MooreÕs law has the effect of driving IT companies to offer thevery latest technology continually.  To do otherwise would mean losing

out to competitors.  There is an unusually high obsolescence factor driven

by the rapid advances in IT.  Any company attempting to offer 2-year-old

versions of its systems would, in effect, be offering technology only half
as cost-effective as the latest technology allows.  In other words, the pen-

alty for being late to market is to lag the performance of more rapidly
developed competitive products.  Abbreviated product development

cycles accelerate the pace of researchÑif researchers can produce tangibleresults faster, then products can change faster.  If research is done at all, it
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32MAKING IT BETTERBOX 1.3Components, Systems, and ApplicationsEven in fields traditionally associated with information technology (IT), themethods and subjects of research can vary.  These problems can be viewed on
three levels:¥Components are individual elements of computing and communicationssystems that have specific interfaces and functions.  They include hardware and

software.¥Systems are amalgams of many interacting components that are combinedto perform a particular set of functions, however broadly those functions may be
defined.  Systems must maintain their performance guarantees under widely vary-
ing and unknown external (and internal) conditions.¥Applications are components and systems that are embedded in a largerenvironmental or organizational context to solve particular problems, such as airtraffic control or electronic commerce.  They provide value to end-users, whether
the end user is an individual or an organization.The distinction between components, systems, and applications is not absolutebut depends on the perspective from which they are viewed.  A personal computer

(PC), for example, may be considered an application by a microprocessor designer,a system by a PC designer, and a component by a network designer.  As IT has
become more integral to everyday life and work, the set of research problemsassociated with systems and applications has grown.  These problems result from
success in building components, such as the PC and the Internet, which have in
turn created opportunities for new systems and applications.is often impossible to follow the traditional open research model, withresults broadly available for review.  As suggested earlier in this chapter,
research investments that are coupled more closely to market objectives
tend to refine and exploit existing knowledge rather than lay the ground-
work for the more radical innovations upon which the industryÕs futuresuccess will surely rely.  The shortcomings of this mode of operation are

obvious in the areas of securityÑwhere, for example, the cycle of iterativeproduct release, public announcement of product flaws, and product fixes
has become the norm (CSTB, 1999b)Ñand of usability, where, for exam-ple, the lack of time for studying how real people with differing abilities
use systems and what they need and want from the systems continues to
constrain ease of use (CSTB, 1997).  The situation is compounded by long-

standing difficulties in improving productivity in the development of
quality software; progress in software engineering continues to be elusive
(CSTB, 1999b).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION33Expanding Applications of Information TechnologyThe second major change affecting IT research is the expanding roleof IT systems in a number of important social applications of IT that
support groups of people performing tasks related to government, industry,
business, and commerce and in which the technology and larger organi-
zational or social processes are inseparable.  It is no exaggeration to say

that, today, virtually every facet of government, industry, and commerce
is touched by IT, and some depend heavily on it.  Many crucial organiza-
tional and societal systems operate at a scale and complexity that would
simply not be feasible without the assistance of IT.  These applications

tend to implemented in large-scale systemsÑIT systems that containmany hardware and software components that interact with each other in
complex ways.  Many social applications of IT are characterized by the

deep interrelationship of the IT with nontechnological elements, such as
people, workers, groups of people, students, and organizations of workers.
For example, data storage has become a foundation of organizational
processes that involve people and material as well as data.  Networking

has integrated computing into many human interactions, supporting group
activities and collaboration:  for example, collaboration on the design of a

complex vehicle by manufacturers, suppliers, and major customers who
share in the development and modification of plans and specifications or
the enhancement of retail product and pricing strategies and customer
service by capturing information about customer buying behavior.Newfound applications of IT represent a significant step forward inthe evolution of computing, much of which has been shaped by the needs
of and conditions in the scientific and engineering communities.7  The
runaway success of the Internet has vastly expanded the range and
sophistication of applications, making the issues surrounding large-scale
system design, which were for a long time open issues, more critical and
immediate.  For example, growing numbers of IT applications are span-

ning different organizations and administrative domains, incorporating
not only multiple users but also multiple organizations (with different
preferences, procedures, capabilities, and so on) into a single application.
As a result, it is becoming much less appropriate to design applications
with the assumption that they will be implemented, deployed, operated,
and maintained in a coordinated fashion under central control.8Increasing complexity and sophistication are predictable trends.  They
are standard phenomena in technologically advanced industries, in which
productivity gains, fundamental innovations, and difficult, if less funda-
mental, research problems continue for many years.9  A corollary is the
generation of research problems, discussed in the subsequent chapters,
that arise from technical complexity.  New IT systems are especially com-
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34MAKING IT BETTERplex because of their large size, the number of interacting components,and their intimate involvement with people who are themselves complex
components.  The performance of these cannot be fully modeled, so it is

difficult to understand how they work before they are put to actual use.
Their intended applications and design continue to evolve, and they are
increasingly embedded in real-world systems.  This situation stands in

contrast to the large-scale systems of the past, such as the telephone
system, which, because it was so regulated and standardized, did not
have to address heterogeneity to the same degree as do todayÕs large-scale IT systems.The shortcomings in the current state of technology supporting socialapplications of IT are painfully evident.  Engineers are building IT sys-

tems that venture beyond the state of knowledge, much as designers of
the Tacoma Narrows bridge ventured too far into lightweight suspension
bridge design.10  Today
Õs news reports of system outages in electronictrading, Internet access, and telephony signal that users expect IT systems
to have characteristics of reliability and availability that parallel those of
physical infrastructures, such as roads, bridges, and power supplies.
Aggravating the situation is the distribution of the underlying computing
and networking infrastructure across multiple organizations, with com-
ponents designed by multiple equipment and software vendors.  A low

level of coordination is possible, but the virtual distributed computing
infrastructure cannot be designed or even ÒtunedÓ in the same way as
earlier generations of computing infrastructure were, when everything
was typically under the control of a single organization and its hand-
picked vendors.  As a result, today
Õs infrastructure forms a rather shakysubstrate for the distributed social applications of IT that depend on it.One manifestation of this reality is vulnerability to various securitythreats, unpredictable emergent behaviors, and breakdowns.  It is diffi-

cult to predict or control the performance of large-scale systems or the
environment in which they operate.  Challenges include constant change

in both functional requirements and regulatory constraints, as well as in
the underlying infrastructure itself, all of which have the effect of com-
pounding the vulnerability and performance issues.  The responses to

these challenges are generally ad hoc and not based on any fundamental
understanding that could inspire confidence in the methodologies and
outcomes.  Indeed, the many shortcomings and even failures of past

efforts suggest that confidence would not be justified.Many system problems have been evident for decades, but the broad-ening deployment of IT and growing dependence on it mean that the
payoff from finally resolving them will be greater than ever.  Enduring

difficulties include achieving parallelism in systems, reusing system com-
ponents, enhancing ease of use and trustworthiness, and supporting aMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION35larger scale.  Some other difficulties are becoming more compelling:  for
example, achieving adaptability (the ability to evolve over time) or main-
taining availability of use in the face of predictable and unpredictable
problems.11  The need for progress on these problems has become acute.
12Major users of large-scale systems, networks, and applications are
severely limited in their ability to develop new IT systems by high devel-
opment costs, uncertain outcomes, and the need to maintain existing
operations even though a new system could reduce operational costs,
speed product innovation, and improve the services they provide to their
customers.The problems associated with large-scale systems are much the sameas those associated with the large, monolithic systems created by organi-
zations like the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Internal Rev-
enue Service (IRS), and large private companies.  They could become

characteristics of systems used for health care, education, manufacturing,
and other social applications that have become widespread.13  The con-
tinued development of computing systems embedded in other devices
and systems promises to exacerbate these problems.  Microprocessors are

being incorporated into an increasing array of devices, from automobile
transmissions and coffeemakers to a range of electronic measuring
devices, such as thermostats, pollution detectors, cameras, microphones,
and medical devices (Business Week Online, 1999b).  They are also entering
a range of information appliances that can be used for playing music,
reading electronic books, sending and reading e-mail, and browsing the
Web.  Such devices are expected to become more numerous than stand-

alone computers and will be able to share information across the Internet
and other information infrastructures.  Some believe that, within 10 years,

discrete microprocessors will be knitted together into ad hoc distributed
computers whose terminals are laptops, cell phones, or handheld devices.In considering the social applications of IT, two distinct but relatedcategories of research are relevant.  The first is systems research, which

has long been pursued in the computing community but takes on added
significance in light of the broadening range of functions supported by
large-scale systems.  In fact, the definition of systems research has

changed.  In the past, it meant primarily computer architecture, operating

systems, and related computer science subjects.  Research in these sub-

jects continues, driven by the need for highly scalable systems, around-
the-clock availability, and the like.  However, the greatest impact of sys-

tems and opportunities for them transcend the technology per se:  they lie

in the social applications of IT.  There is a huge demand for research in e-
commerce systems and technologies, content management and analysis,
community and collaboration systems, and so forth.  There is a broad

spectrum of social applications of IT, ranging from those that serve pri-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36MAKING IT BETTERmarily a single user operating in a larger context (as in home bankingapplications that are used by a single user but connect into the bankÕsfinancial system) through those that serve groups of users in a time-
limited activity, through those that serve the needs of organizations,
through those that serve groups of organizations (in commerce or tax
collection, for example), to those that serve individual users interacting
with groups of organizations (as in online shopping).  Systems research

will aim at new levels of automation and integration of activities within
and among organizations.  It will couple IT more closely than ever to

complex social and business processes, making IT more truly an informa-
tion infrastructure.  But such coupling also complicates the pursuit of

success.The second category of research focuses on IT embedded in a socialcontext.  This research addresses the technology itself, asking how IT can
be changed to provide greater benefits to users and end-user organizations
through social applications.  This perspective is the opposite of the more

conventional perspective on the impact of technology, which emphasizes
how people must change to accommodate IT:  the question is how tech-

nology can be changed to accommodate people and organizations.One characteristic of IT is its extreme malleability.  At the level of
software and applications, there are few physical limits to be concerned
about, and the inherent flexibility of the technology enables it to adjust
rather unconstrainedly to application needs, at least in theory.  There are,

however, serious obstacles to carrying out such adjustments.  These

include the practical difficulties of changing existing approaches and
infrastructure, known by economists as Òpath-dependent effectsÓ and
Òlock-in.Ó  But even if these economic obstacles could be overcome, thereis simply a lack of fundamental understanding of how the technology
could be made to better serve the social applications of IT.  Furthermore,

there are serious gaps in the methodologies for translating contextual
application requirements into concrete architectures and specifications
for a software implementation (as well as gaps in methods for modifying
the context to take maximum advantage of IT).  The implication is that

trial and error is inevitable, as are false starts and dead ends.Technical and organizational factors are intertwined, adding to thescientific and engineering challenges.  For example, despite its leveraging

of work on constrained optimization in the Gulf War, cited above, the
United States experienced notable logistical failures in that war:  some 40
percent of the sea containers that arrived dockside at the Saudi disembar-
kation points had to be physically opened and inspected for want of
documentation of their contents and its disposition, and it took at least
twice as long as the Department of DefenseÕs worst-case projections tomobilize the necessary warfighting materiel in Saudi Arabia and otherMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION37key points and nearly four times as long to get all that materiel to where itwas supposed to go.  These represent failures in information systems and

reflect underinvestments in areas such as sealift, containerization, and
logistics, none of which is as intriguing as, say, smart bombs.  They under-

score the importance of human and organizational factors in harnessing
IT and demonstrate why more research needs to be done on the blend of
factors.  Although in practice IT has always been shaped by the environ-

ment in which it is used, IT research needs to focus more on the overall
system and the operational context in which such systems will be used.To date, IT research has not emphasized systems and applications tonearly the extent called for by the virtual explosion of sophisticated social
applications of IT as a result of the Internet.  This is not to say there has

been a complete void.  Indeed, there has been a substantial effort, but it

appears to have been inadequate when weighed against the significant
challenges and tremendous opportunities. There is a critical need for more
fundamental understanding, given the rapidly expanding deployment of
applications that support organizational missions and the interaction of
many entities (such as businesses, universities, and government) as well
as of society in general.  This is an area in which opportunities abound for

substantial advances in technology, with the goal of making applications
much more effective and improving their development, administration,
operation, and maintenance in terms of effectiveness, reliability, trust-
worthiness, and cost.IMPLICATIONS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThe challenges posed by large-scale IT systems and the social applica-tions of IT can be addressed effectively only if the IT research base is
expanded.  Past research in IT has tended to focus on areas such as the

following:¥Fundamental understanding of the limitations on computation andcommunications;¥Underlying technologies (such as integrated circuits), design tech-niques and tools (such as compilers), components (such as microprocessors),
and computer systems (such as parallel and networked computers); and¥Applications and usability for isolated users, improvements in thehuman-computer interface, and applications that serve an isolated user.This technology base must be carried forward; continuing substantialprogress will be needed to support and maintain the progress in larger
domains.  As the importance of networking increases, research in associ-

ated challenges (such as distributed file systems and transaction and
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38MAKING IT BETTERmulticast protocols) is expanding.  A number of engaging social applica-
tions (such as e-mail, newsgroups, chat rooms, multiplayer games, and
remote learning) have emerged from the research community.  As is true
for other relatively immature suites of technologies, much of the research
was begun in academia, and large segments of both the research agenda
and its commercial applications have migrated to industry.Past research in technology emphasized underlying technologies andcomponents, in part because these were necessary ingredients for getting
started and in part because it was challenging to obtain the  functionality
and performance required of even the most basic applications.  Today, the

challenge is almost the reverse.  In the wake of several decades of expo-

nential advances in the capabilities of both electronics and fiber optics, it
can be argued that the technologies are beginning to outstrip societyÕsunderstanding of how to use them effectively.  Increasingly, the challenge

can be stated as follows:  Wonderful technologies are now in our grasp;

how can they be put to good use?  This is not to minimize either the

importance or the challenges of advancing the core technologies, because
such advances are critical to progress in applications built on these tech-
nologies.  Rather, the point is that the existing research agenda needs to

accommodate a major push into the uses of technology.The idea of an expanded IT research agenda is not entirely new.  A
study committee convened by CSTB in the early 1990s observed both that
intellectually substantive and challenging computing problems can and
do arise in the context of problem domains outside computer science and
engineering per se and that computing research can be framed within the
disciplineÕs own intellectual traditions in a manner that is directly appli-cable to other problem domains (CSTB, 1992).  The committee viewed

computing research as an engine of progress and conceptual change in
other problem domains, even as these domains contribute to the identifi-
cation of new areas of inquiry within computer science and engineering.
Its recommendations sought to sustain the core effort in computer science
and engineering (similar to ÒcomponentsÓ research as defined in this
report) while simultaneously broadening the field to explore intellectual
opportunities available at the intersection of computer science and engi-
neering and other problem domains (see Box 1.4).  Efforts over the past

decade have shown both the virtue and the difficulty of including more
application-inspired work under the umbrella of IT research, but the need
for such work continues to outstrip efforts to produce it.As the emphasis shifts from applications serving solitary users andsingle departments to those serving large groups of users, entire enter-
prises, and critical societal infrastructures, the issues related to this em-
bedding become more interesting and challenging.  In particular, research

is needed in two areas in addition to IT components:  (1) the technical
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION39BOX 1.4Echoes of CSTBÕs Computing the FutureIn the early 1990s, the CSTB Committee to Assess the Scope and Direction ofComputer Science and Technology was charged to assess how best to organizethe conduct of research and teaching in computer science and engineering (CS&E)

in the future.  In considering appropriate responses, the committee formulated a
set of priorities, the first two of which are relevant to this report:Priority 1ÑSustain the core effort in CS&E, i.e., the effort that creates the theoret-ical and experimental science base on which computing applications build.  This

core effort has been deep, rich, and intellectually productive and has been indis-
pensable for its impact on practice in the last couple of decades.Priority 2ÑBroaden the field.  Given the solid CS&E core and the many intellectual
opportunities available at the intersection of CS&E and other problem domains,
the committee believes that academic CS&E is well positioned to broaden its self-
concept.  Such broadening will also result in new insights with wide applicability,

thereby enriching the core.  Furthermore, given the pressing economic and social

needs of the nation and the changing environment for industry and academia, the

committee believes academic CS&E must broaden its self-concept or risk becom-
ing increasingly irrelevant to computing practice.
These priorities led the committee to offer a set of recommendations that, whilelinked to particular programs of the time, have continued relevance today and
foreshadow the recommendations made in Chapter 5 of this report.Recommendation 1ÑThe High Performance Computing and Communications(HPCC) Program should be fully supported throughout the planned 5-year pro-
gram.  The HPCC program is of utmost importance for three reasons.  The first is

that high-performance computing and communications are essential to the nationÕsfuture economic strength and competitiveness, especially in light of the growing

need and demand for ever more advanced computing tools in all sectors of society.

The second reason is that the program is framed in the context of scientific and
engineering grand challenges.  Thus the program is a strong signal to the CS&E

[computer science and engineering] community that good CS&E research can
flourish in an application context and that the demand for interdisciplinary and

applications-oriented CS&E research is on the rise.  And finally, a fully funded

HPCC Program will have a major impact on relieving the funding stress affecting
the academic CS&E community. . . .Recommendation 2ÑThe federal government should initiate an effort to supportinterdisciplinary and applications-oriented CS&E research in academia that is
related to the missions of the mission-oriented federal agencies and departments

that are not now major participants in the HPCC [High Performance Computing

and Communications] Program.  Collectively, this effort would cost an additional

$100 million per fiscal year in steady state above amounts currently planned.  Many

federal agencies are not currently participating in the HPCC Program, despite the

utility of computing to their missions, and they should be brought into the program.
Those agencies that support substantial research efforts, though not in CS&E,
should support interdisciplinary CS&E research, i.e., CS&E research undertaken
jointly with research in other fields.  Problems in these other fields often include an
continuedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40MAKING IT BETTERimportant computational component whose effectiveness could be enhanced sub-
stantially by the active involvement of researchers working at the cutting edge of

CS&E research.   Those agencies that do not now support substantial research

efforts of any kind, i.e., operationally oriented agencies, should consider support-
ing applications-oriented CS&E research because of the potential that the efficien-

cy of their operations would be substantially improved by some research advance

that could deliver a better technology for their purposes.  Such research could also

have considerable Òspin-offÓ benefit to the private sector as well.
Recommendation 3ÑAcademic CS&E should broaden its research horizons,embracing as  legitimate and cogent not just research in core areas (where it has

been and continues to be strong) but also research in problem domains that derive

from nonroutine computer applications in other fields and areas or from technology-
transfer activities.  The academic CS&E community should regard as scholarship

any activity that results in significant new knowledge and demonstrable intellectual

achievement, without regard for whether that activity is related to a particular appli-
cation or whether it falls into the traditional categories of basic research, applied
research, or development. Chapter 5 describes appropriate actions to implement
this recommendation.Recommendation 4ÑUniversities should support CS&E as a laboratory discipline(i.e., one with both theoretical and experimental components).  CS&E departments

need adequate research and teaching laboratory space, staff support (e.g., techni-
cians, programmers, staff scientists); funding for hardware and software acquisi-

tion, maintenance, and upgrade (especially important on systems that retain their
cutting edge for just a few years); and network connections.  New faculty should be

capitalized at levels comparable to those in other scientific or engineering disci-
plines.SOURCE:  Excerpts from Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (1992), pp. 5-8.
BOX 1.4 Continuedchallenges, such as trustworthiness, scalability, and location transparency,associated with large-scale systems and (2) challenges that surround the
molding of embedded IT within its application context, that is, within the
social applications of IT.  The second challenge can be considered only

partly a technical one, arising as it does from the context of IT.  These are
difficult problems to characterize, let alone solve.An analogy to the health sciences may be helpful in understandingthe relationship between the more traditional components-oriented
research and the additional work that is needed on large-scale systems
and on the social applications of IT.  One way to classify the health sciences
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION41is to divide them into three related and overlapping sets of disciplines,each with its own research base:¥The biological sciences, which examines the basic scientific processesthat underlie much of the progress in medicine;¥Physiology, anatomy, and pathology, which focus on understand-ing how biological systems, such as organisms composed of interacting
organs, work and how their components can be manipulated to provide
medical benefits; and¥Clinical medicine and epidemiology.  The former focuses on treat-ing human diseases, drawing on the other disciplines but also working
closely and empirically with patients; the latter focuses on the relation-
ship between environments and health.Pursuing this analogy, the component- and technology-orientedresearch that has so far dominated IT research is similar to research in the
biological sciences:  it develops the basic understanding and techniques

that are invaluable in constructing working systems.  Research related to

large-scale systems that use IT is analogous to physiology:  it attempts to

understand the interactions among components and the development of
systems.  Interdisciplinary research involving the social sciences, busi-

ness, and law, in collaboration with technologists and addressing many of
the social and organizational challenges posed by the social applications
of IT, is analogous to medicine and epidemiology.  This research is focused

on applications and is justified by the direct impact it can have on them
and society as a whole.As this report argues, research in components, systems, and applica-tions is needed to ensure the development of fundamental understanding
that will allow IT systems to evolve to meet societyÕs growing needs.  This
is not research directed at finding a more effective way to use IT in a
narrow application domain; rather, it is research directed at revolutioniz-
ing the understanding of how distributed computing environments with
decentralized design and operations can offer predictable, reproducible
performance and capability and controlled vulnerability.  It is also

directed at revolutionizing the ability to accommodate rapid change in
both the context and requirements of the infrastructure and applications.
It is directed at fundamentally revamping methodologies for capturing
application requirements and transforming them into working applica-
tions.  It is directed at revolutionizing the organizational processes and

group dynamics that form the application context in ways that can most
effectively leverage IT.  This is long-term research that is extremely chal-

lenging.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42MAKING IT BETTERIMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH ENTERPRISEThe trends in IT suggest that the nation needs to reinvent IT researchand develop new structures to support, conduct, and manage it.  The

history of U.S. support for IT research established enduring principles for
research policy:  support for long-term fundamental research; support for

the development of large systems that bring together researchers from
different disciplines and institutions to work on common problems; and
work that builds on innovations pioneered in industrial laboratories
(CSTB, 1999a).As IT permeates many more real-world applications, additional con-stituencies need to be brought into the research process as both funders
and performers of IT research.  This is necessary not only to broaden the

funding base to include those who directly benefit from the fruits of the
research, but also to obtain input and guidance.  An understanding of

business practices and processes is needed to support the evolution of e-
commerce; insight from the social sciences is needed to build IT systems
that are truly user-friendly and that help people work better together.  No

one truly understands where new applications such as e-commerce, elec-
tronic publishing, or electronic collaboration are headed, but business
development and research together can promote their arrival at desirable
destinations.Many challenges will require the participation and insight of the enduser and the service provider communities.  They have a large stake in

seeing these problems addressed, and they stand to benefit most directly
from the solutions.  Similarly, systems integrators would benefit from an

improved understanding of systems and applications because they would
become more competitive in the marketplace and be better able to meet
their estimates of project cost and time.  Unlike vendors of component

technologies, systems integrators and end users deal with entire informa-
tion systems and therefore have unique perspectives on the problems
encountered in developing systems and the feasibility of proposed solu-
tions.  Many of the end-user organizations, however, have no tradition of

conducting IT researchÑor technological research of any kind, in factÑand they are not necessarily capable of doing so effectively; they depend
on vendors for their technology.  Even so, their involvement in the research
process is critical.  Vendors of equipment and software have neither the

requisite experience and expertise nor the financial incentives to invest
heavily in research on the challenges facing end-user organizations, espe-
cially the challenges associated with the social applications of IT.14  Of
course, they listen to their customers as they refine their products and
strategies, but those interactions are superficial compared with the demands
of the new systems and applications.  Finding suitable mechanisms for
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION43the participation of end users and service providers, and engaging themproductively, will be a big challenge for the future of IT research.Past attempts at public-private partnerships, as in the emerging arenaof critical infrastructure protection, show it is not so easy to get the public
and private sectors to interact for the purpose of improving the research
base and implementation of systems:  the federal government has a respon-
sibility to 
address the public interest in critical infrastructure, whereas theprivate sector owns and develops that infrastructure, and conflicting
objectives and time horizons have confounded joint exploration.  As a

user of IT, the government could play an important role.  Whereas histori-

cally it had limited and often separate programs to support research and
acquire systems for its own use, the government is now becoming a con-
sumer of IT on a very large scale.  Just as IT and the widespread access to
it provided by the Web have enabled businesses to reinvent themselves,
IT could dramatically improve operations and reduce the costs of applica-
tions in public health, air traffic control, and social security; government
agencies, like private-sector organizations, are turning increasingly to
commercial, off-the-shelf technology.Universities will play a critical role in expanding the IT researchagenda.  The university setting continues to be the most hospitable for

higher-risk research projects in which the outcomes are very uncertain.
Universities can play an important role in establishing new research pro-
grams for large-scale systems and social applications, assuming that they
can overcome long-standing institutional and cultural barriers to the
needed cross-disciplinary research.  Preserving the university as a base

for research and the education that goes with it would ensure a workforce
capable of designing, developing, and operating increasingly sophisti-
cated IT systems.  A booming IT marketplace and the lure of large salaries

in industry heighten the impact of federal funding decisions on the indi-
vidual decisions that shape the university environment:  as the key

funders of university research, federal programs send important signals
to faculty and students.The current concerns in IT differ from the competitiveness concernsof the 1980s:  the all-pervasiveness of IT in everyday life raises new ques-
tions of how to get from here to thereÑhow to realize the exciting possi-bilities, not merely how to get there first.  A vital and relevant IT research

program is more important than ever, given the complexity of the issues
at hand and the need to provide solid underpinnings for the rapidly
changing IT marketplace.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44MAKING IT BETTERORGANIZATION OF THIS REPORTThe remainder of this report elaborates on the themes introduced inthis chapter.  Chapter 2 examines trends in support for IT research by

government, industry, and universities.  It reviews statistics on funding

for R&D and describes the linkages between existing funding patterns
and the trends outlined above.  Chapter 3 examines challenges in large-

scale systems research that are not new but that have taken on renewed
importance as social applications of computing and communications
emerge.  It identifies existing shortfalls in the research community
Õs under-standing of 
large-scale systems and suggests avenues for further investi-gation.  Chapter 4 examines IT systems that are embedded in a social

context, outlining the research problems that result from the integration
of IT into a range of social applications and discussing the value of inter-
disciplinary research in this area.  It identifies areas in which interdiscipli-

nary research drawing on the social sciences is needed to complement the
strictly technical research being conducted by IT researchers; outlines
different mechanisms for pursuing an expanded IT research agenda that
considers systems and applications as well as components; and discusses
ways in which government, industry, and universities need to alter their
organization and management of IT research to ensure that mechanisms
exist for conducting the kinds of research that will be needed for the
future.  Chapter 5 presents the committee
Õs recommendations for strength-ening the resource base in IT.  It outlines actions that government, uni-

versities, and industry should take to advance a broader research agenda
for IT.BIBLIOGRAPHYBuderi, Robert.  1998.  
ÒBell Labs Is Dead:  Long Live Bell Labs,
Ó Technology Review 101(5):50-
57.Business Week Online.  1999a.  
ÒQ&A:  An Internet Pioneer Moves Toward Nomadic Com-
puting,Ó August 30.
Business Week Online.  1999b.  
ÒThe Earth Will Don an Electronic Skin,Ó August 30.
Carey, John.  1997.  
ÒWhat Price Science?Ó Business Week, May 26.  Available online at
<www.businessweek.com/1997/21/b3528136.htm>.Committee for Economic Development (CED).  1998
.  America
Õs Basic Research:  Prosperity
Through Discovery.  Committee for Economic Development, New York.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1992.  Computing the Future.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1994.  Realizing the Information Future: The Internet and Beyond.
  National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1995.  Evolving the High-Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Supportthe NationÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION45Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1997.  More Than Screen Deep.  
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999a.  Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council1999b.  Trust in Cyberspace.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Council on Competitiveness.  1996.  
Endless Frontier, Limited Resources:  U.S. R&D Policy for
Competitiveness.  Council on Competitiveness, Washington, D.C., April.
Council on Competitiveness.  1998.  
Going Global:  The New Shape of American Innovation
.Council on Competitiveness, Washington, D.C., September.Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office (CIAO).  2000a.  
Defending AmericaÕs Cyberspace:National Plan for Information Systems Protection, Version 1.0, An Invitation to a Dialogue.The White House, Washington, D.C., January.  Available online at <http://
www.ciao.gov/National_Plan/national_plan%20_final.pdf>.Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office (CIAO).  2000b.  Practices for Securing Critical Information
Assets.  CIAO, Washington, D.C., January.  Available online at <http://www.ciao.gov/CIAO_Document_Library/Practices_For_Securing_Critical_Information_Assets.pdf>.David, Paul.  1990.  
ÒThe Dynamo and the Computer:  An Historical Perspective on the
Modern Productivity Paradox,Ó The American Economic Review 80(2):355-361, May.
Gray, Jim.  1999.  
WhatÕs Next:  A Dozen Information-Technology Research Goals
.  Technical
report MS-TR-99-50, Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, June.  Available
online at HtmlResAnchor http://www.research.microsoft.com/~Gray/.Leibovich, Mark.  1999.  ÒMicrosoft Skims Off AcademiaÕs Best for Research Center,Ó Wash-ington Post, April 5, p. A1.PresidentÕs Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection (PCCIP).  1997.  
Critical Foun-dations:  Protecting America
Õs Infrastructures, Washington, D.C., October.  Available
online at <http://www.ciao.gov/CIAO_Document_Library/PCCIP_Report.pdf>.PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  1999.  Information Tech-nology Research:  Investing in Our Future.  National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and Communications, Arlington, Va., February.  Available online at
<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.Schatz, Bruce R. 1997.  ÒInformation Retrieval in Digital Libraries: Bringing Search to theNet,Ó Science 275(5298):327-334, January 17.
Schatz, Bruce R., and Joseph B. Hardin.  1994.  
ÒNCSA Mosaic and the World Wide Web:Global hypermedia protocols for the Internet,Ó Science 265(5174):895-901, August 12.
Stokes, Donald E.  1997.  
PasteurÕs Quadrant:  Basic Science and Technological Innovation
.Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.Uchitelle, Louis.  1996.  
ÒBasic Research Is Losing Out As Companies Stress Results,Ó NewYork Times, pp. A1 and D6, October 8.U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration.  2000
.  Digital
Economy 2000.  U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., June.
Webre, Philip.  1999.  
ÒCurrent Investments in Innovation,Ó Congressional Budget Office,
Washington, D.C., April.Ziegler, Bart.  1997.  
ÒLab Experiment:  Gerstner Slashed R&D by $1 Billion:  For IBM, It May
Be a Good Thing, Latest Breakthrough Shows,Ó Wall Street Journal, October 6, p. A1.NOTES1.For a discussion of the influence that debates over federal research policy had on the
High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative (HPCCI), see CSTB (1995).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46MAKING IT BETTER2.The recommendations of PITAC regarding federal funding for IT research can be
found in PITAC (1999).  Additional information on the Clinton Administration
Õs IT2 initia-
tive is available online at <http://www.ccic.gov/it2/>.3.Numerous press accounts from the mid- and late 1990s reported on the reorientation
of research labs in the IT industry and resulting concerns about long-term, fundamentalresearch.  See, for example, Uchitelle (1996), Carey (1997), Ziegler (1997), and Buderi (1998).4.A new CSTB study on the fundamentals of computer science will emphasize the
science aspects, including the interaction of computer science with other sciences.  Addi-
tional information on this project is available on the CSTB Web site at <www.cstb.org>.5.Microsoft, in particular, has been noted for tapping top academic talent for its
research lab.  See Leibovich (1999).
6.The Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, for example, called for explicit
attempts to measure the results of government programs, including research programs.The act therefore added to the pressure for near-term and mission-oriented work.7.In scientific computing, IT is used to model, emulate, and simulate various scientific
and technical processes.  Scientific computing has received considerable attention from the
IT research community from the earliest days, for several reasons.  First, IT researchers are
technically oriented and can appreciate and understand the issues related to scientific com-
puting.  Second, scientific computing has been critical to the scientific and engineering
enterprise and to major government programs such as nuclear energy and weapons and themilitary and so has been admirably supported by the government.  Scientific computing

continues to be important to the future of computing, science, many fields of engineering,and the military enterprise and should not be deemphasized.Because it has been strongly supported by funding agencies and the research com-munity, scientific computing is an inspirational example of the interrelationship and syn-ergy between application and technology.  Scientific computing applications have been a
major driver of high-performance computing technologies and parallel programming tech-niques.  In turn, scientific computing has influenced engineering and science, providing not
only substantial benefits but also approaches to problem solvingÑsuch as the characteris-tics of numerical algorithms that yield to parallelism.  The very methodologies of science
have been substantially affected in ways that make scientific progress more rapid as well ascost effective.  Scientific computing has benefited greatly from its long-term association

with the research environment.Scientific computing also demonstrates the importance of long-term and fundamentalresearch on technology in application contexts.  There are fundamental gaps in understand-

ing and unexploited opportunities that can be addressed by taking a long-term perspective,one that is not generally pursued by industrial organizations with their more short-termprofit motivation.  Much of the benefit of research outcomes will accrue not to individual

private firms but to industry, government, and society in general.  The government is a
major user and developer of scientific computing applications and, in many ways, its chal-lenges are much greater than those of the private sector.  If government-funded research in

any facet of technology is justified, then surely research in the more effective application oftechnology to the needs of government and its citizens is even more strongly justified.8.As recalled recently by Leonard Kleinrock:  
ÒIn the early days of ARPA [theAdvanced Research Projects Agency], even when we had only three machines, we wereable to uncover logical errors in the routing protocol, or the flow-control protocol, thatwould cause network failures.  Those errors are hard to detect ahead of time, especially as

the systems get more complex.  It
Õs easy to detect the cause of a massive crash or degrada-tion.  But complex systems have latent failure modes that we have not yet excited.  There is
always potential for deadlocks, crashes, degradations, errant behavior. . . .  As systems get

more complex, they crash in incredible and glorious ways.  What you want to have is a self-
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION47repairing mode [so that if] one part fails, other parts continue to functionÓ (Business WeekOnline, 1999a).9.A considerable economics literature exists on the increasing complexity of technolo-
gies as they evolve over time.  See, for example, David (1990).
10.The first Tacoma Narrows suspension bridge, near the city of Tacoma, Washington,
collapsed as a result of wind-induced vibrations on November 7, 1940, just 4 months after it
was opened to traffic.  The collapse was attributed to the bridge
Õs structure, which caughtthe wind instead of letting it pass through.  A windstorm caused the bridge to undergo a
series of  undulations, which were caught on film before its collapse, earning the bridge the
nickname ÒGalloping Gertie.Ó  Video footage of the bridge
Õs collapse is available online at<http://mecad.uta.edu/~bpwang/me5311/1999/lecture1/intro25.htm>.11.This material derives from a set of briefing slides entitled 
ÒComputer SystemsResearch:  Past and Present
Ó prepared by Butler Lampson from Microsoft Research.  The
slides are available online at <http://www.research.microsoft.com/lampson/Slides/ComputerSystemsResearchAbstract.htm>.12.As evidence of the recognition that issues of security and reliability have received in
the policy community, President Clinton signed Presidential Decision Directive 63 on May22, 1998, which calls for a national effort to ensure the security of critical information infra-
structures, such as the telephone system and electric power grid.  The directive also estab-
lished the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office (CIAO), which was charged with inte-grating the plans of various industry sectors into a national plan for infrastructure assurance
and with coordinating an analysis of the federal governmentÕs own dependence on criticalinfrastructures.  Its work to date is captured in CIAO (2000a,b).  It builds on the efforts of its
predecessor, the PresidentÕs Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection, which wasestablished in July 1996 as the first national effort to address vulnerabilities of infrastruc-ture in the information age.  See PCCIP (1997).
13.The 1999 PITAC report outlines nine areas that could be dramatically transformed
by information technology.  It describes specific transformations in communications, pro-
cessing information, teaching and learning, the provision of health care, the conduct of
commerce, the way people work, the design and manufacture of goods, the conduct ofresearch, and government operations.  The full potential of these and similar applications
cannot be achieved without a much better fundamental understanding of the applications
themselves, the supporting IT, and the relationship between the two.  A great deal of
research needs to be done to gain this understanding.14.As noted in a previous CSTB study (CSTB, 1997), most of the people involved in the
design and implementation of IT systems are sophisticated users of computing and com-munications devices.  They do not, in general, understand the ways in which IT is used in
different applications, nor the more limited technical prowess of the average end user.  As a

result, it is difficult for researchers and system designers to know what will be easy andgratifying for many of their ultimate customers.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.482Resources for Information Technology
Research
The resources needed for research include funding and human capi-tal, which are interrelated.  Increases in funding for information

technology (IT) research can enable industrial and university labo-ratories to hire more researchers, increase the number of graduate stu-
dents trained in the nationÕs research universities, and allow the purchase
of more IT hardware, software, and services to support those people.
Similarly, increasing the size of the research workforce demands addi-
tional financial resources for salaries and technical infrastructure.  But

numbers alone do not tell the whole story.  Equally important are the

types of work supported and the types of organizations that fund or
undertake the research.  Vendors of computing and communications

products, systems integrators, and end users all have different perspec-
tives on the IT challenges that need to be addressed, and these perspec-
tives combine with those of government funders of research and the
researchers themselves to influence the scale and scope of the research
agenda.This chapter reviews trends in the nationÕs overall investment in ITresearch.  The first section provides a framework for evaluating trends by

explaining the importance of diversity in research portfolios, a theme
carried forward through the chapter.  The next two sections examine

levels of government and industry funding for IT research, concentrating
on the years 1987 to 1998.  Distinctions are made, when possible, among

funding sources (e.g., specific federal agencies, vendors, or users of IT
components) and the types of research supported (e.g., componentMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH49advances vs. system integration issues).  The last section of the chapter
reviews trends in academic IT research, which receives much of the gov-
ernment and industrial support.A credible discussion of research resources presupposes the existenceof data:  unfortunately, the present discussion is limited by the nature and

quality of available statistics on IT research expenditures, as well as by
lags between the time conditions are measured and the time they are
reported.  Despite extensive efforts by the National Science Foundation

(NSF) and the Bureau of the Census, federal statistics on industrial and
federally funded research remain difficult to track over time because some
individual firms have been reclassified into different industry sectors and
survey methodologies have been revised.  Private sources of information,

whether corporate reports or statistics from industry associations, typi-
cally do not distinguish expenditures on basic research from those on
technology development (or applied research).  Further complicating

matters, neither federal nor private statistics speak to IT as a whole.
Rather, they refer to academic disciplines (e.g., computer science and
electrical engineering) or industry classifications (e.g., office and comput-
ing equipment and computing and data processing services).  Some of the

categories are being updated, but it is too soon to assess the impact of
those changes.  As computing and communications technologies converge

and IT is infused into a growing number of products and services, assess-
ing the size and needs of IT research will become even more difficult.Because of the limitations in the available data sets, this chapter doesnot attempt a definitive assessment.  Instead, it presents and analyzes a

mosaic of available statistics to elucidate the dominant themes in support
for research.  In some cases, funding for combined expenditures on re-

search and development (R&D) is used as a proxy for research; in others,
the distinctions in federal data between basic and applied research are
used to gain some insight, however limited, into the overall investments
in these areas.DIVERSITY IN THE RESEARCH BASEThe payoff of any research, especially fundamental research, is inher-ently uncertain.  Research managers cannot predict which projects will

prove successful or produce the greatest benefit to their organizations,
industry, or society as a whole.  Accordingly, savvy research managers

seek to invest in a range of diverse research programs as a strategy for
ensuring that at least a fraction of the overall portfolio will pay offÑpreferably enough to justify the entire investment.  The concept of prepar-

ing for the unpredictable by investing in diverse activities that pursue aMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50MAKING IT BETTERspread of the best possible ideas is known as Òportfolio managementÓ in
financial markets, which rely on this concept to manage risk.Diversity within a research or financial portfolio plays much the samerole as does genetic diversity in a species.  A living organism carries a

small amount of genetic material in addition to the genes that are essen-
tial for function.  In a static environment, this genetic diversity imposes a
cost beyond that carried by a species whose members are genetically
identical and specifically tuned to exploit the environment.  However, in

times of a change or competition from other species, genetic diversity
enables a species to adapt to the new environment using its extra re-
sources.  Similarly, diversity in the research base ensures that a nation
Õsinnovations will continue in the face of unforeseen changes in the techni-
cal, business, or societal landscape.1  Diverse approaches will thus be
available when changing conditions require new solutions quickly.No one can fully predict future needs.  The need for high-speed packet
switching could not have been predicted 25 years ago, yet it is the heart of
the Internet today.  The need for ultralow-power microprocessors was

largely unexplored 20 years ago, whereas today it is a critical under-
pinning in the growing area of portable and handheld computing.  The

economic payoffs of specific investments are likewise difficult to predict.
Coding theory and digital signal processing were important research areas
40 years ago because of their applications in telephony and military radio.
There was no way to know, however, that this research would have such
enormous importance for consumer cellular telephones and Internet
multimedia conferencing, which have hundreds of millions of users.Lack of diversity in the IT research base can result from several fac-tors.  First, inbreeding can dilute the effectiveness of a research area as the

same small community keeps funding and peer reviewing its membersÕprojects.  Or a research area can become too focused on a single approach

that in retrospect turns out to have been unproductive.  This can happen

in a vigorous industry when firms adopt common approaches in their
products, implying to researchers that even a successful new idea could
not be introduced into practice.  For example, radical new ideas for micro-

processor designs might seem futile, because a tiny number of designs
dominate todayÕs market and the cost of market entry is enormous.  How-
ever, low-power designs, crafted for the battery-powered portable devices
that are sure to increase in number, might offer an opportunity for a very
different approach.Second, there can be a lack of funding for certain types of researchÑresulting in an absence of understanding of some technology that might
suddenly become important to the field.  This can happen when innova-

tion moves ahead of research and new products and services are devel-
oped without sufficient intellectual underpinnings.  Arguably, some of
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH51the problems inherent in large-scale systems fall into this category (asdiscussed further in Chapter 4).Third, research can reflect, to too great a degree, the objectives of thefunders rather than the ideas of researchers.  Although narrowly defined

project goals can sometimes drive research that has serendipitous out-
comes, they typically undermine diversity.  This prospect fueled debate

within the IT research community in the 1990s, when the High Perfor-
mance Computing and Communications Initiative focused attention on
the nature of research program definition and its impacts.  Of course, it

can be difficult to quantify the opportunity cost, which, at best, may be
measurable only in retrospect.FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThe federal government has been a strong supporter of IT researchsince World War II.  Some of this research is conducted in federal labora-
tories, such as those supported by the Department of Energy (DOE) and
the Department of Defense (DOD), but the greatest impact may have
come from federally funded research carried out in university and indus-
trial laboratories (CSTB, 1999).  Over the past 50 years, this research has

contributed to a wide range of important developments, including inter-
active time-shared computing, computer graphics, artificial intelligence,
relational databases, and internetworking (CSTB, 1995, 1999).2  These
technologies laid the foundation for new firms and new industries that
have made substantial contributions to the nationÕs economic and socialdevelopment.  The context for decisions about new IT research continues
to changeÑthe industrial context seems particularly uncertain as thisreport is writtenÑbut broad lessons can be extracted from history toinform future decision making.As noted in earlier reports by the Computer Science and Telecommu-nications Board (CSTB, 1995, 1999), federal support for IT research has
been most effective when (1) directed toward fundamental research with
long-term payoffs, (2) used to support experimental prototypes that
pushed the technological frontier and created communities of researchers
that crossed institutional boundaries, and (3) expanded on research pur-
sued in industry laboratories.  Such investments not only generated new

technical ideas and knowledge that subsequently were incorporated into
new products, processes, and services, but alsoÑespecially in the case ofuniversity researchÑtrained generations of researchers who went on tolead the IT revolution.  Continued federal support for projects that

complement industry-funded research in these ways will help maintain
the strength of the IT sector.  Federal agencies also need to continue to
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52MAKING IT BETTERlook forward, supporting computing and communications research inareas that are likely to grow in importance.The following sections examine trends in federal funding between1990 and 1998, the relative contributions of particular agencies, the oper-
ating styles of major federal agencies, and the characteristics of some
large IT research programs.  That period was chosen because it consti-

tutes the most recent period for which consistent statistics are available.
Other sections draw on data for 1999 and 2000.Trends in Federal FundingTrends in federal support for IT research over the past decade can begleaned from data on funds obligated for research in computer science
and electrical engineering, the two academic disciplines most closely asso-
ciated with IT.  Computer science encompasses the study of the theory of
computing; the design, development, and application of computing
devices; information science and systems; programming languages; and
systems analysisÑall topics that are directly applicable to IT.  Electrical
engineering includes the study of electronic devices and communication
systems, which is directly relevant to IT, as well as the study of electric
power systems, which is not.  The sum of research expenditures for com-
puter science and electrical engineering is an imperfect, but reasonable,
proxy for IT research.  Although it overstates federal expenditures by

including work on electric power, this overstatement is offset by un-
counted research in other academic disciplines relevant to IT, such as
mathematics and cognitive science (important for understanding human-
computer interaction).The data indicate that federal funding for IT research has, in general,been strong over the past decade.  Combined federal funding for com-

puter science and electrical engineering grew from $1.4 billion to $2 billion

in constant dollars between 1990 and 1998Ña 40 percent increase in realterms (Figure 2.1).3  However,
 federal funding for IT research remainedvirtually unchanged in real terms between 1993 and 1997, when theInternet and the World Wide Web began to exert a significant influence
on the nationÕs economic and social structure, and when combined salesof IT goods and services were growing at an annual rate of more than 10
percent in real terms.4  In other words, the explosion in IT applications
throughout industry, government, and society was not matched by a com-
mensurate increase in federal research support for the fieldÑeven as thoseapplications began pushing beyond the knowledge limits of the under-
lying technology and began opening up new research opportunities.Despite the gains in funding for IT as a whole, federal support forresearch in electrical engineering appears to have declined between 1990Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH5305001,0001,5002,0002,500199019911992199319941995199619971998Computer scienceElectrical engineeringTotal ITMillions of Constant 1998 DollarsFIGURE 2.1  Federal funding for IT research, 1990 to 1998.  SOURCE:  National
Science Foundation (2000a).and 1998.  The data suggest a 16 percent drop in real terms, from $764
million to $639 million in constant dollars (Figure 2.2).  Most of the cuts

were in the applied research budget, effectively boosting the share of
funds devoted to basic research from 23 percent to 34 percent of total
research spending in electrical engineering.  However, support for basic

research did not grow appreciably until 1998.  Reductions in total research
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54MAKING IT BETTER02004006008001,0001,200199019911992199319941995199619971998Millions of Constant 1998 DollarsTotal researchBasic researchFIGURE 2.2  Federal obligations for research in electrical engineering, 1990 to 1998.
SOURCE:  National Science Foundation (2000a).
in electrical engineering appear to be due almost entirely to cutbacks insupport from the DOD, which accounted for as much as 84 percent of the
nationÕs total research funding for the field during this time period.  This
observation suggests that a significant portion of the cutbacks was
directed toward those areas of electrical engineering that are directly
related to IT, but sufficiently detailed data are not available to confirmMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH55this statement.  Nor can available statistics reveal whether apparent re-
ductions in funding for electrical engineering resulted from the reclassifi-
cation of some research from electrical engineering to computer science.In computer science, combined federal expenditures for basic andapplied research (also referred to as Òtotal researchÓ) more than doubledin real terms between 1990 and 1998, growing from $671 million to $1.4
billion in constant 1998 dollars (Figure 2.3).  Here, however, funding for

applied research grew more quickly than that for basic research.  Although
02004006008001,0001,200
1,4001,600199019911992199319941995199619971998Millions of Constant 1998 DollarsTotal researchBasic researchFIGURE 2.3  Federal obligations for research in computer science, 1990 to 1998.
SOURCE:  National Science Foundation (2000a).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56MAKING IT BETTERspending on basic research increased from $269 million to $419 millionduring the 8-year period, its share of total federal funding for computer
science research fell from 40 percent to 30 percent.  Statistics on basic

versus applied research must be used with caution because distinctions
between the two categories are notoriously difficult to make and may
only reflect differences in accounting methods.  Nevertheless, the data

correlate with the testimony to this committee (and others) by IT research-
ersÑespecially university researchersÑwho perceive a decided shift infederal funding away from fundamental research and toward more ap-
plied projects with narrower scopes of inquiry, additional project mile-
stones, mandatory system demonstrations, and interim deliverables.  This

trend has an upside and a downside:  it may enhance the accountability of

government agencies and help document the benefits of public invest-
ments (objectives set forth by the Government Performance and Results
Act), but IT researchers report that it hampers their ability to conduct
long-term research with inherently uncertain outcomes.  At risk is the

type of work that has been the cornerstone of federally funded IT research
for decades.Sources of Federal SupportDespite growth in the number of agencies listed as supporting ITresearch, federal funding remains concentrated in a handful of agencies.
As recently as 1998, 88 percent of all federal funds for computer science
research were distributed by just three federal agencies:  the Department

of Defense (DOD), the Department of Energy (DOE), and the National
Science Foundation (NSF).  The DOD alone contributed 40 percent of the

total, with much of its funding coming from the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA) (see Table 2.1).  A similar proportion of
all funding for basic research in computer science came from the same
three agencies, with the NSF alone contributing 62 percent of the total in
1998.  This funding pattern continues a historical trend:  as far back as

1976 (the earliest date for which consistent data are available), these three
agencies contributed 91 percent of federal funding for computer science
research, with the DOD alone contributing 68 percent.Although the DOD has driven many important IT innovations in thepast 50 years, the fieldÕs reliance on this one agency makes IT researchsupport especially sensitive to fluctuations and directions in defense
spendingÑand to repeated calls for research to be more relevant to de-fense missions.  Defense budgets declined significantly in the post-Cold

War environment, with total defense R&D declining 24 percent in real
terms from its high in 1989 to 1999.5  Although DOD funding for com-
puter science research grew 32 percent in real terms between 1990 andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH57TABLE 2.1  Federal Funding for Computer Science Research by Agency,
1998Total ResearchBasic Research
MillionsPercentMillionsPercent
Agencyof Dollarsof Totalof Dollarsof Total

Department of Defense562408520
Department of Energy39628225

National Science Foundation2671925862
Department of Health andHuman Services665358
Department of Commerce58410
National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration262174
Other25210
Total1,399100419100
SOURCE:  National Science Foundation (2000a).
1998, it varied from year to year, declining in real terms in 1991, 1994, and1996.  Steep increases in spending by NSF and DOE during those years

more than compensated for fluctuating military funding, but increases in
computer science spending were not matched in spending for electrical
engineering.  The DOD funding for electrical engineering research dropped

20 percent in real terms between 1990 and 1998, driving the decline in
total federal funding for the field.The concentration of federal IT research funding within three organi-zations may have other limiting effects, not only on technology but also,
perhaps, on the performance of government operations.  Several agen-

cies, including the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS),
the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration,
and the Internal Revenue Service, find their missions increasingly reliant
on capable IT systems, which figure not only in internal processes (e.g.,
determinations and tracking of Social Security benefits) but also, increas-
ingly, in the conduct of external activities for which they have some
responsibility and in the very fabric of their relationships with external
parties, from entities in regulated industries to individual citizens.  The

potential benefits to government agencies from IT are such that special
federal efforts have been mounted to pursue them, including the Digital
Government program described in Chapter 4.  This level of attention and
effort distinguishes IT from other types of infrastructure, such as trans-
portation, on which agencies also depend.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58MAKING IT BETTERAchieving the benefits of IT within agencies has been more difficultthan articulating their promise.  The difficulties these agencies have expe-

rienced with systems modernization over the past decade (see Chapter 3)
suggest that adequate solutions to their IT needs are not available and
cannot be developed within existing time and budget constraints.  The

problems are related mostly to the large scale of the systems and applica-
tionsÑa common issue that might have the best chance of being resolvedif the agencies supported the relevant IT research.  Yet the agencies are

not mounting significant IT research programs, nor have they rushed to
support the exploratory Digital Government program launched by the
NSF to couple IT researchers to agencies with IT challengesÑan initiativethat could stretch the state of the art.  Surely, support for IT research from

federal agencies other than DOD, DOE, and NSF has increased as a per-
centage of total federal support since 1990, but the fraction remains small.
Only 12 percent of total IT research funding and 13 percent of basic
research support came from other agencies in 1998Ñand most of that wasprovided by science-based agencies such as DHHS and the National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration (NASA), which have long histories of
attention to IT.  Few other agencies have established IT research pro-

grams, and without the impetus of their resources and problem defini-
tions, technical progress on these problems will probably be a matter of
chance.Styles of Federal SupportFederal agencies support IT research in different ways that tend to besuited to different types of problems.  The most notable distinction is that

between the research management styles of DARPA and the NSF.  Re-

search at DARPA has always emphasized the design and engineering
aspects of IT, and building and experimenting with research prototypes
are an essential aspect of that research.6  Such experimental work requires
continuityÑmore funding per investigator and longer projects than arenecessary for theoretical or paper studies (CSTB, 1994).  DARPA
Õs pro-gram managers assemble and oversee research portfolios within particu-
lar thematic areas.  Researchers themselves play an indirect role in setting

the objectives of the program through their interactions with program
managers, and some DARPA programs specifically allow investigator-
initiated proposals within the research theme of the program.  Program

managers are technically savvyÑusually researchers on leave from uni-versity or industryÑand know both the field and its researchers well.They work with research leaders and military leaders to develop long-
term objectives that are both tractable for the research community and
valuable to the DOD, balancing near-term military needs against longer-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH59term fundamental research that will advance the field.  Program man-
agers often devise ways for researchers from different organizations to
work together on common problems or to bring new expertise or disci-
plines to bear on a problem.The NSF, by contrast, relies much more heavily on peer review toallocate its IT research funding.  Proposals are submitted by principal

investigators, reviewed by several research peers, and acted on by a
program manager.  As a result, ideas are derived from the research com-

munity without the programmatic framework characteristic of a DARPA-
funded effort.  At the same time, most research proposals are for individual-

investigator research.  Grants are typically small, on the order of $90,000

per year, and include support for graduate research assistants.  More than

10 years ago, the Computing and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE) directorate within the NSF began to address experimental research
with grants that could support modest-sized research teams for several
years, something that had not been possible within conventional grant
programs.  Recently, this approach has been extended from hardware to

software systems experiments.  In partnership with DARPA, the DHHS
ÕsNational Library of Medicine, NASA, and others, CISE supports the
Digital Libraries Initiative (DLI), characterized by research themes focused
more on an application vision than is typical of traditional computer-
science research programs, which support subdisciplines such as pro-
gramming languages, operating systems, and artificial intelligence.  In

keeping with a trend throughout the NSF, CISE is sponsoring more inter-
disciplinary work, engaging more social scientists (e.g., in support of
better user interfaces or better systems to support group interaction) and
researchers in the natural sciences to work in collaboration with computer
scientists and engineers.In addition, CISE sponsors a variety of efforts designed to provide ITinfrastructure to support NSFÕs broader mission, namely, the support ofscientific research.  The most notable examples originated with the super-

computer centers established in the mid-1980s.  Now called Partnerships

for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (PACI), two facilities with
high-performance computers are linked nationwide to groups of academic
and industrial partners to constitute a Òdistributed metacomputing envi-ronment,Ó featuring large-scale computing and visualization techniques
to address scientific questions in many disciplines.7  Other efforts aim at
improving networking infrastructure for the scientific community, lever-
aging the multiagency Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative.  These

activities routinely provoke comments from IT researchers who fear that
these efforts will be counted as programs that contribute to IT research,
when in fact their purpose is to provide IT systems for other scientists to
use in their research.  They are, for the most part, infrastructure programs,
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60MAKING IT BETTERnot research programs.  The DLI,
 as well as some of the larger activitieslikely to emerge from the Information Technology Research initiative (see
below), are different from PACI and the infrastructure component of the
NGI because of their more balanced integration of application objectives
with IT research.Federal Information Technology Research ProgramsThe majority of recent federal funding for IT research has been pro-vided under the umbrella of the High Performance Computing and Com-
munications Initiative (HPCCI), which involved 10 federal agencies and
offices and had a total budget of over $800 million in 1999 (Table 2.2).
This initiative pursues research in several areas, primarily high-end com-
puting and large-scale networking.  High-end computing research in-

cludes work on components and architectures for high-speed computers
(i.e., computers capable of 1015 operations per second); software for oper-
ating them and supporting various applications (e.g., scientific visualiza-
tion, weather prediction, biomedical research); and theoretical computerTABLE 2.2  Federal Funding for High Performance Computing and
Communications by Agency, FY99 (millions of dollars)High-EndLarge-Scale
AgencyComputingNetworkingOther
aTotalNational Science Foundation224.772.04.3301
DARPA48.082.210.4141
Department of Energy91.933.90126

National Institutes of Health27.167.98103
National Aeronautics and  Space
Administration71.420.60.693
National Security Agency24.03.027
National Institute of Standards andTechnology3.55.24.313
National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration8.82.712
Agency for Health Care Policy andResearch03.14.98
Environmental Protection Agency4.24
  Total503.6290.632.5828
aThis category includes funding for high-confidence systems; human-centered systems; andeducation, training, and human resources.SOURCE:  National Science and Technology Council (1999b).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH61science.  Research in large-scale networking involves attempts to develop
and deploy innovative technologies for high-speed networking and to
experiment with applications that can take advantage of these networks.
The NGI initiative falls into this category.8  Smaller amounts of funding
are allocated to the development of high-confidence systems that have
predictably high levels of availability and security; human-centered sys-
tems that enhance interactions between computers and users; and educa-
tion, training, and human resources.Other federal programs are aimed at more specific needs of federalagencies and contribute to the research base in different ways.  For exam-

ple, the DOE spent $484 million in 1999 on its Accelerated Strategic Com-
puting Initiative (ASCI), which is intended to develop technologies that
will enable the agency to simulate the performance of nuclear weapons
without testing them (in compliance with the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty).  Through this program, the DOE is establishing centers of excel-

lence at five universities to pursue high-end computing systems and simu-
lation software and is working with the developers of these systems.9Meanwhile, NASA pursues a more limited program of IT research to
develop tools and integrated systems for the design and manufacture of
flight vehicles, to manage complex flight and aviation operation systems,
and to automatically generate and verify flight-crucial software.  The DOD

research labs support a range of fundamental and applied research pro-
grams to serve military needs.A new multiagency initiative, proposed under the name InformationTechnology for the Twenty-First Century (IT2) by the NSF is intended toboost fundamental IT research, particularly in the areas of scalability and
software.  In its first year (FY00), the initiative provided an additional

$366 million in federal funding for IT R&D to support (1) long-term
research in software, human-computer interfaces and information man-
agement, scalable information infrastructure, and high-end computing;
(2) the procurement and deployment of advanced computers that are 100
to 1,000 times more powerful than those available in 1999, simulation
software and tools to make the computers useful in scientific and engi-
neering applications, and teams of researchers to work on them to solve
challenging problems, and (3) research on the social and economic impacts
of IT that will enhance the usefulness of IT systems, limit potential mis-
uses of such systems (such as potential violations of privacy), and lead to
better understanding of the ways in which knowledge, values, and sys-
tems of society influence the spread of IT and the acceptability of IT
systems in various applications (NSTC, 1999a).  The long-term research

component, in particular, is an attempt to recapture the past success of
federal funding for IT research and Òlead to fundamental breakthroughsin computing and communications, in the same way that governmentMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62MAKING IT BETTERinvestment beginning in the 1960s led to todayÕs InternetÓ (PITAC, 1999).
The initiative is to be coordinated jointly with the HPCC programs and
the NGI initiative.  The Clinton Administration proposed an additional

$605 million in IT R&D funding in its FY01 budget to support research in
priority areas, such as infrastructure for advanced computational model-
ing and simulation; storing, managing, and preserving data; security and
privacy of information; ubiquitous computing and wireless networks;
intelligent machines and networks of robots; more reliable software;
broadband optical networks; and future generations of computers.  It will

also support partnerships to pursue research breakthroughs in particular
application areas, such as health care and education (White House, 2000).Six federal agencies are participating in the IT2 initiative:  DOD, DOE,
NASA, NIH, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), and NSF.  Each has developed new programs or expanded

existing ones to meet the objectives of IT2.  Some of these programs will
address elements of large-scale systems and social applications of IT, but
not to the full extent needed (see Chapters 3 and 4).  Although it is too

soon to evaluate these efforts, early indicators point to some practical
challenges.  The largest federal supporter of computing research, DARPA,

attempted to jump-start its efforts to promote path-breaking IT research
by issuing a broad agency announcement (BAA) in late 1998 (immedi-
ately after PITAC released a draft version of its report)  calling for 
Òradi-cally new visions
Ó of the future of information technology (Box 2.1).
Anecdotal reports suggest that the results were disappointing to DARPA,
perhaps because the research community was uncertain about the new
effort.  Nevertheless, several projects were funded as a result of this

announcement, including Project Oxygen at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT) Laboratory for Computer Science;10 the Endeavor
expedition at the University of California at Berkeley;11 Portolano/
Workscape at the University of Washington;12 and another expedition at
Carnegie Mellon University.  Each of these is exploring different aspects

of the post-PC era in which computing will be embedded into a range of
information devices.13In late 1999, NSF issued a solicitation for proposals under its agency-wide Information Technology Research (ITR) program, which called for
research in eight areas related to IT:  software, IT education and workforce,

human-computer interfaces, information management, advanced com-
putational science, scalable information infrastructure, social and eco-
nomic implications of computing and communications, and revolutionary
computing (NSF, 1999).  Awards are anticipated in September 2000, but

anecdotal reports on this effort point to the stresses on NSF program
management caused by a large influx of researcher communications (e.g.,
letters of intent, preproposals, and proposals) that need to be evaluatedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH63BOX 2.1Expeditions into the Twenty-first CenturyÒThe goal of Expeditions into the 21st Century, a broad agency announcement(BAA) issued by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, is to encour-
age vigorous and revolutionary research in information technology (IT).  The funded
efforts will set out to invent the future of IT by exploring alternative visions and theirimpact on society.  The ideas pursued by expedition teams are expected to lead to

unexpected results, thereby nourishing the information infrastructure and indus-tries of the future.ÒThe BAA solicits proposals for radically new visions that step outside of thepresent and anticipated models of both IT itself (i.e., hardware, software, etc.) andthe domains and modes in which it is applied.  There are a number of precedents
for the ÔexpeditionÕ approach.  A famous example is the Xerox Palo Alto Research
Center, where researchers created an experimental network of computers for useby individuals doing office work.  This effort pioneered many of the revolutionary
technologies that led to todayÕs personal computersÑgraphical user interfaces,
pointing devices, laser printing, distributed file systems, and Ôwhat you see is whatyou getÕ word processing.  This expedition was rooted in an alternative vision
regarding how IT could be organized and used by individuals (i.e., distributed com-
puting) as opposed to a more predictable goal of increasing the raw capability ofthen-dominant mainframe computers.ÒAn expedition may focus on either a discipline-based theme, such as bio-informatics, or an infrastructure-based theme, such as ubiquitous computing.  To
establish a context, each expedition must be based on assumptions not true today;for example, one could assume the worldwide availability of near-infinite band-width.  An expedition need not be limited to a single such assumption; however,
proposals are expected to outline an approach to the exploration of a vision within
the context of the assumptions.  The bottom line:  Think big and bold.Ó
SOURCE:  Reproduced from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (1999).
and responded to by a fixed staff already busy with ongoing responsibili-ties.  Extraordinary efforts were made to recruit experts to participate in

the necessary peer review.  It will be years before the results of these

recent efforts by DARPA, NSF, and other participants in the IT2 initiativecan be evaluated, but current indications underscore the importance of
the human infrastructure associated with the design and implementation
of federal programs.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64MAKING IT BETTERINDUSTRY SUPPORT FOR INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY RESEARCHIn the United States, industry is the leading supporter of IT R&Doverall, according to available statisticsÑalthough these statistics raise asmany questions as they appear to answer.14  The committee chose to
analyze the available, albeit flawed, information in the belief that rough
dimensions could be discerned and would be relevant to thinking about
how to make progress, notably because the conduct and capacity of
industry research are key to policy debates about whether and why the
federal government should support more IT research.  In an attempt to

understand the sources of variation in reported aggregate data and to
devise a more consistent set of data covering the 1990s, the committee
made special arrangements with the Census Bureau to secure access to
the raw data it collects on corporate R&D expenditures.  In addition,

committee members were able to enhance the utility of the data with
quantitative and qualitative insights based on their own experiences.  That

said, the committee underscores the inadvisability of reading too much
into specific numbers and other details.Federal statistics indicate that companies in the six industry sectorsmost closely related to the manufacture and supply of IT products and
provision of information servicesÑoffice, computing, and accountingmachines, communications equipment, electronic components, computer
and data processing services, professional and commercial equipment
and supplies, and communications servicesÑinvested some $52 billion inR&D in 1998.  Detailed data are not available for the professional and

commercial equipment and supplies industry.  The five remaining sectors

had combined R&D expenditures of $45 billion in 1998  (Table 2.3).  This

figure represents 7.3 percent of the combined annual sales revenues of the
companies in these industries.  More than one-quarter of these R&D

expenditures, or $12.7 billion, was spent on research, with roughly 20
percent of research funding, or $2.7 billion, classified as basic researchÑthe best approximation of fundamental research that is available using
federal statistics.15As the data in Table 2.3 indicate, there are considerable sector-to-sector differences in the support of R&D.  For example, in the office,

computing, and accounting equipment industry, R&D expenditures totaled
more than 9 percent of sales revenues in 1998, whereas in the communica-
tions services industry (which might include companies such as AT&T,
MCI, Sprint, and the regional Bell operating companies), expenditures on
R&D represented less than 1 percent of sales revenues.  Equally signifi-

cant differences exist in support for research.  Manufacturers of office,

computing, and accounting machines, communications equipment, andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH65TABLE 2.3  Company Investment in Research and Development in
Information Technology Industries, 1998 (millions of dollars)
InvestmentR&D as %TotalTotalBasic
Industry Sectorof SalesR&DResearchResearch
Office, computing, and accountingequipment9.28,8903,441276
Communications equipment11.210,1732,2961,148
Electronic components8.49,7764,661635

Communications services0.91,76834956
Computing and data processing servicesa12.414,2971,996599
Total7.344,90412,7432,714
NOTE: Does not include data for the professional and commercial equipment and supplies
industry, which had estimated R&D investments of $7.2 billion in 1998.aComputing and data processing services includes prepackaged software, programmingservices, systems integration, and other computer-related services.SOURCE:  National Science Foundation (2000b).
electronic devices (including semiconductors)ÑÒcomponent vendorsÓ in
the terminology developed in Chapter 1Ñfunded more than 80 percent ofthe research reported by IT firms in 1998.  Communications service pro-

vidersÑwhich can be considered Òend usersÓ in the terminology of Chap-ter 1Ñfunded less than 6 percent of the total.  The computer and data
processing services industry, despite its significant R&D expenditures
both in nominal terms and as a percentage of sales, also invests relatively
little in research:  its research expenditures accounted for just 14 percent

of the IT industry total in 1998.  The computer and data processing ser-

vices industry encompasses firms engaged in a wide variety of activities,
from the development of prepackaged software (another ÒcomponentÓ)to custom programming and systems integration (ÒsystemsÓ work in the
terminology of Chapter 1) to computer support and repairs.  As the

analysis below demonstrates, much of the R&D in this industry is attrib-
utable to software developers, such as Microsoft, implying that systems
integrators themselves fund little research.Most industry-funded IT research targets the discovery of new tech-nical opportunities, usually within the sponsorÕs line of business.  The
time horizon is longer and the risk is higher than would be the case for
product development, but the work does not pursue fundamental knowl-
edge and it typically is completed within 3 years.  Targeted research
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66MAKING IT BETTERusually is done only by larger companies with $3 billion or more in annualrevenues; smaller companies do little or no explicit research.  A few large

companies, such as IBM Corporation, Lucent Technologies, Microsoft
Corporation, and Xerox Corporation, support fundamental research con-
ducted in their own laboratories and, to a much lesser extent, in universi-
ties.  This research addresses fundamental questions not necessarily

limited to the sponsorÕs line of business, and it has resulted in a number ofmajor industry innovations, from the transistor to relational databases.
Without exception, such work accounts for only a small fraction of the
sponsorÕs overall research portfolio, because the emphasis is on targetedwork.The following sections examine trends in industrial research support,R&D at large companies, disincentives to corporate R&D investment, gaps

in systems integration research, research by end-user organizations, and
venture capital support for innovation.Trends in Industry SupportTrends in industrial support for IT research over the past decade aredifficult to discern because of limitations in data collection and inconsis-
tencies in the available data.  Over the past 20 years, the Census Bureau

has expanded the three relevant Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
categoriesÑbusiness services, electronics, and computing equipmentÑon two different occasions, meaning that each one has twice been seg-
mented into a larger number of subsectors.16  The reclassification of IT
companies cannot be tracked because the Census Bureau cannot say which
companies are in which categories.  (The business category declared by a
company in its filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
is not relevant because Census makes its own classification decisions
based on the composition of the companyÕs domestic payroll.)  To compli-
cate matters, a change in a firmÕs business focus (e.g., from telephoneservices to equipment manufacturing or communications business con-
sulting) also leads to a reclassification of the firm and its research.
17  There
are also data gaps because the Census Bureau did not collect R&D statis-
tics from service-sector companies (whether in telecommunications or
banking) prior to 1995, nor does it break out the IT-related component of
R&D expenditures by firms in other industries (i.e., end users of IT), such
as the Boeing Company, General Motors Corporation, and Merrill Lynch.
Furthermore, companies have different cultures and definitions for research;
even within a single company it is often impossible to get an accurate
estimate of spending on research that is spread thinly among divisions
and researchers.  Often the most important research is conducted infor-

mally by individuals without explicit corporate approval.  In the past, it
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH67was somewhat easier to estimate spending because research was concen-trated in the centralized laboratories of a few large companies.Industry support for IT research is in the midst of significant transfor-mation, driven in large part by burgeoning demand for IT-based products
and services.  Large IT firms and start-ups are attempting to meet the

demand by bringing new technologies to market at an increasing rate, a
trend that has profound implications for research.  As new competitors

enter the industry, the traditional process of performing in-house research
and incorporating the results into new products and services is being
supplemented by some firmsÕ attempts to, in effect, purchase research
results.  Some companies buy research explicitly by supporting university

research, buying other companies (e.g., start-ups that have developed
innovative products or technologies), or licensing technology from them,
thereby obviating the need to fund their own research directed at devel-
oping similar solutions.  Many companies engage in no explicit research,

instead buying it indirectly through the activities of their vendors.  Some

assemblers of personal computers, such as Dell Computer Corporation
and Gateway, Inc., for example, conduct virtually no research, choosing
instead to assemble components (e.g., microprocessors, disk drives, oper-
ating systems) purchased from vendors such as Intel Corporation, Seagate
Technologies, and Microsoft, which do conduct R&D.  The same is true

for many communications service providers, which perform limited R&D
because they build networks out of communications equipment devel-
oped by vendors (although they often participate in testing equipment
supplied by vendors and are actively involved in designing their own
networks).  Supply chains in IT industries are, therefore, important to

understanding the flow of innovation, in addition to furnishing compo-
nents for larger products and services.  This trend has significant implica-

tions for research throughout the IT industry.Federal statistics suggest that industry spending on IT R&D grewrapidly between 1990 and 1998 (Figure 2.4).  The sheer magnitude of the

swings in the reported data for individual industry sectors calls into ques-
tion the reliability of the data and indicates the degree of reclassification
of firms among sectors over time.18  Nevertheless, the data suggest that
firms in the office, computing, and accounting industry and in the profes-
sional equipment industry reduced their R&D expenditures in the early
1990s before boosting them later in the decade.  R&D in computing and

data processing services appear to have grown, while R&D in communi-
cations services declined.These trends mirror the data on R&D reported by firms in their annualfilings to the Securities and Exchange Commission, although the magni-
tude of the changes is considerably less dramatic (Table 2.4).  Among a

dozen or so top IT firms whose combined R&D investments constitutedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68MAKING IT BETTER05,00010,00015,00020,000
25,00030,00035,000
40,000
45,00050,00055,000199019911992199319941995199619971998
Millions of Constant 1998 DollarsOffice, computing, and accounting equipment
Communications Equipment
Electronic ComponentsComputing, data processing, and communications servic
eCommunications services
Computer and data processing services
Professional and commercial equipment and supplies
Total
FIGURE 2.4  Reported company investments in research and development in IT
industries, 1990 to 1998.  Data for the professional and commercial equipment
and supplies industry estimated in 1998.  SOURCE:  Compiled from U.S. Census

Bureau statistics.almost three-quarters of all reported IT industry R&D in 1998,19 such
spending declined moderately in real terms between 1991 and 1994 and
then grew rapidly between 1995 and 1999.  Only three companies reported

1999 R&D investments lower than those of 1991 (in real terms).  IBM
Õsinvestments in R&D declined from $7.6 billion in 1991 to $4.4 billion in
1995 before rising to $5.2 billion in 1999, Digital EquipmentÕs investmentsMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69TABLE 2.4  Research and Development Investment by Large Information Technology Companies, 1991-1999
(millions of constant 1998 dollars)Company199119921993199419951996199719981999
IBM7,6447,3346,0954,6774,3784,7944,9395,0465,205
AT&T3,5833,2883,4123,3343,903847862662543
Lucent Technologies2,6283,2263,9034,452
NCR389388360336
Hewlett-Packard1,6831,8221,9312,1732,4172,8003,1103,3283,393
Motorola1,3031,4691,6681,9942,3072,4662,7832,8933,394
Intel7118771,0641,1911,3611,8622,3772,5093,071

Microsoft2703965156549031,3661,8872,6012,932
Texas Instruments1,0531,0021,0761,1208841,2161,5761,2251,316
Sun Microsystems4104304885365916738371,0141,246
Xerox1,0241,0379689599981,0751,0791,043966
Digital Equipment1,8571,8541,9241,6401,0921,0941,0275330
Compaq Computer4894644784915807168271,3531,639
Cisco Systems00481152224117111,0261,574
  Total23,60823,25923,08022,21923,53726,19930,10432,42135,397
NOTE:  AT&T spun off Lucent Technologies and NCR in 1996.  Digital Equipment Corporation was purchased by Compaq Computer in Ju
ne1998; the data shown for DigitalÕs 1998 R&D expenditures are estimates for the two quarters of the year during which it operated as a separatecompany.  Compaq
Õs 1998 and 1999 figures reflect its acquisition of DigitalÕs R&D operations.   SOURCE:  Company annual reports.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70MAKING IT BETTERdropped from $1.9 billion in 1991 to $1 billion in 1997 before the companywas purchased by Compaq Computer in 1998, and XeroxÕs R&D spendingdropped slightly, from $1.02 billion to $966 million.  Most companies posted

real gains in R&D spending during the course of the decade.  Microsoft
ÕsR&D spending jumped from $270 million to $2.9 billion in real terms be-
tween 1991 and 1999 and IntelÕs leapt from $711 million to $3.1 billion.  Cisco
Systems, a relative newcomer to the field, increased its R&D investment to
more than $1.5 billion in 1999.  People in these industries or knowledgeable
about them recognize that the figures apply primarily to development or
highly applied activity rather than to more fundamental research, but the
figures do suggest an increase in innovative activity in the IT industry.Despite impressive gains, company-financed R&D has not grown asquickly as have the sales of IT goods and services.  Several of the compa-

nies listed in Table 2.4 saw their R&D investments decline as a percentage
of net sales between 1991 and 1999 (Table 2.5), despite growing absolute
R&D investments by many of them.  Intel, for example, boosted its R&D

spending almost fivefold between 1991 and 1999, but its R&D as a per-
centage of sales dropped from 13 percent to 10.5 percent.  Although there

were signs that many of the numbers improved in the late 1990s, the data
overall indicate that R&D funding by large IT companies has declined in
proportion to the IT marketplace, as noted earlier in this chapter.Furthermore, the decline in the rate of R&D investment has beenmagnified by a shift toward more near-term, targeted research or devel-
opment in many industry labs.  Over the past decade, the share of IT R&D

conducted by the 12 largest firmsÑthose most likely to conduct long-term researchÑhas declined by more than 10 percentage points. In addi-tion, several large IT companies that operate central research divisions
have redirected their research to track more closely areas of clear business
interest.  These changes have been driven by a desire to (1) better couple

research activities with product development as a means of bringing new
technologies to market more quickly and improving overall corporate
performance,20 (2) shift resources into computing and communications
systems research, and (3) emphasize a more problem-oriented way of
selecting research topics (Box 2.2).  Research is coupled more closely now

to the needs of the marketplace.  IBM, for example, still supports the

industryÕs largest in-house research program, but more of its work isconcentrated on systems and software, the underpinnings of e-commerce,
than on mathematics and physics.Disincentives to Corporate Investment in Research and DevelopmentLike most commercial enterprises, IT firms have strong economic rea-sons to refrain from investing in research, especially long-term research.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71TABLE 2.5  Research and Development as a Percentage of Sales in Large Information Technology Companies, 1991
to 1999Company199119921993199419951996199719981999
IBM10.310.18.96.85.86.16.26.26.0
AT&T4.84.44.54.14.71.61.61.20.9
Lucent Technologies11.012.112.311.8
NCR5.45.85.55.5
Hewlett-Packard10.19.78.58.07.07.07.17.06.8
Motorola10.09.89.08.48.18.69.29.811.1

Intel12.913.311.09.68.08.79.49.510.6
Microsoft12.712.712.412.914.214.715.617.015.0
Texas Instruments13.512.011.510.17.411.915.614.214.1
Sun Microsystems11.110.610.310.79.59.29.610.410.8
Xerox6.66.46.25.95.76.05.55.45.4
Digital Equipment11.611.812.610.67.57.37.88.20.0
Compaq Computer7.37.14.93.63.33.53.34.34.3
Cisco Systems6.88.09.59.710.912.113.1
NOTE: AT&T spun off Lucent Technologies and NCR in 1996.  Digital Equipment Corporation was purchased by Compaq Computer in Jun
e 1998;the data shown for DigitalÕs 1998 R&D expenditures are estimates for the two quarters of the year during which it operated as a separate company.CompaqÕs 1998 and 1999 figures reflect its acquisition of DigitalÕs R&D operations.  SOURCE:  Company annual reports.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72MAKING IT BETTERBOX 2.2Redirection of Research at Large Industrial LaboratoriesIBM CorporationWhen IBM Corporation experienced substantial operating losses in the early1990s, IBM Research underwent significant restructuring.  Skeptical of the Research
DivisionÕs contributions to the companyÕs bottom line, IBM executives cut the com-panyÕs total research and development (R&D) expenditures from $7.7 billion in1991 to $4.4 billion in 1995, and the divisionÕs budget dropped from $550 million to$430 million.  Although most of the cuts were accommodated by trimming over-
head and eliminating redundant or unpromising programs, total R&D employment
declined from a peak of about 3,400 to approximately 2,800 in late 1997.To deal with this situation, IBM managers attempted to couple research moreclosely to corporate objectives.  IBM reoriented its research to focus less on

physics and materials science and more on information systems, storage, soft-ware, applications, and solutions.  Accordingly, the number of researchers working
on networking, Internet technologies, solutions, and services grew, whereas the
number of physicists and materials scientists declined.  Electronic commerce
emerged as a main focus of research.  This research is clearly market-driven but
still requires fundamental advances in computing and mathematics.  It has pro-

duced innovations such as secure encrypted transactions.In recent years, IBM Research has experienced a resurgence.  By 1999, IBM
ÕsR&D spending had increased 19 percent (in real terms) over its 1995 level, and the
Research DivisionÕs budget reached an all-time high.   Between 1995 and 1999,
IBM established three new research facilities across the world:  a lab in Austin,
Texas (1995) that works on microprocessor technology; a lab in Beijing (1995) that
focuses on speech recognition and digital library applications; and a facility in India
(1998) that addresses cutting-edge customer solutions.  IBM Research also has
produced some much-heralded successes.  Work on speech recognition contributed
to the successful ViaVoice product; researchers found a way to replace aluminum
with copper in microprocessors, paving the way for smaller, faster chips; and workon magnetoresistive data recording technology enabled IBM to capture 40 percentof the laptop storage market and produced the Microdrive, a 1-square-inch storage
device for digital cameras and handheld computers.  Paul Horn, director of research,
says these technologies and others derived from the companyÕs research con-tribute $25 billion a year in revenues for IBMÑone-third of its total.AT&T and Lucent TechnologiesSince splitting off from AT&T in 1996, Lucent Technologies (which retained BellLaboratories) committed itself to funding research at 1 percent of total revenues,which gives researchers an incentive to contribute to the companyÕs growth.  Re-
search expenditures have grown with the company at roughly 19 percent a yearsince 1996, reaching $4.5 billion in 1999.  To increase the value and effectiveness
of its research, Lucent established a variety of mechanisms to accelerate the com-
mercialization of research results.  It established an internal venture capital opera-
tion to fund innovative ideas that do not fit into existing business units.  It has
launched a dozen or so internal businesses that have their own presidents and
virtual stock, as well as several independent spin-offs, such as Visual Insights,which sells software that can detect billing fraud by analyzing large amounts ofcontinuedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH73data; Veridicom, Inc., which markets Bell LabsÕ patented fingerprint-authentication
technology; Lucent Digital Radio, which is developing technology to convert analogFM radio signals to high-quality digital sound for broadcasters and greatly improve
the quality of AM radio; and Persystant Technologies, which offers a softwareserver that creates virtual environments linking networked usersÑwhether onwired or wireless phones, laptops, or multimedia personal computersÑover thepublic Internet or corporate intranets.  Some of these ventures have moved their
research results to the marketplace in just 8 months.AT&T also remains committed to funding research, but at a level not to exceed0.3 percent of total revenues.  Actual expenditures for research at AT&T have
been closer to 0.2 percent of revenues since the two companies split, because thesize of the staff grew more slowly than had originally been anticipated.  AT&T also

has allied research programs with newly defined strategic initiatives of its businessunits, especially those focusing on Internet-related technologies.  For example,
AT&T formed a subsidiary, a2b music, in November 1997 to provide secure down-
loading of music over the Internet.  The company uses AT&T
Õs encryption technol-ogy to protect the digital content rights of music labels and artists.Xerox CorporationMost of Xerox CorporationÕs computing- and communications-related researchis conducted at its Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), which views itself as provid-ing the equivalent of genetic diversity for Xerox.  PARC
Õs goals are to create sur-prising technological opportunities and ensure resilience against dramatic changes
in the information technology industry.  The center maintains small research pro-

grams in several topical areas that are expanded or contracted as technologytrajectories and each programÕs relative importance to the company become clearer.Over time, PARCÕs research agenda has shifted to emphasize computing overareas such as mathematics and physics, and the centerÕs overall level of effort hasincreased slightly, reflecting XeroxÕs commitment to research.To avoid repeating past mistakes, Xerox PARC has established mechanismsto improve its ability to capture the value of its research.  Researchers are encour-
aged to work more closely with Xerox business units, and PARC routinely usesÒspin-insÓ (cases in which Xerox forms a corporation to develop a technology, takes
a majority ownership position, and offers participants stock) and Òspin-outsÓ (in
which separately operating companies are formed that license the technology fromXerox) to encourage the commercialization of research results.  Research prob-

lems still are chosen in a highly decentralized fashion, with researchers proposingnew projects, but PARC has emphasized a problem-oriented approach to projectselection.  The idea is to focus on projects that are important to the company, such

as how to make a totally silent copier.  A challenge like this allows a range of
responses, from incorporating sound-deadening devices in the copiers to facilitat-ing the use of computer displays instead of paper copies.  Such problem-oriented

research often results in multidisciplinary work teams.  Work on 
Òsmart matterÓ (the
creation of materials with embedded computing capabilities), for example, involvesboth solid-state physicists and computer scientists.SOURCES:  Buderi (1999); Carey (1999); Neil Marx, Internet Division Finance, IBM SoftwareGroup, personal communication, November 20, 1997.BOX 2.2 ContinuedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74MAKING IT BETTERWithin their relatively small research budgets, vendors are understand-ably reluctant to invest in projects from which they are unlikely to reap
many or all of the benefits.  Economists call this the 
ÒappropriabilityÓproblem:  because good ideas diffuse rapidly and can be only partially

protected by patents, individual firms cannot be assured of reaping (or
appropriating) the benefits of their investments.  Practical companies

therefore tend to underinvest in the generation of new knowledge and
technologies (see Box 2.3).But IT firms face additional hurdles that make the problem of fundingresearch especially acute.  First, the IT industry is known for a rapid pace
of innovation, which by all reports has accelerated in recent years.  With

product cycles as short as 6 to 9 months in many areas of IT, companies
must pour resources into product development or risk being quickly left
behind.  The future is harder for research managers to predict than it was

in the 1980s, a shift that increases the perceived risk for companies that
invest too much in a particular vision of the future.  IT companies that

commit resources to projects that extend more than 3 years or so can find
themselves abandoned by an unexpected direction of the industry.  In

such an environment, long-term research is risky unless broadly distrib-
uted across a portfolioÑas prescribed by the diversity principle explainedat the beginning of this chapter.Other disincentives may be further reducing interest in IT research.One is the so-called network effect:  the value of a networked application
grows with the number of its users.21  Because of this effect, the market
can lock in popular applications, which quickly become difficult to dis-
place.  The value of prototype applications in such an environment is

small.  For example, there is little incentive to do research on technically

superior alternatives to common standards such as TCP/IP, Microsoft
Windows, or the Intel microprocessor architecture; the rewards are more
obvious for products that leverage these de facto standards.22  In this
environment, there is less innovation in the form of fundamental im-
provements, which would challenge the dominant technologies; instead,
innovation tends to be seen in new products and services that cleverly
adapt these technologies to new market needs.23  For example, the
InternetÕs basic protocol, IPv4, which provides only about 4.3 billionunique addresses, may not provide a large enough address space to meet
future demands as the Internet grows.  A replacement, IPv6, which is

generally thought to not only provide a vastly larger address space butother technically superior 
features, was developed in anticipation of thisneed, but because of the high cost of getting everyone to switch protocols
it has thus far failed to catch on in the marketplace.  To surmount the

switching problem, a variety of coexistence strategies are being pursued
in the Internet community, but none have yet caught on with a largeMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH75BOX 2.3The Economics of Research FundingOver the past 30 years, economists have developed a solid body of theory thatdemonstrates the limitations of the marketplace in supporting research, as well as
the need for public support.  This theory is based on the observation that knowl-
edgeÑespecially scientific and technical knowledge generated by researchÑhasmany of the characteristics of so-called public goods:  research results are widely

available to people and organizations whether or not they paid for or participated intheir creation, and the discoverers of new knowledge cannot easily prevent othersfrom making use of the knowledge without imposing additional costs on them-
selves and society.  In economic terms, these characteristics are referred to as
Ònonrival useÓ and 
Òcostly exclusion,Ó respectively.  These characteristics are asso-
ciated especially with long-term, fundamental research.  Together, they make it

difficult for firms that fund research to fully capture (or appropriate) the benefits ofthe resulting knowledge or to keep others from doing so.  Competitive markets
work well when the incremental costs and benefits of using a commodity can be
assigned to the user; they do not work well for the creation of scientific and techni-cal knowledge, and firms tend to underinvest in research.Firms can try to protect new knowledge by seeking patent or copyright protec-tion or by trying to keep it secret.  Patents and copyrights provide legally enforce-
able means of protecting knowledge, but they require public disclosure, enablingothers to learn from the work (by, for example, reverse engineering) and to find
alternative means of achieving the same end.  By keeping trade secrets, compa-
nies can avoid public disclosure, but this approach offers little means for legalrecourse should others learn the secret (unless they use unlawful means to do so).Neither set of mechanisms, therefore, provides foolproof protection for new knowl-edge.  Moreover, each imposes some economic inefficiencies, akin to those of a

monopoly, that result from the restrictions placed on the use of the ideas.  Such
restrictions can result in duplicative research programs in different firms and theinsufficient exploitation of new ideas.Despite appropriability problems, firms do support some fundamental research.
Their motives range from monitoring progress at the frontiers of science, to identify-ing ideas for potential lines of innovation that may emerge from the research of
others, to better positioning themselves to penetrate the secrets of rivalsÕ technical
practices.  By conducting fundamental research, firms can also hope to attract top
technical and scientific talent, who can contribute to research as well as develop-
ment activities.  Cohen and Levinthal (1990), in their theory of absorptive capacity,
argue that firm-level investment in research creates an absorptive capacity in thefirm that makes it better able to realize the benefits of research conducted by
others.  Nevertheless, funding fundamental research is a long-term strategy that is
sensitive to commercial pressures to shift the research toward developing newproducts and services and improving existing ones.SOURCE:  Condensed from Chapter 2 of Computer Science and Telecommunications Board(1999); additional discussion of the appropriability problem can be found in Nelson (1959) and
Arrow (1962).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76MAKING IT BETTERnumber of users.  So Internet users have been forced to adopt various
work-arounds, such as network address translation, that provide a quick
fix for the address shortage but have significant side effects.  The ultimate

outcome is, as of this writing, unclear.Further pressure to reduce expenditures on long-term research is
being created by companies that successfully compete in certain segments
of IT markets without incurring research expenses.  As noted earlier,

companies such as Dell Computer and Gateway have captured large
shares of the market for PCs by offering products that incorporate stan-
dard components purchased from other vendors.  Their products exploit

technical advances made by supplier firmsÑmany of which maintainextensive R&D programs.24  In effect, these assemblers buy research con-ducted by their component vendors and benefit from the economies of
scale that the vendors enjoy by selling to numerous assemblers.Another disincentive to fundamental innovation may be the limitedcapacity of users to absorb new technology.25  For example, the difficulty
and risk associated with upgrading software can deter users from adopt-
ing new programs as quickly as vendors can generate them; similarly,
end users may not be able to incorporate increases in processing speeds as
fast as manufactures can provide them.  Another limiting factor is the nature

of the customer base for potential IT innovations.  Because many potential

users (both individuals and organizations) are less sophisticated and able
than the early adopters of IT, vendors have limited incentive to invest in
fundamental research unless they can hope to penetrate new markets with
rapidly improving technology.  Considerable energy is instead devoted to

launching tactical product innovations and letting the marketplace sort out
the winners from the losers.  The enormous amount of activity and market-

ing hype should not be confused with fundamental advances in IT.A Countertrend in Central Research LaboratoriesCompetitive pressures have not forced the traditional IT research labsto give up on fundamental research entirely.  For example, Lucent Tech-

nologies supported a Bell Labs cosmologist who was attempting to detect
hidden dark matter in the universe.  Interestingly, the work contributed

to a software product that detects billing fraud by analyzing patterns in
large amounts of data.  Other Lucent researchers are investigating neural
pathways of the slug to learn how to build self-healing information net-
works or exploring computers based on quantum mechanics and the

information processing capabilities of genetic material (Carey, 1999).
Nevertheless, the breakup and divestiture of AT&T has steadily dimin-
ished the flow of fundamental IT research historically associated with the
Bell Labs name (see Box 2.4).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH77BOX 2.4Changes in Telecommunications ResearchThe telecommunications sector provides a compelling example of the transfor-mation from a vertically structured to a horizontally stratified industry.  Before 1984,

AT&T maintained a regulated monopoly over the nationÕs telecommunicationsservices.  As both an equipment manufacturer and a service provider, the company
had strong interests in end-to-end systems issues, and its research laboratories
(most notably Bell Laboratories) supported those interests.  With its divestiture in
1984, AT&TÕs research divisions were divided between AT&T and the Bell Com-munications Research Corporation (Bellcore), which was formed to conduct re-
search in support of the seven newly established local exchange service providers,the regional Bell operating companies (RBOCs).  Bellcore
Õs applied research orga-nization started out with approximately 350 professional research staff, drawn
almost entirely from the original Bell Laboratories, and grew to its target staff sizeof 501 within 3 years.  By 1990, its budget peaked at about $135 million
Ñnearly allof which was provided by the RBOCs.1Then, amid increasing competition in the telecommunications sector, theRBOCsÕ funding for applied research at Bellcore steadily and rapidly declined, and
by 1998 BellcoreÕs applied research staff was back down to about 350.  Approxi-
mately 20 percent of BellcoreÕs researchers were funded by government contractsin 1998; another 50 percent were funded by BellcoreÕs business units to supportthe companyÕs Software System and Professional Services products (e.g., tech-nology and architectures for Internet telephony products, new types of software-based tools for efficiently finding Y2K problems, and, more generally, for testingsoftware).  Less than 30 percent of Bellcore
Õs research budget was directed atbroader industry research issues.  Furthermore, Bellcore
Õs customer base hadgrown substantially beyond the RBOCs, so the share of BellcoreÕs research sup-ported by the RBOCs declined.  Further separating Bellcore from the service pro-
viders, the RBOCs sold Bellcore (now called Telcordia Technologies) to ScienceApplications International Corporation in 1998, divesting themselves of their core
research capability.Some of the RBOCs (e.g., NYNEX, U S WEST) supported large internalresearch organizations in 1990, with combined research expenditures of $75 mil-
lion to $100 million.  But these research programs were eliminated or dramaticallyscaled back during the 1990s.  As a result, by 1999, the RBOCs no longer supported
fundamental research (i.e., research that may not generate a return on investment
until more than 3 years in the future), and even their support for more targetedresearch (i.e., attempts to discover innovative approaches for addressing clearlydefined immediate problems) declined precipitously.  The spin-off of Lucent Tech-

nologies from AT&T in 1996 reinforced the separation between equipment pro-viders and service providers, as roughly two-thirds of AT&TÕs original researchcapacity (including Bell Labs) went to Lucent Technologies and only one-third

remained within AT&T (in the form of AT&T Research).  Research at Lucent con-
tinues to move toward systems and software, but with a less direct connection tothe operational issues faced by telecommunications service companies.continuedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78MAKING IT BETTERAll of these changes occurred during a 15-year time period when the need tobetter understand how to design large, complex information networks, including
their associated applications, greatly increased.2  As a result, the majority of
research supporting the nationÕs telecommunications industry now is conducted byequipment suppliers, such as Lucent Technologies, Nortel, and Cisco Systems,
with fundamental research performed by some of the largest of these firms.  These
organizations, in effect, conduct research for a rapidly growing sector comprisingRBOCs, long-distance carriers (such as MCI and Sprint), and Internet service
providers.1A small portion came from Southern New England Telephone and Cincinnati Bell (inde-pendent entities that purchased BellcoreÕs products as part of a package).2The history recounted here, and the estimates of R&D support by the RBOCs, wereprovided by Stewart Personick, former vice president of information networking at Bellcore,
personal communication, April 26, 1999.BOX 2.4 ContinuedSome IT companies have created new corporate research laboratoriesto extend their horizons.  Intel, for example, established a microcomputer

lab in 1996 to conduct pioneering research on microprocessors.  With an

original staff of 70, the groupÕs objective was to identify technical road-blocks to improved microprocessor performance and find ways to over-
come them (Takashi, 1996).  In November of 1998, Motorola created a

central research lab, Motorola Labs, as a way of combining and better
managing the approximately 1,000 researchers who had previously worked
in separate research groups focusing on wireless communications, semi-
conductors, and other products.  At the same time, Motorola began increas-
ing its funding for research, especially fundamental research, to bring it

up to what it describes as a standard level of research funding among
larger IT companies, 1 percent of the prior yearÕs revenues.26  Research
topics range from high-quality displays for cellular phones to work with
genetic material aimed at finding ways of using the attraction between
pairs of organic acids to lay down patterns of circuitry on integrated
circuits (Hardy, 1999).The most obvious newcomer to corporate research is Microsoft, whichin 1991 established a research division that has attracted some of the top
talent in IT.  Microsoft Research grew to some 200 researchers by 1999,

even expanding to include a facility in England, and further growth has
been planned.  Research groups are maintained in a dozen areas, includ-

ing speech recognition, decision theory, and computer graphics.  They
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH79pursue research with long-term implications for the company that alsomay also feed into ongoing development projects.27 Systems to check
spelling and grammar, assist users in real time, facilitate remote collabo-
ration, and translate among languages are among the fruits of MicrosoftÕsR&D that have been commercialized; more speculative work includes
efforts to develop a tablet computerÑa portable, wireless device withouta keyboard that could serve a range of personal computing and commu-
nications purposesÑand to develop large-scale-image databases withintuitive interfaces (Markoff, 1999; Barclay et al., 1999).Gaps in the Research Base:  Systems Integration
As noted in an earlier report by the Computer Science and Tele-communications Board (CSTB, 1992), systems integration first became an
issue in the 1960s, when federal agencies began hiring contractors to
design large-scale systems for data processing, communications, and aero-
space and defense applications.  Over the next 40 years, the emergence of

distributed personal computing, local area networks, and, more recently,
the Internet, drove a growing need for systems integration.  The integra-

tion challenge goes beyond making incompatible machines communicate
with each other; it is a problem-solving activity that harnesses and coordi-
nates the power and capabilities of IT to meet customersÕ needs.  The
result is generally one-of-a-kind systems that increase productivity, flex-
ibility, responsiveness, and competitive advantage.  Considerable effort is

expended on customized consultingÑmodification, interfacing, coding,and installing hardware and softwareÑto integrate the individual com-ponents into a cohesive whole.Systems integration is now a thriving U.S. industry that is finding newopportunities in the efforts across the economy to engage in e-commerce.
Total revenues for custom integrated system design and custom program-

ming services topped $76 billion in 1997, up from $34 billion in 1990.28Different types of firms provide such services.  Companies such as

Andersen Consulting, Electronic Data Services (EDS), and Computer Sci-
ences Corporation earn the majority of their revenues from systems inte-
gration activities.  Many of the large accounting/business services firms,

including PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, and Ernst & Young, also have
established systems integration and services practices.  Large diversified

computer manufacturers, such as IBM and Hewlett-Packard, have moved
into systems integration and related services, creating new divisions for
these activities.  IBM
Õs Global Services Division is the fastest-growing partof the company; its revenues increased almost 30 percent between 1997
and 1999 and accounted for 37 percent of the companyÕs revenues in 1999.Also participating in the industry are a number of defense contractors,Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80MAKING IT BETTERsuch as Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company, which developedtheir systems integration experience by designing complex weapons or
command-and-control systems for the military and by operating their
own substantial information and communications systems.In general, systems integrators support limited R&D, and most ofwhat is funded is development.  Neither Andersen Consulting nor EDS
Ñtwo of the largest systems integration firmsÑreport R&D expenditures intheir annual reports (Table 2.6).  Andersen does have a small research

division that employs about 200 computer scientists and business analysts
to identify interesting technologies and build prototype applications for
testing with potential customers; however, the division constitutes a small

part of the company.29  Its work focuses on areas such as e-commerce,
intellectual asset management, and work group productivity.30  Lockheed
Martin, a diversified company with approximately $1 billion in R&DTABLE 2.6  Research and Development Investments of Representative
Systems Integrators, 1998 (millions of dollars)Systems IntegrationSystems Integration
CompanyRevenuesR&D
Services-only firmsa  Andersen Consulting8,3070
  American Management Systems1,05877

  Computer Sciences Corporation7,6600
  Electronic Data Services16,8910
  Keane1,0763.5
Diversified firmsb  IBM28,91625% of research
division budget  Hewlett-Packard6,95650
  Lockheed Martin5,21236.4
aData on the services-only firms was taken from annual reports to the Securities and ExchangeCommission.  Andersen Consulting reports no research and development expenditures in
its annual filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission, but it does operate a research
group with about 200 members.bData for the diversified firms shows systems integration revenues out of total corporaterevenues and systems integration R&D out of total R&D.  Data on IBM provided by Irving

Wladawsky-Berger, vice president of technology and strategy at IBM, personal communi-cation, October 6, 1999.  Data on Hewlett-Packard provided by Curtis Hoyle, special assis-
tant to the director, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, personal communication, November 2,
1999.  Data on Lockheed Martin provided by B. Clovis Landry, vice president of technol-
ogy, Lockheed Martin Information and Services Sector, personal communication, October11, 1999.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH81expenditures, spends only 0.7 percent of its IT systems integration revenueson R&D, reflecting its reliance on off-the-shelf components researched
and developed by IT vendors and the academic research community.31Taken together, these facts suggest that most of the research includedin federal statistics for computer and data processing services is performed
by firms in the prepackaged software industry (e.g., Microsoft, Oracle,
and SAP) rather than firms in the custom programming and systems
integration industries, and insiders discount the amount of research
reflected in the figures.  Indeed, the largest supporter of research on sys-

tems and services appears to be IBM.  Although detailed breakouts of the

companyÕs R&D expenditures are not available, managers in the ResearchDivision estimate that about 25 percent of the companyÕs research budgetis devoted to services and solutions.  This figure is only a rough approxi-

mation, because some software research (e.g., speech recognition) could
have been considered part of services and solution work but was not.  But

the 25 percent share is much higher than the corresponding share in the
early 1990s, when services and solutions accounted for just a tiny percent-
age of the research budget.32The apparent lack of attention to large-scale systems issues is accen-tuated by changes in the structure of the IT industry.  Historically, large

vendors of computer and communications technology such as IBM and
AT&T were vertically structured.  They enjoyed both significant returns

on investment that could be devoted to systems research and a clear
competitive advantage from doing so.  Over the past decade, the IT indus-

try structure has changed, becoming horizontal rather than vertical, with
individual companies focusing on only certain portions of the IT value
chainÑmicroprocessors, software, or PCsÑand addressing a full range ofapplications within that functional group.  Examples of horizontal struc-

ture are evident in the computer industry, with Microsoft specializing in
operating systems and applications software, Intel in microprocessors,
Compaq in computer platforms, and SAP in systems integration and busi-
ness applications.  The communications industry exhibits a similar pat-

tern, with the separation of voice and data communications service pro-
viders (such as AT&T and America Online) from manufacturers of
networking equipment (such as Lucent Technologies and Cisco Systems)
and underlying communications facilities (see Box 2.4).  Horizontally

structured companies have less incentive to invest in large-scale systems
research, because each is responsible for only a piece of the overall infra-
structure and none has a holistic view of the systems created from its
components.  Although IBM has increased its emphasis on systems, few

other IT companies conduct research in these areasÑand, as suggestedearlier and elaborated upon in the next section, organizations that inte-
grate systems or build custom applications do not support research.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82MAKING IT BETTERTABLE 2.7  R&D Spending on IT in 500 End-User Organizations
(percentage)IT BudgetR&DEstimated IT
As ShareBudgetR&D As Share
of ProjectedAs Shareof Projected
IndustryRevenuesof ITSales Revenues
Banking and financial services950.45
Professional services740.28
Telecommunications640.24
Health care4.540.18

Construction and engineering360.18
Information technology440.16
Pharmaceuticals and medical equipment350.15

Transportation340.12
Media and entertainment430.12
Insurance3.530.11

Manufacturing2.540.10
Metals and natural resources250.10
Retail and distribution2.540.10

Energy330.09
Utilities2.530.08
Chemicals2.530.07

Consumer goods3.520.07
Electronics320.06
Hospitality and travel240.06

Food and beverage processing1.530.05
Median/average3.640.14
SOURCE:  Information Week (1999).
Research by End-User OrganizationsMost large companies in industries as disparate as automobiles, bank-ing, and health care maintain a growing staff of IT professionals whose
work consists primarily of deploying, operating, and supporting the
companyÕs information systems.  Many of these companies develop IT
applications to suit their specific needs; a handful engage in highly tar-
geted IT-related research.33  Information Week magazine recently polled
500 organizations considered to be top end users of IT regarding their IT
budgets and R&D activities.  The poll revealed that these organizations

planned to spend an average of 3.6 percent of their expected annual rev-
enues on IT in 1999, and that 4 percent of the IT share would support
related R&D (Table 2.7).  Banking and financial services firms topped the
rankings by a wide margin, with IT R&D budgets equivalent to 0.45 per-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH83cent of their sales revenues; professional services and telecommunica-tions followed with IT R&D budgets of 0.28 and 0.24 percent of sales
revenues, respectively (Information Week, 1999).  Food and beverage pro-
cessing firms came in at the low end, with IT R&D expenditures of 0.05
percent of their projected sales (Information Week, 1999).  The figures show
that on average, even in the 500 most IT-intensive end-user organizations,
less than 0.15 percent of sales revenues are devoted to IT R&D.In short, most large end users who invest massively in developingand deploying IT systems fund only limited research, although they often
do invest in developing custom applications for their own purposes.
These are the companies most likely to benefit from attention to the
research challenges inherent in IT applications (discussed in Chapter 3
and Chapter 5), yet they are the least likely to support research.  The

companies that do support research, mostly equipment suppliers, do not
benefit directly from research on large-scale systems and applications and
cannot be expected to assume the entire burden of supporting such work.
Clearly, the industry as a whole underinvests in this type of research.End users of IT focus almost exclusively on applied R&D.  For exam-ple, a large hospital or health care system might conduct applied research
to evaluate whether expert systems reduce the inappropriate use of medi-
cations and which system features are needed.  Boeing employed approxi-

mately 150 workers (out of its total workforce of 231,000) in its computer
science area in 1998 to develop systems to support aircraft manufacturing
operations (e.g., tools for collaborative design of aircraft, advanced com-
puter-aided design (CAD) technologies); to implement corporate infor-
mation infrastructures; and to design systems for Boeing aircraft (e.g., on-
board networks, entertainment systems).34  Online retailer Amazon.com
spent $47 million to enhance the features, content, and functionality of its
Web sites and transaction-processing systems and upgrade its systems
and telecommunications infrastructure.35  Merrill Lynch spent hundreds
of millions of dollars to develop a new computing platform for its finan-
cial advisors and a Web-based interface that allows customers to access
their accounts and company research, consult with their financial advi-
sors, and conduct e-commerce. 36
  The much smaller online investment
firm, E*Trade, spent $33 millionÑ13 percent of its total revenuesÑontechnology development in 1998 to enhance its product offerings and
maintain its Web site.Such efforts can result in innovative technologies.  Companies such as
Aetna, Amazon.com, Citicorp, Merrill Lynch, and the Sabre Group (which
processes airline reservations) have been awarded a handful of patents on
inventions related to IT and related systems (Table 2.8).37  E*Trade has
applied for a patent on its proprietary Stateless Architecture, which en-
ables its Web site to handle more than 1 million visitors and place up toMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84MAKING IT BETTER150,000 orders at the same time.  Although the total number of patents
held by these companies is dwarfed by the hundreds of thousands of
patents held by major IT vendors such as IBM, AT&T, and Xerox, end
users are clearly pursuing innovative work to address their IT needs.38Innovation by end users is not a new phenomenon, nor is it limited tothe IT arena.  Research conducted by Eric von Hippel in the Sloan School
of Management at MIT found that well over half of the innovations in
scientific instruments, semiconductor and printed circuit board equip-
ment, and pultrusion equipment (used for making fiber-reinforced plastic
products) were attributable to end users as opposed to vendors of such
products (von Hippel, 1988).  Such end users tend to have an understand-

ing of their particular needs, the expertise to satisfy their needs through
innovation, and an expectation that they can improve their competitive
positions through innovation.  End users who must apply technology to a
TABLE 2.8  Representative IT-Related Patents Assigned to End-User
OrganizationsCompanyPatent Title
AetnaInsurance classification plan loss control system.
Expert system for providing interactive assistance in solvingproblems such as health care management.Three-level distributed control for networking input/output devices.Amazon.comSystem and method for providing multimedia bookmarks for
hypertext markup language files.Secure method for communicating credit card data when placing anorder on a nonsecure network.Secure method and system for communicating a list of credit cardnumbers over a nonsecure network.CiticorpSystem and method for delivering financial services.
Merrill LynchDistributed network agents.
Check alteration detection system and method.Integrated system for controlling master account and nestedsubaccount(s).Securities trading workstation.Sabre GroupInformation aggregation and synthesization system.
System to predict optimum computer platform.SOURCE: Compiled from information contained in the U.S. Patent and Trademark OfficeÕsWeb patent database.  Available online at <http://www.uspto.gov>.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH85particular need often have greater insight into the issues involved than doequipment vendors, but they are limited with regard to the types of R&D
they can perform.  Indeed, many lack the expertise to conduct research

altogether.  They may have intelligent, capable staffs in their IT depart-

ments, but they typically lack computer scientists who can contribute to
fundamental as opposed to applied research.  Furthermore, investments

in R&D are examined closely to make sure they have a good chance of
improving organizational performance.  Many organizations run on tight

margins, and if the expected returns are too far into the future or are only
weakly linked to profit margins and overall performance, then the pro-
posed R&D generally does not survive the budget process.  Also, contem-

porary managementÕs focus on core competenciesÑthe essential businessof a companyÑencourages skepticism about R&D.Venture Capital Support for InnovationVenture capital (VC) plays a significant role in accelerating innova-tion in IT in the United States, although not necessarily through direct
support of R&D.  VC firms are concerned primarily with earning a return

on investment.  They raise funds from private investors to make equity

investments in new firms.  They also provide management and other

nontechnical assistance to the firms in which they invest, serving on
boards of directors and helping to attract top management talent to these
firms.  The technologies developed by VC-backed companies typically

draw on research conducted in other corporate or university laboratories.
Indeed, VC firms tend not to invest in companies that require technologi-
cal breakthroughs; instead, recipients of VC must have viable technolo-
giesÑand business plansÑin hand.  Much of the work conducted with
VC relates to marketing and business development.Yet VC funding does contribute to innovation and, less directly, toresearch.  By helping to establish and expand companies, VC enables

novel ideas generated by previous research to be exploited and brought
to the marketplace through continued development.  As the Congres-

sional Budget Office (1999) has noted, Òventure capitalists increase thenumber of new ideas introduced into the economy from the stock of ideas
generated in the laboratory,Ó thereby enhancing the efficiency of R&D.
Start-up companies do a lot of work on systems architectures and design
trade-offs, understanding of user needs and refinement of applications,
and ancillary tools (e.g., CAD tools, verification methodologies).  They

tend not to focus on long-term research or on developing a deep under-
standing of the phenomena exploited in their innovations.  Although this

work is not intended to be research in the narrow sense of the word and is
not published in academic papers, it does generate new knowledge, andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86MAKING IT BETTERthat knowledge diffuses through the industry in the form of patents and,more importantly, a flow of people among companies.39From another perspective, VC firms are even more fundamental toinnovation in Internet and IT technologies than in other venues.  Increas-
ingly, much of the innovation in these areas is related to new business
models and social innovation rather than technology.  An example is the

use of the Internet to bring together buyers and sellers at online auctions.
The research related to these models seems to be carried out by starting
new companies that succeed or fail in the real marketplace.  Looked at in

this way, the market itself is the laboratory and arbiter of success, and the
whole system of VC firms can be thought of as a new way of conducting
research.Studies demonstrate that venture capitalists have a disproportionateimpact on technological innovation relative to the size of their invest-
ments.  Although they fund only a few hundred of the nearly 1 million

businesses begun in the United States each year, venture capitalists backed
roughly one-third of all the companies that went public in the past two
decadesÑincluding several of the most successful IT firms, namelyAmazon.com, Cisco Systems, Microsoft, Intel, and Yahoo (Gompers and
Cohen, 1999; Lerner, 1999a,b).  These companies have a significant impact

on the economy.  A study conducted by the venture firm Kleiner, Perkins,

Caufield, and Byers found that the companies it had financed since its
founding in 1971 had created 131,000 jobs, generated $44 billion in annual
revenues, and had $84 billion in market capitalization (Peltz, 1996).In the IT industry, VC firms are a growing source of funding, al-though insiders wonder how long the gold rush that took place during
the period in which this report was written will last.  Total VC invest-

ments in U.S. firms jumped from less than $4 billion in 1994 to $14.7
billion in 1998, with investments in IT-related companies rising from less
than $2 billion to roughly $9 billion during that time.40  In the 4-year
period between January 1995 and December 1998, VC firms invested a
total of $46.6 billion in start-up companies in all industries; of that amount,
$26 billionÑor 56 percentÑwas invested in the IT sector.  Roughly half of
the IT-related investments went to firms in the computer software and
services sector, with investments in communications, semiconductors, and
computer hardware accounting for the rest (Table 2.9).41  Internet-related
companies (e.g., Yahoo, Amazon.com, and eBay) also have garnered a
growing share of VC investments.  Venture capitalists reportedly invested

$3.8 billion in Internet-related companies in the second quarter of 1999,
up from $1.4 billion in the second quarter of 1998 and more than the $3.3
billion invested during all of 1997.42In contrast to the much smaller amounts of VC in Europe and Japan,almost half of VC investments in the United States represent early-stageMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH87capital.  This includes so-called seed capital that firms use to research,
assess, and develop initial concepts, as well as start-up financing, which
supports product development and initial marketing.  Recipients of start-

up funding may be in the process of setting up or may have been in
business for a short time, but without selling products commercially.
Early-stage financing is distinguished from expansion financing, which
dominates foreign VC investments and supports the growth and expan-
sion of firms already operating in the commercial marketplace.  Expan-

sion funds may be used to finance increased production capacity, for
market or product development, or as a source of additional working
capital.43  These differences show that the VC system in the United States
is more able than VC systems elsewhere to stimulate innovation.UNIVERSITY RESEARCHUniversities play two important roles in IT research.  They are major
performers of research funded by both government and industry, and
they are the source of the educated professionals who populate industrial
and government research laboratories as well as university faculties.  Uni-

versity research has had a significant impact on the evolution of IT and
related practices.  As documented in other reports (CSTB, 1995, 1999),

many important information technologies were first investigated inTABLE 2.9  Venture Capital Investments, January 1995 Through
December 1998 (millions of dollars)IndustryInvestment
Information technology   Computer services and software12,722
   Communications8,054

   Semiconductors and electronic components2,659
   Computer hardware2,529
      IT subtotal25,964
Other industries   Medical and health-related6,624

   Other products4,786
   Consumer-related4,000
   Biotechnology3,670

   Industrial and energy1,593
      Total46,636
SOURCE:  Congressional Budget Office (1999).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88MAKING IT BETTERacademia or largely developed there.  Significant examples include the
Internet, reduced-instruction-set computing, redundant arrays of inex-
pensive disks for storage, object-oriented programming, CAD of inte-
grated circuits, and computer graphics.  Universities can be particularly

important performers of fundamental and long-term research.Unlike industrial research, most university research is conducted inthe public domain.  Results of university research are disseminated widely

throughout the research community, maximizing the impact of the research,
and university graduates serve as key conduits of technology transfer as
they move into jobs in other universities, government, and industry.
Universities are fertile sources of innovation; free from pressures to make
a near-term impact on the next generation of products, they often provide
new ideas for established companies and seed the establishment and
growth of numerous start-up companies. Maintaining the strength of
university research is therefore key to ensuring the vitality of the IT
industry.  The following sections discuss trends in support for university
research, gaps in such research, and commercialization of the research
results.Trends in Support for University ResearchThe available statistics present a mixed picture of funding for univer-sity research focusing on IT.  Universities report that, between 1990 and

1998, constant-dollar funding for R&D in computer science grew from
$614 million to $754 million, and constant-dollar funding for R&D in
electrical engineering grew from $791 million to $1.02 billion.  Approxi-

mately two-thirds of those funds came from federal sources, with the
balance coming from industry, state and local governments, university
funds, and other sources.  Statistics on federal funding for university

research indicate that federal support for IT-related research in universi-
ties grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent between 1990 and 1998
(Figure 2.5).  But these statistics indicate that the rise is attributable almost

entirely to increases in federal funding for computer science research,
which expanded from $336 million to $470 million during the period of
interest; federal funding for university research in electrical engineering
rose at a rate of only 0.9 percent between 1990 and 1998 (from $165 million
to $177 million) and actually declined in real terms after 1993.44Additional IT-related research is conducted in university departmentsother than computer science and electrical engineering, but it tends not to
be captured fully in federal statistics.  Historically, this work has been

pursued in science and engineering departments and has been directed
toward large simulations of physical phenomena and technological sys-
tems.  It has been a primary driver for research into high-performance
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH89FIGURE 2.5  Federal funding for university research in IT, 1990 to 1998.  SOURCE:
National Science Foundation (2000a).0100200300400500600700800199019911992199319941995199619971998Millions of Constant 1998 DollarsComputer scienceElectrical engineeringTotalcomputing and parallel processing.  More recently, the number of depart-
ments engaged in IT-related work appears to have grown as IT has be-
come more deeply ingrained in science and engineering, as well as a host
of nontechnical fields.  Business schools and departments of industrial

engineering, for example, are studying the ways in which IT affects busi-
ness processes.  Medical schools and biology departments are conducting
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90MAKING IT BETTERresearch to enable better use of IT in providing patient care and insequencing the human genome.  The Department of Aeronautics and

Astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology recently hired
a computer scientist (Nancy Leveson) with expertise in software safety.
As discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4, a number of universities have
established new schools or departments to investigate issues at the inter-
section of IT and the social sciences.  In all of these cases, it is difficult to

determine the extent to which the work advances the state of the art in IT
(i.e., should be considered IT research) versus the extent to which it is
used to advance research in another discipline (i.e., supports develop-
ment of IT systems to support research in another discipline).  This report

argues that there is great value in the former.Industry support for university research has grown over the pastdecade but still represents less than 10 percent of all university research
funding.  Moreover, it tends to be concentrated at a select set of universi-

ties.  At Carnegie Mellon University, MIT, Stanford University, and the

University of California at Berkeley, funding from industry constitutes 20
to 30 percent of IT funding for research.  Such support can take several

forms.  Companies may sponsor research of potential interest to them,

providing support for a faculty member and graduate students, or they
may participate in collaborative programs in which industrial and aca-
demic researchers work side by side to bring new technology to market.45Organizations such as the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC),
whose members include most of the nationÕs largest manufacturers ofintegrated circuits, pool research funds and make grants to universities
for nonproprietary research that will help a range of member companies.
In August 1998, for example, the SRC announced that it would establish
six national Focus Centers with a total of $60 million per year in new
funding to pursue long-term research of interest to the semiconductor
industry.46  The trend toward IT-related start-ups originating in universi-
ties (discussed below) also fosters a type of collaboration.  These varied

forms of collaboration have a number of benefits:  they can compensate

for fluctuations in federal research budgets, increase the relevance of aca-
demic research, and, at times, generate revenues from licensing.  Industry

also benefits because academic research allows it to access new technolo-
gies of particular interest, keep abreast of new developments, and, per-
haps most importantly, identify promising young researchers.Gaps in Academic ResearchTo some extent, research conducted in academic research laboratoriesis aligned with the research agendas of its sponsors.  Because much

research funding in IT comes from government and industry, both ofMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH91which appear to allocate most of their resources to component research,academic research has been slow to respond to emerging requirements
for interdisciplinary research connected to the large-scale systems and IT
applications that are responding to business and societal needs.  This is

not to say that academia has failed to develop highly innovative programs
to educate students and conduct research on interdisciplinary topics but
simply that there is substantial room for improvement.  Just as industry

research can become compartmentalized along product lines and indus-
try sectors, academic research can track individual disciplines too closely.
Faculty members tend to be rewarded on the basis of their contributions
to a particular field, so setting off in new directions can have adverse
consequences.Universities face difficult problems in conducting research on net-works and large-scale systems:  primarily they lack access to large opera-
tional systemsÑmost of which are owned and operated by private firmsÑas well as tools for simulating the performance of such systems.  This

problem has persisted for decades (CSTB, 1994), and its consequences
have worsened as interest grows in the social applications discussed in
this report.  As the framers of federal networking research programs have

long known, only large networks populated by real users demonstrate
the behaviors that need to be studied and understood.  Even if academic

researchers gain access to these systems, it is extremely difficult, if not
impossible, to change their operation for experimental purposes, because
users and their applications demand stability and availability.  This prob-

lem was first noted when the research communityÕs use of the Internetgrew rapidly in the 1980s; the commercialization of the 1990s only exacer-
bated the problem (CSTB, 1994).47  The limited ability to simulate such
systems is reflected in the poor understanding of their behavior.Commercialization of University ResearchUniversity students, professors, and researchers often start new com-panies to commercialize the results of their research.  Universities also

license technology to industry, especially since the passage of the Bayh-
Dole Act of 1980, which allows universities to license technologies emerg-
ing from federally funded research programs.  The large number of new

companies created to sell products based on university research, and the
thousands of licenses that universities grant to firms, testify to the dra-
matic impact of university research on the private sectorÑand the effec-tiveness of the nationÕs innovation system in converting research resultsinto new products and processes.Across all industries, the number of start-up companies emergingfrom university research is growing rapidly.  A 1998 survey by the Asso-
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92MAKING IT BETTERciation of University Technology Managers (AUTM) reported that, since1980, more than 2,200 companies had been created to commercialize the
results of research conducted in U.S. and Canadian universities, research
hospitals, and other research institutions (AUTM, 1998).  Almost half of

those companies had been created since 1993.  In 1997, 258 of the 333 start-

up companies in the survey came out of university research.  In 1996, only

248 start-ups were reported by all the institutions combined.  Although

the number of start-up companies is increasing, the percentage of tech-
nologies licensed to start-up (as opposed to established) companies is
decreasing.  From 1977 to 1993, 50 percent of licenses were granted to

start-up companies.  Since 1993, only 29 percent of licenses were extended

to start-up companies, and 61 percent were extended to existing compa-
nies.  The implications of this trend are as yet unclear, and further study is

needed; the trend could signify greater recognition within established
companies of the value of university research, or it could suggest estab-
lished companiesÕ growing dependence on university research.
The IT industry is home to a large number of firms that emerged fromuniversity research.  Stanford University, for example, gave rise to a num-

ber of well-known Silicon Valley companies, including Sun Microsystems
and Cisco Systems.  MIT also gave rise to a number of firms, ranging from

Open Market, Inc., an e-commerce firm, to RSA Data Security, which
specializes in public key encryption, and more recently Akamai, which
streamlines the downloading of content from popular Web sites.  The

AUTM survey reports that MIT contributed to the creation of 17 start-up
companies in 1997, second only to the University of Washington, with 25.
A report by BankBoston found that MIT graduates and faculty had been
involved in founding 4,000 companies that employed 1.1 million people
and had annual world sales of $232 billion in 1995; 57 percent of the
employment resulted from firms in electronics and instruments
(BankBoston, 1997).  Carnegie Mellon University has licensed technolo-

gies to many small software and robotics companies, as well as LYCOS,
one of the well-known players in the Internet search engine market.The characteristics of start-up companies that arise out of academiavary significantly among universities.  For example, both Stanford and

the University of California at Berkeley have provided many new tech-
nologies to Silicon Valley, but their approaches are quite different.  Berkeley

professors have tended to remain in academia.  At Stanford, by contrast,

ÒitÕs almost expected that a successful faculty member will at some pointstart a companyÓ (Hamilton and Himelstein, 1997), although an indi-
vidual may return to Stanford after the company is well launched.
BerkeleyÕs style is to Òdevelop technology, convince existing companiesto use the ideas, and then go back and develop more technologyÓ(Hamilton and Himelstein, 1997).  This pattern seems to be changing
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH93rapidly:  in any given year about 10 percent of Berkeley
Õs electrical engi-neering and computer science faculty members are on leave starting a
company.  Each pattern illustrates one way in which faculty and students

migrate between universities and start-ups.  It is too early to tell whether

the late-1990s trend of faculty across the country leaving academia to
establish start-ups will persist, but the prospect is debated actively among
academics.  All other things being equal, the trend raises questions about
the long-term capabilities of universities.CONCLUSIONThis review indicates that the recent growth in spending on ITresearch does not alleviate all concerns about the nationÕs research enter-prise.  Several underlying trends could ultimately limit the nation
Õs inno-vative capacity and hinder its ability to deploy the kinds of IT systems
that could best meet personal, business, and government needs.  First,

expenditures on research by companies that develop IT goods and ser-
vices and by the federal government have not kept pace with the expand-
ing array of IT.  The disincentives to long-term, fundamental research

have become more numerous, especially in the private sector, which
seems more able to lure talent from universities than the other way
around.  Second, and perhaps most significantly, IT research investments

continue to be directed at improving the performance of IT components,
with limited attention to systems issues and application-driven needs.
Neither industry nor academia has kept pace with the problems posed by
the large-scale IT systems used in a range of social and business con-
textsÑproblems that require fundamental research.  With the exception
of IBM, most companies involved in developing IT systems for end-user
organizations invest little in research.  Academic researchers also have

tended to ignore work on large-scale systems and social applications
because they require interdisciplinary teams and very large budgets and
because it is hard for them to obtain access to operational systems for
experimental purposes.  New mechanisms may be needed to direct

resources to these growing problem areas.REFERENCESArrow, Kenneth.  1962.  
ÒEconomic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,Óin Richard Nelson, ed., The Rate and Direction of Innovative Activity
.  Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, N.J.Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM).  1998.  
FY 1998 AUTM LicensingSurvey.  AUTM, Norwalk, Conn.
BankBoston.  1997.  
MIT:  The Impact of Innovation
.  MIT Technology Licensing Office, Cam-
bridge, Mass., March.  Available online at <http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/founders/>.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94MAKING IT BETTERBarclay, Tom, Jim Gray, and Don Slutz.  1999
.  Microsoft TerraServer:  A Spatial Data Warehouse
.Technical Report MS-TR-99-29, Microsoft Corp., Redmond, Wash., June.  Available 
onlineat <http://research.microsoft.com/~gray/Papers/MSR_TR_99_29_TerraServer.pdf>.Buderi, Robert.  1999.  
ÒInto the Big Blue Yonder,Ó Technology Review, July/August:46-53.Carey, John.  1999.  
ÒAn Ivory Tower That Spins Pure Gold,Ó Business Week, April 19, pp.167-168.Christensen, Clayton.  1997.  
The InnovatorÕs Dilemma.  Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Cohen, W., and D. Levinthal, 1990. ÒAbsorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learningand Innovation.Ó  Administrative Science Quarterly 35:128-152.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1992.  Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive:  Systems Integration
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1994.  Academic Careers for Experimental Computer Scientists and Engineers
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1995.  Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support
the NationÕs Information Infrastructure. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999.  Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research
.  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.2000.  The Digital Dilemma:  Intellectual Property in the Information Age
.  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Congressional Budget Office (CBO).  1999.  
ÒCurrent Investments in Innovation in the Infor-mation Technology Sector:  Statistical Background,
Ó April.  Available online at <http:/
/www.cbo.gov>.Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).  1999.  
ÒInformation TechnologyExpeditions,Ó BAA 99-07.  Available online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ito/Solicita-
tions/CBD_9907.html>.Dertouzos, Michael L.  1999.  
ÒThe Future of Computing,Ó Scientific American 281(2):52-55.Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Cohen.  1999.  
The Venture Capital Cycle.  MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.Hamilton, Joan, and Linda Himelstein.  1997.  
ÒA Wellspring Called Stanford,Ó BusinessWeek, Silicon Valley Special Report (August 26).  Available online at <http://
www.businessweek.com/1997/34/b354112.htm>.Hardy, Quentin.  1999.  
ÒMotorolaÕs New Research Efforts Look Far Afield,Ó Wall StreetJournal (June 17):B6.
Information Week.  1999.  
ÒInformation Week 500:  Industries At a Glance,
Ó September 27.
Available online at <http://www.informationweek.com/754/99iw500.htm.Lerner, Josh.  1999a.  
ÒSmall Business Innovation and Public Policy,Ó in 
Are Small FirmsImportant? Zoltan Acs, ed.  Kluwer Academic Publishing, New York.
Lerner, Josh.  1999b.  
ÒSmall Business, Innovation, and Public Policy in the InformationTechnology Industry,Ó paper prepared for the conference Understanding the Digital
Economy:  Data, Tools, and Research, Washington, D.C., May 25-26.
Markoff, John. 1999. ÒMicrosoft Brings in Top Talent to Pursue Old Goal:  The Tablet,Ó NewYork Times (August 30):C1,C10.
National Science and Technology Council (NSTC), IT2 Working Group.  1999a.  
InformationTechnology Research for the Twenty-First Century:  A Bold Investment in AmericaÕs Future.
Implementation Plan.  National Coordination Office for Computing, Information, and
Communications, Arlington, Va., June.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH95National Science and Technology Council (NSTC), Committee on Technology, Subcommit-tee on Computing, Information, and Communications R&D.  1999b
.  Information Tech-
nology Frontiers for a New Millennium:  Supplement to the President
Õs FY 2000 Budget,National Coordination Office for Computing, Information, and Communications,Arlington, Va., April.National Science Foundation (NSF).  1999.  
ÒInformation Technology Research:  Program
Solicitation, NSF 99-167,Ó September 28, available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/
pubs/1999/nsf99167/nsf99167.htm>.National Science Foundation (NSF), Division of Science Resources Studies.  2000a
.  Federal
Funds for Research and Development:  Fiscal Years 1998, 1999, and 2000
.  Arlington, Va.,
forthcoming.National Science Foundation (NSF), Division of Science Resources Studies.  2000b.  Researchand Development in Industry: 1998. Arlington, Va., forthcoming.Nelson, Richard.  1959.  
ÒThe Simple Economics of Basic Research,Ó Journal of PoliticalEconomy 67(2):297-306.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).  1999.  
STI Scoreboard ofIndicators.  OECD, Paris, France.
Peltz, Michael.  1996.  
ÒHigh TechÕs Premier Venture Capitalist,Ó Institutional Investor 30
(June):89-98.PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  1999.  Information Tech-nology Research:  Investing in Our Future
.  National Coordination office for Computing,
Information, and Communications, Arlingon, Va., February.Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA).  2000.  
The Silicon Century.  Semiconductor
Industry Association, San Jose, Calif.Smith, Douglas K., and Robert C. Alexander.  1988
.  Fumbling the Future:  How Xerox Invented,
Then Ignored the Personal Computer.  William Morrow and Company, New York.
Streitfeld, David.  1999.  
ÒCapital and Ideas:  Financiers of the Information Age Serve Up
Cachet, Cash,Ó Washington Post (August 15):H1.
Takashi, Dean.  1996.  
ÒIntel Shifts Its Focus to Original Research,Ó WSJ Interactive Edition(August 26):1.  Available online at <http://interactive3.wsj.com/edition/articles/
SB841015179745727000.htm>.von Hippel, Eric.  1988.  
The Sources of Innovation.  Oxford University Press, New York.
White House.  2000.  
ÒInformation Technology Research and Development:  Information
Technology for the 21st Century.Ó  Press release dated January 21, Office of the Press
Secretary, Washington, D.C.NOTES1.Diversity is not, of course, the only factor in research success.  The quality of the
research is also of paramount importance.  Quality can be assured through mechanisms
such as peer review.2.The Internet, for example, traces its roots to the DOD
Õs ARPANET, built in the late1960s and 1970s.  Early work in virtual reality was supported by the government, and
continued government investments in the technology sustained the field even when early
commercial interest waned.  Many of the most important advances in artificial intelligence
came from government-funded research.3.All data on federal funding for IT research in this paragraph were derived from the
National Science Foundation (2000a).4.The growth rate cited includes sales in five industry sectors defined in the standard
industrial classification (SIC) codes:  office, computing, and accounting machines (SIC 357),Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96MAKING IT BETTERcommunications equipment (SIC 366), electronic components (SIC 367), communicationsservices (SIC 48), and computer and data processing services (SIC 737).5.According to preliminary estimates from the National Science Foundation, defense
R&D spending will decrease even further in FY00.6.Many important, lasting IT developments sprang from DARPA
Õs experimentalprojects, such as the ARPANET (which laid the groundwork for the Internet) and the Very
Large Scale Integrated Circuit program, which helped advanced reduced-instruction-setcomputing.7.Research supported by the NSF has contributed significantly to the evolution of IT.
An important capability, scientific visualization, grew out of NSF sponsorship of comput-ing in the service of science.  Visualization, which uses carefully designed images to allow
scientists and engineers to glean insight from computer simulations of natural phenomena,
is now widely used in scientific computing and advanced engineering applications such asjet engine design.8.For more information on the NGI, see <www.ngi.gov>.

9.The university centers established as part of ASCI are the Center for Integrated Tur-
bulence Simulation at Stanford University, the Computational Facility for Simulating theDynamic Response of Materials at the California Institute of Technology, the Center for
Astrophysical Thermonuclear Flashes at the University of Chicago, the Center for Simula-tion of Accidental Fires and Explosions at the University of Utah, and the Center for Simu-lation of Advanced Rockets at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.10.For more information on Project Oxygen, see Dertouzos (1999).
11.Additional information on the University of California at Berkeley
Õs Endeavor projectis available online at <http://endeavor.cs.berkeley.edu>.12.Additional information on the University of Washington
Õs Portolano/Workscapeproject is available online at <http://portolano.cs.washington.edu/>.13.As of April 2000, DARPA planned to transform its expeditions program into a pro-
gram that would explore Òubiquitous computing,Ó a term used to describe the incorpora-
tion of computing and communications capabilities into a range of everyday devices.14.It should also be cautioned that it is notoriously difficult to separate research from
development, especially given that fundamental research advances sometimes emanatefrom focusing on development projects.  Most often research and development are lumped

together in the statistics, and attempts to separate out the research should be viewed withsome skepticism.15.The 20 percent figure reported in the 1998 data is unusually high, suggesting some
inconsistencies in the collection or reporting of the data.  IT firms reported that 10 percent
of their research dollars were allocated to basic research in 1997, which is more consistentwith earlier reports and anecdotal reports from research managers.16.The Census Bureau is in the process of shifting from the SIC to a new system, the
North American Industry Classification System, which features significant changes such asthe introduction of an Information Sector and is undergoing additional modification and
revision.   Additional information on the transition to the new industry classification sys-
tem is available online at <http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html>.17.Despite the difficulties in tracing the movements of firms among industry sectors,
federal statistics are still the best source of data for tracking research in the IT industry.Corporate annual reports and other public documents cannot be used because individualcompanies do not report research investments in these documents, although most list com-
bined research and development investments.18.Indeed, there is reason to believe that much of the decline in reported research and
development investments in the office and computing equipment industry between 1990
and 1991 resulted from the reclassification of large firms to other industries.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH9719.Combined R&D investments for these firms totaled $32 billion in 1998. R&D invest-
ments for all firms contained in the NSF survey of industrial R&D in the office and com-puting equipment, communications equipment, electronic components, communications
services, and computing/data processing services industries in 1998 totaled $45 billion.20.Many large IT firms were criticized in the 1980s and early 1990s for failing to take
advantage of technologies developed in their own labs.  Xerox, for example, developed one
of the earliest personal computers (the Alto) but never successfully marketed it.  See Smith
and Alexander (1988).21.Robert Metcalfe, a founder of 3Com Inc., has said that the value of the network scales
as the square of the number of users.  This is now called Metcalfe
Õs law.22.This is not to say that there will be no effort to displace the prevailing technology, as
the open-source software movement and the Linux-based initial public offerings demon-
strate.23.Of course, there can be benefits to the rapid adoption of new technologies, and lock-
in as well, in that they allow other innovators to build on top of a commonly accepted
platform.  It is only when limitations in the platform itself become evident and impede
further innovation that lock-in becomes problematic.24.Such companies have forced many of the traditional computer manufacturers, such
as IBM, to streamline their PC operations, sometimes establishing them as separate busi-ness lines with their own cost structures.25.A notable proponent of this theory is Christensen (1997).

26.For Motorola, which has roughly $30 billion in sales, this ratio would imply about
$300 million in research funding.27.For example, work in natural language processing has long-term goals, but it already
has contributed to the grammar checker in Microsoft Office.28.These activities correspond to SIC codes 7371 and 7373.
29.Andersen Consulting employs about 50,000 workers, so the research group repre-
sents just 0.4 percent of its workforce.30.The information on Andersen Consulting
Õs research activities was obtained fromJoseph Carter, Andersen Consulting, in a presentation to the study committee in Palo Alto,California, on February 10, 1998.31.The data on Lockheed Martin
Õs R&D expenditures were obtained from B. ClovisLandry, vice president of technology, Lockheed Martin Information & Services Sector,October 11, 1999.32.Personal communication from Irving Wladawsky-Berger, vice president of technol-
ogy and strategy for IBM, October 6, 1999.33.Amazon.com reported $47 million in product development expenses in 1998, most of
which were related to continual enhancement of the features, content, and functionality of
the companyÕs Web sites and transaction processing systems, as well as investments insystems and telecommunications infrastructure.  Merrill Lynch reported in 1997 that it
would spend $200 million to complete the development of a technology platform for its
financial consultants by the third quarter of 1998.34.Needless to say, most of Boeing
Õs $1.9 billion R&D budget is allocated to non-ITactivities.35.These data are from Amazon.com
Õs annual 10-K report to the SEC.36.Merrill Lynch reported in 1997 that it was investing some $200 million in the develop-
ment of a new platform for its financial consultants called the Trusted Global Advisor
system.  In keeping with new accounting standards, Merrill Lynch amortized $72 million in
development costs for internal-use software in 1998.  These amounts are amortized over the
useful life of the developed software (generally 3 years).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98MAKING IT BETTER37.Most of these patents have been awarded since 1998, although the patent applica-
tions were submitted several years before the awards.38.In the late 1990s, end-user organizations also began applying for
Ñand receivingÑpatents covering methods of doing business.  Considerable controversy has arisen around
this subject.  The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board is developing a
prospectus for a study of this issue.  For additional background on the patenting of busi-

ness practices, see CSTB (2000), especially pp. 192-198.39.Anoop Gupta, a Stanford University professor on leave at Microsoft at the time,
characterized this distinction to the committee on February 10, 1998, as follows: ÒThe differ-ence between black and white magic is really in its symbolism and intent.Ó  Symbolism andintent seem to determine the perceptions of whether something is research or not.  Whether
knowledge is created is often overlooked.  From this 
Òintent-basedÓ perspective, the work
of start-ups is not research, whereas from the perspective of producing knowledge, it cer-tainly is.40.These data are from a PricewaterhouseCoopers MoneyTree survey.

41.Preliminary statistics from PricewaterhouseCoopers indicated that for the second
quarter of 1999, 63 percent of VC investments went to firms in the communications, soft-ware and information, and computers and peripherals industries.42.Data from VentureOne Corporation, as reported in Streitfeld (1999).
43.The definitions of seed, start-up, and expansion financing used here are derived
from OECD (1999).44.The apparent disparities between the research funding numbers reported by univer-
sities and by federal agencies are due largely to differences in the ways the surveys areadministered to collect these data.45.The federal government has attempted to stimulate collaboration between industry
and academia as a means of improving the competitiveness of U.S. companies and of betterexploiting the results of federally sponsored research.  For example, NSF established the
ongoing Engineering Research Centers program in the 1980s to foster partnerships amonggovernment, industry, and universities in research and engineering.  This program is more

fully described in Chapter 4 of this report.46.Two Focus Centers had been established as of May 2000.  The first is led by researchers
at the University of California at Berkeley; the second, by researchers at the Georgia Institute
of Technology.  Each involves researchers from a number of other universities.  Additional
information on the program is available in SIA (2000).47.Congressional hearings that predated the 1995 commercialization of the NSFnet fea-
tured debates over ÒexperimentalÓ versus 
ÒproductionÓ networks.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.993Research on Large-Scale Systems
Systems research has long been a part of the information technology(IT) landscape.  Computer scientists and engineers have examined

ways of combining componentsÑwhether individual transistors,integrated circuits, or devicesÑinto larger IT systems to provide im-
proved performance and capability.  The incredible improvements in the

performance of computer systems seen through the past five decades
attest to advances in areas such as computer architectures, compilers, and
memory management.  But todayÕs large-scale IT systems, which contain
thousands or even millions of interacting components of hardware and
software, raise a host of technical and nontechnical issues, some of which
existed in the early days of computing and have now become critical and
others of which arose recently as a result of the increases in scale and the
degree of interconnection of IT systems.  As computing and communica-

tions systems become more distributed and more integrated into the fabric
of daily life, the scope of systems research needs to be broadened to
address these issues more directly and enable the development of more
reliable, predictable, and adaptable large-scale IT systems.  Some have

argued that the notion of computer systems research needs to be rein-
vented (Adams, 1999).TodayÕs large-scale IT systems crest on a shaky foundation of ad hoc,opportunistic techniques and technologies, many of which lack an ade-
quate intellectual basis of understanding and rigorous design.  There are

at least three concrete manifestations of these deficiencies.  First, there has

been an unacceptably high rate of failure in the development of large-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100MAKING IT BETTERscale IT systems:  many systems are not deployed and used because of an
outright inability to make them work, because the initial set of require-
ments cannot be met, or because time or budget constraints could not be
met.  Well-publicized failures include those of the government
Õs tax pro-cessing and air traffic control systems (described later in this chapter), but
these represent merely the tip of the iceberg.  The second manifestation of

these deficiencies is the prevalence of operational failures experienced by
large-scale systems as a result of security vulnerabilities or, more often,
programming or operational errors or simply mysterious breakdowns.
The third sign of these deficiencies is the systemsÕ lack of scalability; that
is, their performance parameters cannot be expanded to maintain ade-
quate responsiveness as the number of users increases.  This problem is

becoming particularly evident in consumer-oriented electronic commerce
(e-commerce); many popular sites are uncomfortably close to falling
behind demand.  Without adequate attention from the research commu-

nity, these problems will only get worse as large-scale IT systems become
more widely deployed.This chapter reviews the research needs in large-scale IT systems.  It
begins by describing some of the more obvious failures of such systems
and then describes the primary technical challenges that large-scale IT
systems present.  Finally, it sketches out the kind of research program that

is needed to make progress on these issues.  The analysis considers the

generic issues endemic to all large IT systems, whether they are systems
that combine hardware, software, and large databases to perform a par-
ticular set of functions (such as e-commerce or knowledge management);
large-scale infrastructures (such as the Internet) that underlie a range of
functions and support a growing number of users; or large-scale software
systems that run on individual or multiple devices.  A defining character-

istic of all these systems is that they combine large numbers of compo-
nents in complicated ways to produce complex behaviors.  The chapter

considers a range of issues, such as scale and complexity, interoperability
among heterogeneous components, flexibility, trustworthiness, and emer-
gent behavior in systems.  It argues that many of these issues are receiv-

ing far too little attention from the research community.WHAT IS THE PROBLEM WITH LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS?Since its early use to automate the switching of telephone callsÑthereby enabling networks to operate more efficiently and support a

growing number of callersÑIT has come to perform more and morecritical roles in many of societyÕs most important infrastructures, includ-ing those used to support banking, health care, air traffic control, tele-
phony, government payments to individuals (e.g., Social Security), andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS101individualsÕ payments to the government (e.g., taxes).  Typical uses of IT
within companies are being complemented, or transformed, by the use of
more IT to support supply-chain management systems connecting
multiple enterprises, enabling closer collaboration among suppliers and
purchasers.Many of the systems in these contexts are very large in scale:  they
consist of hundreds or thousands of computers and millions of lines of
code and they conduct transactions almost continuously.  They increas-

ingly span multiple departments within organizations (enterprisewide)
or multiple organizations (interenterprise) or they connect enterprises to
the general population.1  Many of these systems and applications have
come to be known as Òcritical infrastructure,Ó meaning that they are inte-
gral to the very functioning of society and its organizations and that their
failure would have widespread and immediate consequences.  The criti-

cal nature of these applications raises concerns about the risks and conse-
quences of system failures and makes it imperative to better understand
the nature of the systems and their interdependencies.2The IT systems used in critical intra- and interorganizational applica-tions have several characteristics in common.  First, they are all large,

distributed, complex, and subject to high and variable levels of use.3Second, they perform critical functions that have extraordinary require-
ments for trustworthiness and reliability, such as a need to operate with
minimal outages or corruption of information and/or a need to continue
to function even while being serviced.  Third, the systems depend on IT-

based automation for expansion, monitoring, operations, maintenance,
and other supporting activities.All three of these characteristics give rise to problems in building andoperating large-scale IT systems.  For example, applications that run on

distributed systems are much more complicated to design than corre-
sponding applications that run on more centralized systems, such as a
mainframe computer.  Distributed systems must tolerate the failure of

one or more component computers without compromising any critical
application data or consistency, and preferably without crashing the sys-
tem.  The designs, algorithms, and programming techniques required to

build high-quality distributed systems are much more complex than those
for older, more conventional applications.Large-scale IT systems are notoriously difficult to design, develop,and operate reliably.  The list of problematic system development efforts

is long and growing (Table 3.1 provides an illustrative set of failures).  In

some cases, difficulties in design and development have resulted in sig-
nificant cost overruns and/or a lack of desired functionality in fielded
systems.  In others, major IT systems were cancelled before they were

ever fielded because of problems in development.  To be sure, the reasons
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102MAKING IT BETTERTABLE 3.1  Examples of Troubled Large-Scale Information Technology
SystemsProjectProblem
Federal AviationProject begun in 1981 is still ongoing; major pieces of
Administration airproject were canceled, others are over budget and/or
traffic controldelayed.  The total cost estimate now stands at

modernization$42 billion through the year 2004.
Internal Revenue ServiceIn early 1997, the modernization project was
tax systemscancelled, after expenditures of $4 billion and 8 years
modernizationof work.
National Weather ServiceProject begun in 1982 to modernize systems for
technologyobserving and forecasting weather was over budget
modernizationand behind schedule as of January 2000.  The cost of
the system is estimated to be $4.5 billion.Bureau of Land ManagementAfter spending more than 15 years and
automated land andapproximately $411 million, the program was
mineral records systemcanceled in 1999.
California vehicleVehicle registration and driver
Õs license databaseregistration, driverÕswas never deployed after $44 million in development
license databasecosts
Ñthree times the original cost estimate.California deadbeat dads/Even at a total cost of $300 million (three times the
moms databaseoriginal budget estimate), the system was still flawed,
and the project was canceled.Florida fingerprint systemIncompatible upgrades resulted in inability of the
Palm Beach County police to connect to the mainstate fingerprint database (a failure that prevents thecatching of criminals).Hershey Foods, Inc., orderA $112 million system for placing and filling store
and distribution systemorders has problems getting orders into the system
and transmitting order information to warehouses forfulfillment.  As of October 1999, the source of the

problem had not been identified.Bell Atlantic 411 systemOn November 25, 1996, Bell Atlantic experienced a
directory service outage for several hours after thedatabase server operating system was upgraded and
the backup system failed.New York Stock ExchangeThe stock exchange opened late on December 18,
upgrade1995 (the first such delay in 5 years) because of
problems with communications software.Denver International AirportIn 1994, problems with routing baggage delayed the
baggage systemairport opening by 11 months at a cost of $1 million
per day.CONFIRM reservationsThe project was canceled in 1992 after 32 years of
system (Hilton, Marriott,work in which $125 million was spent on a failed

and Budget Rent-a-Car,development effort.
with American AirlinesInformation Services)Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS103for failures in the development of large-scale systems are not purely tech-nological.  Many are plagued by management problems as well (see Box

3.1).  But management problems and technical problems are often inter-

related.  If system design techniques were simpler and could accommodate

changing sets of requirements, then management challenges would be
greatly eased.  Conversely, if management could find ways of better defin-

ing and controlling system requirementsÑand could create a process fordoing soÑthen the technical problems could be reduced.  This dilemma
has existed from the earliest development of computer systems.The direct economic costs of failed developments and systems fail-ures is great.  U.S. companies spend more than $275 billion a year on

approximately 200,000 system development projects (Johnson, 1999).  By

some estimates, 70 to 80 percent of major system development projects
either are never finished or seriously overrun cost and development time
objectives (Gibbs, 1994; Jones, 1996; Barr and Tessler, 1998).4  The reported
data may well underestimate the problem, given that many entities would
(understandably) prefer to avoid adverse publicity.  However, the account-

ability 
required of government programs ensures that system problems ingovernment at all levels do get publicized, and a steady stream of reports
attest to the ongoing challenges.5  Individual failures can be expensive.
For example, the state of California abandoned systems development
projects in recent years worth over $200 million (Sunday Examiner andChronicle, 1999).  The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) will have
spent some $42 billion over 20 years in a much-maligned attempt to mod-
ernize the nationÕs air traffic control system (see Box 3.2), and the InternalRevenue Service (IRS) has spent more than $3 billion to date on tax sys-
tems modernization.6  The potential cost of economic damage from a
single widespread failure of critical infrastructure (such as the telephone
system, the Internet, or an electric power system) could be much greater
than this.7The potential consequences of problems with large-scale systems willonly become worse.  The ability to develop large-scale systems has im-

proved over the past decade thanks to techniques such as reusability and
object-oriented programming (described below), but even if the rate of
problem generation has declined, the number of systems susceptible to
problems continues to grow.  A large number of system failures and cost

overruns in system development continue to plague the developers and
users of critical IT systems (Gibbs, 1994; Jones, 1996).  As recently as

October 1999, Hershey Foods, Inc., was attempting to understand why its
new, $112-million, computer-based order and distribution system was
unable to properly accept orders and transmit the details to warehouses
for fulfillment (Nelson and Ramstad, 1999).  Several universities also

reported difficulties with a new software package designed to allow stu-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104MAKING IT BETTERBOX 3.1The CONFIRM Hotel Reservation SystemThe CONFIRM hotel reservation system is one of the best-documented casesof system development failure in industry.  The CONFIRM system was intended to
be a state-of-the-art travel reservation system for Marriott Hotels, Hilton Hotels,and Budget Rent-A-Car.  The three companies contracted with AMRIS, a subsid-

iary of American Airlines, to build the system.  The four companies formed the
Intrico consortium in 1988 to manage the development of the system.  AMRIS
originally estimated the cost of the project to be $55.7 million.  By the time the

project was canceled 4 years later, the Intrico consortium had already paid AMRIS$125 million, more than twice the original cost estimate.AMRIS was unable to overcome the technical complexities involved in creatingCONFIRM.  One problem arose from the computer-aided software engineering
(CASE) tool used to develop the database and the interface.  The toolÕs purpose
was to automatically create the database structure for the application, but the task
ended up being too complex for the tool.  As a result, the AMRIS development
team was unable to integrate the two main components of CONFIRMÑthe inter-active database component and the pricing and yield-management component.
An AMRIS vice president involved in the development eventually conceded thatintegration was simply not possible.  Another problem was that the developers
could not make the systemÕs database fault-tolerant, a necessity for the system.
The database structure chosen was such that, if the database crashed, the datawould be unrecoverable.  In addition, the development team was unable to make
booking reservations cost-effective for the participating firms.  Originally, AMRIS

estimated that booking a reservation would cost approximately $1.05, but the cost
estimates rapidly grew to $2.00 per reservation.The difficulties plaguing CONFIRM were exacerbated by problems with theprojectÕs management, both on AMRISÕs side and on the side of the end users.
Even though the Marriott, Hilton, and Budget executives considered CONFIRM tobe a high priority, they spent little time involved directly with the project, meetingwith the project team only once a month.  An executive at AMRIS said, ÒCON-

FIRMÕs fatal flaw was a management structure. . . .  You cannot manage a devel-
opment effort of this magnitude by getting together once a month. . . .  A system of
this magnitude requires quintessential teamwork.  We essentially had four different

groups. . . .  It was a formula for failure.Ó
The actions of AMRIS middle managers also contributed to the delays andeventual complete failure of CONFIRM.  Some AMRIS managers communicated

only good news to upper management.  They refrained from passing on news of
problems, delays, and cost overruns.  There were allegations that ÒAMRIS forced
employees to artificially change their timetable to reflect the new schedule, and
those that refused either were reassigned to other projects, resigned, or werefired.Ó  The project employees were so displeased with management actions that,
by the middle of 1991 (1 year before the project was canceled), half of the AMRIS
employees working on CONFIRM were seeking new jobs.  Had developers at
AMRIS informed upper AMRIS management or the other members of Intrico aboutthe problems they faced with CONFIRM, it might have been possible to correct the
problems.  If not, then at least the end users would have had the opportunity to
cancel the project before its budget exploded.SOURCES:  Ewusi-Mensah (1997), Oz (1997), and Davies (1998).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS105BOX 3.2Modernization of the Air Traffic Control SystemThe Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) began modernizing its air trafficcontrol (ATC) system in 1981 to handle expected substantial growth in air traffic,replace old equipment, and add functionality.  The plan included replacing or up-

grading ATC facilities, radar arrays, data processing systems, and communica-tions equipment.  Since that time, the system has been plagued by significant cost
overruns, delays, and performance shortfalls, with the General Accounting Office
(GAO) having designated it as a high-risk information technology initiative in 1995.As of early 1999, the FAA had spent $25 billion on the project.  It estimated that
another $17 billion would be spent before the project is completed in 2004Ñ$8billion more and 1 year later than the agency estimated in 1997.The GAO has blamed the problems largely on the FAAÕs failure to develop ordesign an overall system architecture that had the flexibility to accommodate
changing requirements and technologies.  When the ATC program began, it was
composed of 80 separate projects, but at one point it grew to include more than200 projects.  By 1999, only 89 projects had been completed, and 129 were still in

progress1Ñnot including several projects that had been canceled or restructuredat a cost of $2.8 billion.  The largest of these canceled projects was the Advanced
Automation System (AAS), which began as the centerpiece of the modernization
effort and was supposed to replace and update the ATC computer hardware andsoftware, adding new automation functions to help handle the expected increasein air traffic and allow pilots to use more fuel-efficient flight paths.  Between 1981

and 1994, the estimated cost of the AAS more than doubled, from $2.5 billion to
$5.9 billion, and the completion date was expected to be delayed by more than 4years.  Much of the delay was due to the need to rework portions of code to handle
changing system requirements.  As a result of the continuing difficulties, the AAS

was replaced in 1994 by a scaled-back plan, known as the Display System Re-placement program, scheduled for completion in May 2000.  A related piece of the
modernization program, the $1 billion Standard Terminal Automation Replacement
System, which was to be installed at its first airport in June 1998 has also beendelayed until at least early 2000.The FAA is beginning to change its practices in the hope of reducing the costescalation and time delays that have plagued the modernization effort.  In particu-
lar, it has begun to develop an overall architecture for the project and announcedplans to hire a new chief information officer who will report directly to the FAA
administrator.  In addition, instead of pursuing its prior 
Òall at onceÓ development
and deployment strategy, the FAA plans on using a phased approach as a meansof better monitoring project progress and incorporating technological advances.1Some of the high-priority projects that remain to be completed include the Integrated Termi-nal Weather System, intended to automatically compile real-time weather data from several
sources and provide short-term weather forecasting; the Global Positioning System Augmen-
tation Program, transferring ground-based navigation and landing systems to a system based
on DOD satellites; and the Airport Surface Detection Equipment, which encompasses three
projects to replace the airport radar equipment that monitors traffic on runways and taxiways.
See U.S. GAO (1998), p. 9.SOURCES: U.S. General Accounting Office (1994, 1997, 1998, 1999a,b,c), Li (1994), andOÕHara (1999).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106MAKING IT BETTERdents to register online for classes.8  As networking and computing become
more pervasive in business and government organizations and in society
at large, IT systems will become larger in all dimensionsÑin numbers ofusers, subsystems, and interconnections.Future IT applications will further challenge the state of the art insystem development and technical infrastructure:¥Information management will continue to transition from isolateddatabases supporting online transaction processing to federations of mul-
tiple databases across one or more enterprises supporting business process
automation or supply-chain management.  ÒSupply-chain managementÓis not possible on a large scale with existing database technology and can
require technical approaches other than data warehouses.9¥Knowledge discoveryÑwhich incorporates the acquisition of datafrom multiple databases across an enterprise, together with complex data
mining and online analytical processing applicationsÑwill become moreautomated as, for example, networked distributed sensors are used to
collect more information and user and transaction information is cap-
tured on the World Wide Web.  These applications severely strain the

state of the art in both infrastructure and database technology.  Data will

be stored in massive data warehouses in forms ranging from structured
databases to unstructured text documents.  Search and retrieval tech-

niques need to be able to access all of these different repositories and
merge the results for the user.  This is not feasible today on any large

scale.¥Large financial services Web sites will support large and rapidlyexpanding customer bases using transactions that involve processing-
intensive security protocols such as encryption.  Today
Õs mainframe andserver technology is strained severely by these requirements.¥Collaboration applications are moving from centralized deferredapplications such as e-mail to complicated, multipoint interconnection
topologies for distributed collaboration, with complex coordination pro-
tocols connecting tens or hundreds of millions of people.  The deploy-

ment of technology to support distance education is a good example.
TodayÕs Internet is able to support these requirements only on a relativelymodest scale.¥Advances in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoscaledevices presage an era in which large numbers of very small sensors,
actuators, and processors are networked together to perform a range of
tasks, whether deployed over large or small geographic areas.10  The
sheer number of such devices and the large number of interconnections
among them could far exceed the number of more conventional comput-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS107ing and communications devices, exacerbating the problems of large-scalesystems.¥Information appliances allow computing capabilities to be embed-ded in small devices, often portable, that realize single functions or small
numbers of dedicated applications.11 
  Information appliances will greatly
increase the number of devices connected to the network, increasing the
scalability problem.  They will also magnify problems of mobility.  As

users roam, all the while accessing their standard suite of applications,
their connectivity (in both the topological and performance dimensions)
shifts with them.  From an application perspective, the infrastructure

becomes much more dynamic, creating a need to adapt in various ways.These applications exemplify a technology infrastructure strained bycurrent and evolving requirements.  Obviously, many systems are fielded

and used to good effect.  But as the requirements and level of sophistica-

tion grow, old approaches for coping and compensating when problems
arise become less effective if they remain feasible at all.12  This situation
Ña proliferation of systems and of interconnections among  them
Ñcalls forbetter understanding and greater rigor in the design of large-scale sys-
tems to better anticipate and address potential problems and to maximize
the net potential for benefit to society.  Achieving that understanding and

rigor will require researchÑresearch that will develop a better scientificbasis for understanding large-scale IT systems and new engineering meth-
odologies for constructing them.  The high cost of failures suggests that

even modest improvements in system design and reliability could justify
substantial investments in research (the federal governmentÕs budget forIT research totaled $1.7 billion in fiscal year 2000).  Of course, the goal of

further systems research should be more than just modest improve-
mentsÑit should be no less than a revolution in the way such large-scalesystems are designed.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES ASSOCIATED WITHLARGE-SCALE SYSTEMSWhy are large-scale systems so difficult to design, build, and operate?As evidenced by their many failures, delays, and cost overruns, large-
scale systems present a number of technical challenges that IT research
has not yet resolved.  These challenges are related to the characteristics of

the systems themselvesÑlargeness of scale, complexity, and heterogene-ityÑand those of the context in which they operate, which demands
extreme flexibility, trustworthiness, and distributed operation and adminis-
tration.  Although the characteristics may be identified with specific applica-

tion requirements, they are common across a growing number of systemsMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108MAKING IT BETTERused in a diversity of applications.  As explored in greater detail below,
fundamental research will be required to meet these challenges.Large ScaleBy definition, scale is a distinguishing feature of large-scale systems.Scale is gauged by several metrics, including the number of components
contained within a system and the number of users supported by the
system.  As systems incorporate more components and serve increasingly

large numbers of users (either individuals or organizations), the chal-
lenges of achieving scalability become more severe.  Both metrics are on

the rise, which raises the question, How can systems be developed that
are relatively easily scaled by one or more orders of magnitude?13The Internet provides an example of the need to scale the hardwareand software infrastructure by several orders of magnitude as the user
base grows and new services require more network capacity per user.
The Internet contains millions of interconnected computers, and it experi-
ences scaling problems in its algorithms for routing traffic, naming enti-
ties connected to the network, and congestion control.  The computers

attached to the network are increasing in capability at a pace tied to
MooreÕs law, which promises significant improvements in a matter ofmonths.  Because so much of the activity surrounding the Internet in the

late 1990s was based in industry, the academic research community has
been challenged to define and execute effective contributions.  The nature

of the research that would arise from the research community is not obvi-
ous, and the activities in current networking research programsÑasclustered under the Next Generation Internet (NGI) program or other
programs aimed at networking researchÑseem not to satisfy either theresearch community or industry.ComplexityLarge systems are not complex by definition; they can be simple if, forexample, the components are linked in a linear fashion and information
flows in a single direction.  But almost all large-scale IT systems are com-
plex, because the system components interact with each other in compli-
cated, tightly coupled waysÑoften with unanticipated results.14  By contrast,
consider the U.S. highway system:  it contains millions of automobiles

(i.e., the system is large in scale), but at any given time most of them do
not interact (i.e., the system is low in complexity).15  Much more complex
are IT systems, which contain thousands of hardware components linked
by millions of lines of code and elements that interact and share informa-
tion in a multitude of ways, with numerous feedback loops.  Indeed, it is
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS109often impossible for a single individual, or even a small group of indi-viduals, to understand the overall functioning of the system.  As a result,
predicting performance is incredibly difficult, and failures in one part of
the system can propagate throughout the system in unexpected ways
(Box 3.3).  Although nature has succeeded in composing systems far more

complex than any information system, large-scale information systems
are among the most complex products designed by humans.Scale and complexity interact strongly.  As IT systems become larger,
they also tend to become more complex.  The as-yet-unattained goal is to
build systems that do not get more complex as they are scaled up.  If
BOX 3.3Performance Prediction in Large-Scale SystemsThe performance of large-scale systems is difficult to predict, because of boththe large numbers of interacting components and the uncertain patterns of usage
presented to the system.  Performance can seldom be predicted by modeling,
simulation, or experimentation before the final deployment.  As a result, complex
systems of dynamically interacting components often behave in ways that theirdesigners did not intend.  At times, they display emergent behavior
Ñbehaviors notintentionally designed into the system but that emerge from unanticipated inter-
actions among components.  Such behaviors can sometimes benefit a system, but
they are usually undesirable.An example of an emergent behavior is the convoying of packets that wasobserved in the packet-switched communications networks in the late 1980s.Although the routing software was not programmed to do so, the system sentpackets through the network in bursts.  Subsequent analysis (using fluid flow

models) discovered that certain network configurations could cause oscillations inthe routing of packets, not unlike the vibration of a water pipe with air in it.  This
type of behavior had not been intended and was corrected by upgrading routing
protocols.Unexpected performance issues (including emergent behaviors) are amongthe most common causes of failure in software projects.  Improved methodologies

for characterizing and predicting the performance of large, complex, distributedsystems could help enhance performance and avoid dysfunction before systemsare deployed.  More powerful mechanisms are needed to deal effectively with

emergent behavior in complex hardware and software systems.  Design methodol-
ogies are needed that incorporate into a system some type of structure that limitssystem behavior and can reason about subsystem interaction.  Also needed are

more effective ways of modeling and simulating or otherwise testing large-systembehavior.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110MAKING IT BETTERscaling can be achieved merely by replicating existing components, and ifthe management and operation of components do not change as their
numbers grow, then the system has been scaled up successfully.  On the

other hand, if software must be rewritten or reconfigured, or if new hard-
ware structures must be introduced to achieve larger scale, then complex-
ity increases as well.  For example, the demand for database storage and

query speed is growing at a rate of 100 percent per year, a rate faster than
the improvement in processor performance predicted by MooreÕs law.  As
a result, demand must be satisfied not by scaling up the system directly,
but by parallel and distributed processing, which introduces additional
complexity associated with the replication and reconciliation of data.HeterogeneityLarge-scale IT systems are increasingly heterogeneous.  In the past,
computing capabilities generally were provided by stand-alone systems
supplied by a single vendor who designed the system from the top down.
Today, large-scale systems are stitched together from components and
subsystems drawn from many vendors; they are increasingly constructed
from commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) technology, and the products of
any one vendor (equipment or software) must fit into a larger system
containing components from many other vendors.  This process results in

a high level of heterogeneity within systems and heightens the need for
interoperability among components.  It requires sound techniques for

designing large systems from components Òout of the box,Ó especially
when they are mixed and matched in ways unanticipated by their
makersÑa process that makes systems difficult to design and maintain.A related problem of growing importance is how to design trustworthy
systems from untrustworthy components, as articulated by another CSTB
committee.16Heterogeneity means much more than accommodating different pro-cessor architectures or different operating systems, which are daunting
problems in their own right.  Systems increasingly are composed of soft-

ware objects and components that are written by different entities, per-
haps using different object architectures.  These parts may be built on top

of different operating systems or middleware architectures.17  It is often
not feasible to determine ahead of time which sets of objects will interact
when any given user (with a particular machine, operating system,
browser, etc.) connects to the system and requests a service.  Nomadicity
Ñthe mobility of individuals and their use of different hardware and soft-
ware under different circumstancesÑadds to the uncertainty.  Techniques
are needed to help design robust, reliable, and secure software in this new
and highly challenging environment.18Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS111Further complicating matters is the reality that large-scale IT systemsdo not generally come out of a centralized, top-down design process.
Rather, they often result from the bottom-up integration of many indi-
vidual components and subsystems.  Systems are not designed as a whole;

instead, each added component must incorporate, elaborate on, and inter-
operate with the preexisting parts.  Large-scale IT systems (and personal

systems) tend to be custom-configured for particular users and applica-
tions, compounding the difficulties associated with testing (Box 3.4). 19
Furthermore, interoperability is needed over the lifetime of a system
(which can be years, if not decades) because the ensemble must continue
to evolve as new hardware replaces old or as software is repaired or
enhanced.  These requirements are difficult to accommodate using tradi-

tional reductionist engineering approaches, and methodologies to suc-
cessfully engineer such systems are poorly understood.  The publicized

system failures presented in Table 3.1 and Boxes 3.1 and 3.2 reflect the
situation:  the design of large-scale IT systems is characterized not by

consistent, well-understood engineering methodology but rather by con-
siderable trial and error.FlexibilityThe ad hoc nature of design as a consequence of the heterogeneitydescribed above suggests another challenging characteristic of large-scale
IT systems:  the need for flexibility.  Flexibility is important both during

the design process and after deployment.  The development of large-scale

IT systems can take so long that mission requirements and component
technologies change before the system is fielded.20  An inability to accom-
modate these changes and to integrate subsystems that were designed
and implemented separately is a main reason that many major IT systems
are never deployed.21  Once deployed, large IT systems tend to have long
lifetimes, during which additional functionality is often desired, old com-
ponents must be replacedÑoften with more modern technologyÑor thescale of the system must be expanded.  The need for system upgrades and

expansions can be particularly pressing for businesses, whose require-
ments evolve more rapidly than those of government.  Companies want

to establish new products and services quickly, either to beat competitors
to market or to match their innovations.  Doing so almost always requires

reconfigured information systems; the challenge is to Òchange the soft-ware as fast as the business.ÓA complementary trend driving the need for flexibility is a shift awayfrom the standardization of products and toward rapid innovation, short
product cycles, and Òmass customization.Ó  This trend has been forecast
by business analysts since at least the 1980s, but it is becoming a realityMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112MAKING IT BETTERBOX 3.4The Challenges of Testing Large-Scale SystemsTiny programs (systems) can be tested exhaustively by enumerating everystate the system can enter and checking to be sure that, when started in that state,the system conforms to its specification.  But the combinatorial explosion of possi-

ble states in a large-scale system defeats this technique very quickly.  Testing a
hardware design for a 32-bit adder or multiplier (as in the case of the famous Intelfailure) is not practical.  There are techniques, including theorem proving and

model checking, for verifying the correctness of somewhat larger designs.  These
techniques have been used recently to find errors in network protocol designs,(hardware) bus designs, and the like.  These are subsystems of interesting size

but still far smaller than any product component as the term is used in this report(see Chapter 1).At the level of a modest-sized computer program, such as a word processor ora World Wide Web browser, proof techniques cannot be applied.  Instead, testing
is used in various forms.  Two forms of testing are common.  In unit testing, the
main modules of a system are tested separately, each against test cases derived
from its specification.  This technique takes advantage of hierarchical decomposi-tion used in the design of the system.  It helps reduce testing time by not testing
modules that have not changed.  Often modules have simple, easy-to-understand

interfaces, which lead to good, thorough test suites, thereby also improving test-ing.  When code does not have simple specifications, a form of testing called pathcoverage is used, in which every
 possible path through the system is executed atleast once as part of a test program.  To do so may require writing a huge quantity

of test cases.  These techniques are used in both hardware and software designs(in hardware, it is often called simulation, whereby a chip design is simulatedagainst a large number of test cases before it is fabricated).Testing can demonstrate the presence of bugs but never their absence.  It does
not enumerate all the possible states into which a system can enter or all combina-tions of paths through the system, so it is not definitive.  Furthermore, testing

becomes costly as systems become large.  Today, a serious limitation on the
ability to design microprocessors (and in their time-to-market) is the amount ofsimulation that must be done.The forms of testing described apply to a single system of modest size.  Whenthe system is a large, distributed system-of-systems, the cost of testing becomesso high that only a tiny fraction of possible system behaviors is tested.  The scale

problem means that either (1) testers cannot afford to assemble a large enoughsystem to test all interesting cases (e.g., for routers, lines, clients) or (2) they can-not explore a significant fraction of the system states or configurations (e.g., loads
on the network, routing table entries, link congestion, routing policies).  Thus, test-
ing can quickly get out of hand.Another complicating aspect of large-scale systems is that they have very com-plex failure modes.   When a single personal computer running a single system
stops, it is obvious that it is broken, and users no longer expect the system to meetits specification until the problem is fixed.  However, when a single element of a

large system (such as the Internet) fails, the rest of the system is often required tocontinue functioning properly.  System designs are often intended to remain robust
despite this type of failure, but testing in the presence of all these failure modes is
more difficult still.  In addition, testing is of little use in identifying security vulnera-
bilities in an IT system, because it is hard to determine what to test for.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS113now because of the cumulative advances in IT.  As a result, flexibility
Ñspecifically, the ability to meet changing needs rapidlyÑhas become oneof the most fundamental and important requirements of many applica-
tions.  The pursuit of flexibility is complicated by the context in pre-

existing organizations, where new enterprise applications usually need to
incorporate legacy departmental applications and thus cannot be devel-
oped from scratch.  In the case of a merger or divestiture, information

systems may need to be integrated or dismantled.  Another source of

complication that is growing along with economic globalization is the
internationalization of functions within businesses.  Such international-

ization demands multifaceted support, not only for multiple languages
but also for business processes that differ from one geographic area to
another.  The Internet is a global phenomenon, and research needs to be

sensitive to international differences, including differences in technology
and in issues of privacy, taxation, content regulation, and so on.  Tech-

nologies such as automated language translation, which could be easily
customized for different countries, would  facilitate the internationaliza-

tion of IT.  Research is needed to understand the other differences men-

tioned above, perhaps through international or comparative research
projects.22System upgrades and expansions have proven particularly difficultin practice.  One reason is that the original system may not be fully under-

stood, and the developers attempting to augment it may have played no
role in its design.  Changes or additions to the system can therefore pro-

duce unexpected and unanticipated results.23  Another source of diffi-
culty is that many systems are designed without the modularity and
encapsulation of functionality needed to facilitate future upgrades.  In

many hardware and software projects, the emphasis is on getting a system
up and running.  Less attention is paid to designing large-scale applica-

tions that will be easy to modify and maintain over a long lifetime.  As a

result, many systemsÑsometimes poorly designed in the first placeÑaremodified repeatedly with great effort, to the point where their complexity
virtually precludes further modification.  Such systems may have to be

scrapped long before they ordinarily would have been, at a high cost to
the organizations that created them.  An additional complication is a

dearth of expertise in systems architecture.  Some large government IT

systems that have experienced problems, for example, have been faulted
for the lack of architecture planning and perspective.24Large-scale systems require architectures that are flexible enough thatnecessary modifications can be made easily, at low cost, and with little
impact on system availability.  Beyond paying more attention to IT designs

that support flexibility, it will be important to gain an understanding of
which forms of flexibility are desirable and which are unnecessary.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114MAKING IT BETTERUnfettered flexibility can lead to too many options for end users to con-sider, making interactions cumbersome.  When a system is customized

for a particular application, interactions tend to become relatively short
and efficient, but the system itself is less capable of accommodating
changing specifications.  A balance needs to be struck between unfettered

flexibility (which doubtless would be too expensive and also degrade
performance) and the present state of inflexibility, which increasingly
cannot meet the needs of real-world systems.  This is a variation on a

traditional engineering theme:  the trade-off between specialized and flex-

ible technology.TrustworthinessBecause they increasingly support mission-critical functions in indus-try, government, and other societal organizations, large-scale IT systems
must also be extremely trustworthy.  That is, they must do what they are

required to doÑand nothing elseÑdespite environmental disruption,human user and operator error, and attacks by hostile parties (CSTB,
1999a).  They must be available for service when needed (perhaps con-

tinuously) and perform their tasks reliably, with adequate security and
without error.  Failure to meet these standards can disrupt the service the

IT systems provide, causing loss of business revenues or even human life.
Trustworthiness increasingly is recognized as one of the most important
challenges in IT, because systems are increasingly used to support critical
functions and are increasingly networked, which can introduce new vul-
nerabilities.  Ensuring trustworthiness is particularly difficult in large-

scale IT systems because of their size and complexity.The challenges are much broader and deeper than security alone.  The
trustworthiness of systems and applications encompasses a number of
issues, including correctness, reliability, availability, robustness, and
security; some analysts would also include privacy and other issues that
add more subjective coloring to the trade-offs by clearly blending techni-
cal and social elements.  For example, how one approaches the need for

accountability and the value of anonymous speech will affect approaches
to system design.  These issues are central to ongoing discussions and

developments relating to electronic identity.  Gaining a deeper under-

standing of trustworthiness, and measures to ensure it, is in large part an
operational and managerial challenge as well as a technical problem.  Even

the most secure installations or reliable systems are subject to human
error, inattention, or dishonesty.25Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS115SecurityLarge-scale information systems are vulnerable to malicious attacksthat can render them unable to perform their intended tasks; result in the
loss of confidential information; or cause information to be lost, modified,
or destroyed.  The security issue is obvious in areas such as e-commerce,

where the potential for financial loss is huge, and in health care, where
divulging a patientÕs medical record could result in an irreparable loss ofprivacy.  But security gaps in any sort of IT system can lead to widespread

system failure and disruption, financial loss, or theft of private or propri-
etary information in a very short time.  The Defense Information Systems

Agency (DISA) estimates that the Department of Defense (DOD) may
have experienced as many as 250,000 attacks on its computer systems in a
recent year, and that the number of such attacks may be doubling annu-
ally.  Most of these attacks have been unsuccessful, but in some cases

intruders have been able to take control of systems, steal passwords, and
retrieve classified information (e.g., about troop movements in the Gulf
War).  A Swedish hacker shut down a 911 emergency call system in

Florida for an hour, according to the FBI, and in March 1997 a series of
commands sent from a hackerÕs personal computer disabled vital servicesto the FAAÕs control tower in Worcester, Massachusetts.26  Such vulner-
abilities are not limited to government computer systems, whose prob-
lems are more likely to be publicized; they apply as well to a growing
number of private-sector systems, which become attractive targets of
corporate espionage as attackers come to recognize that proprietary infor-
mation is stored on networked systems.  The wave of denial-of-service

attacks launched against high-profile commercial Web sites in February
2000 underscores the vulnerability of such systems.Large-scale systems are especially vulnerable to security flaws.  The
large number of client computers attached to them means an even larger
number of portals at which a lapse in security (e.g., a weak or divulged
password) can allow entry into a system.  Furthermore, many such sys-

tems are distributed among several administrative domains, making
security more difficult to manage and assure.  Additional vulnerabilities

are introduced by the connection of large-scale IT systems to the Internet.
Although the attraction of many of todayÕs large-scale systems stems fromtheir attachment to the global network, this network connection also
makes the systems vulnerable to misuse or attack.How can systems be designed to retain information securely andoperate correctly while under attack from intruders?  How can intruders

be deterred, while accommodating more open or less predictable inter-
actions over computer networks?  Existing technologies such as encryp-

tion, authentication, signatures, and firewalls can provide some degree ofMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116MAKING IT BETTERprotection.  But flaws in these systems and in operating systems are found
and exploited regularly, leading to incremental improvements while also
raising fundamental questions about the state of the art.  More research

on new methodologies for creating secure and trusted software systems
would be of great benefit to the nation.Availability and ReliabilityAs IT applications increasingly address critical needs such as disasterrecovery, e-commerce, and health care, the requirements for availability
(i.e., assurance that a system is available for use when and as needed) and
fault tolerance (i.e., assurance that a system can function even when prob-
lems arise) have increased dramatically.  Large-scale system designs

clearly differ from, say, desktop office suites in that they must operate in
unknown, changing environments.  Unfortunately, most algorithms and

design techniques for computer hardware and software assume a benign
environment and the correct operation of every component.  There is an

urgent need for new algorithms based on different assumptions that will
lead to algorithms that work correctly in spite of failures.  The study of

distributed computing (i.e., computer systems interconnected by net-
works) has begun to address the problem.  Algorithms have been devel-

oped that work correctly even when a data packet sent into the network
from a computer fails to arrive at its intended destination.  The algorithms

used to route packets through the Internet are not only robust in the
presence of dropped packets but also adapt to changing network perfor-
mance (e.g., when a communication link fails or resumes operation after
failure).  Although considerable progress has been made in critical algo-

rithms, they are far from perfect (e.g., routing algorithms cannot always
prevent network congestion), and they fulfill only a small fraction of the
requirements of todayÕs large-scale systems.Ensuring the availability and reliability of large-scale IT systems isespecially challenging (Box 3.5).  As noted earlier, the number of compo-

nents in these systems and the deep-seated interactions among them make

attempts to predict performance especially difficult.  The fact that they are

usually custom-built for a particular application makes testing them
extremely difficultÑespecially when they may be operated by a largenumber of users under a wide variety of operating conditions and when
companies are under intense competitive pressure to field new systems
quickly.  In this environment, how can a large-scale system be designed to

be so robust that it is guaranteed to be available all but, say, 30 seconds
per year no matter what, even in cases of hardware failure, software bugs,
or human error?  Individual components of IT systems (such as routers

and computing platforms) can be made reliable,27 but making the large-
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS117BOX 3.5Availability Problems Experienced inInformation Technology SystemsNumerous well-publicized failures of major systems show that current technol-ogy and operating practices are not meeting expectations.  For example, the
3-year-old central computer system that monitors the position of trains in the Wash-ington, D.C., Metrorail system reportedly crashed 50 times in the first 15 months
after its deployment.  In September 1999, it failed for unknown reasons, delaying
morning startup by 45 minutes and causing significant delays in the rush hour.  A
number of high-profile Internet companies have also experienced problems with
World Wide Web sites for electronic commerce, many stemming from problems inupgrading systems and growing traffic volume.  Charles Schwab
Õs online broker-age service, for example, experienced more than a dozen outages in 1999, during
which users could not access real-time quotes, check account information andmargin balances, or execute trades.  Online retailer Beyond.com experienced an
extended outage in October 1999 as a result of complications stemming from a
scheduled upgrade.  In 1998, problems with unscheduled maintenance caused
Amazon.com to take its site offline for several hours; eBay and E*Trade Securitiesare experiencing intermittent outages as the volume of visitors to their Web sites
increases.  Indeed, a survey conducted in late 1999 by the consulting company
Deloitte & Touche found that the primary business concerns of online brokeragefirms were system outages and an inability to accommodate growing numbers of
online investors.  Performance and reliability were also cited as significant concerns.
SOURCES:  Junnarkar (1999), Layton (1999), Luenig (1999), and Meehan (2000).
scale systems themselves reliable is more difficult.  The telephone system,
which is based heavily on software, may be the closest to reaching this
goal, but its robustness has been achieved only at considerable cost and
with delays in development.28  The race to develop new critical applica-
tions, driven by the rapid pace of innovation in Internet applications and
services, has resulted in inadequate, even dangerously poor, robustness.
Often prototypes or simplistic implementations become so popular so
quickly that expectations far exceed the reliability achievable with the
initial design.  Moreover, even when systems are designed carefully to

address reliability concerns, their complexity makes it doubly difficult to
achieve reliability and robustness goals.The spread of IT bears witness to the fact that, overall, hardwarereliability has advanced significantly but software reliability has laggedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118MAKING IT BETTER(think of the frequency with which standard desktop computers crash).Techniques for assuring robustness in hardware have been of critical
importance in, for example, space flight; by performing each computation
using three independent hardware systems and attaching a ÒvotingÓ cir-
cuit to the outcome to determine the majority answer, one can catch and
overcome many hardware failure modes.  However, this approach would

not catch so many software bugs.29  The implementation of software
modules in three different ways probably would catch some bugs, but at
a high cost.  In a complex situation, how could one determine which

version was behaving correctly?  Clearly, new ideas are needed on how to

assure the robustness of complex hardware and software systems.  Experi-

menting with and qualifying these ideas will be a daunting challenge,
given the nature of these large-scale systems and their myriad and infre-
quently observed failure mechanisms.Distributed Operation and AdministrationThe challenges inherent in large-scale IT systems are further compli-cated by the frequent distribution of their operation and administration
across different organizational units.  In the past, most IT applications

were compartmentalized into individual organizations and indepen-
dently administered.  Now, applications
Ñwhether designed for social,information access, or business purposesÑare executed across a networkedcomputing infrastructure spanning whole organizations and enterprises,
and indeed multiple enterprises and consumers (see Box 3.6 for a discus-
sion of e-commerce as a distributed system).  Such an infrastructure

cannot be administered effectively in a centralized fashionÑthere is nocentral administrative authority.  New tools and automated operational

support methodologies could improve the operation and administration
of such distributed systems.  These potential solutions have yet to be

considered seriously by the research community; network management is
an area that has long needed more research (CSTB, 1994).IMPROVING THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OFLARGE-SCALE SYSTEMSTo date, IT research has failed to produce the techniques needed toaddress the challenges posed by large-scale systems.  Standard computer
science approaches, such as abstraction, modularity, and layering (Box
3.7), are helpful at separating functionality and establishing clear inter-
faces between components, but even with these techniques engineers have
great difficulty designing and refining large, complex systems.  These

tools are apparently insufficient for dealing with the enormous complex-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS119BOX 3.6Electronic Commerce Applications As Distributed SystemsElectronic commerce (e-commerce) demonstrates the issues of heterogeneityand multiple administrative domains cropping up in large-scale systems.  In

business-to-business e-commerce applications, the system cannot be integrated,nor is it deployed, by a single organization or professional service firmÑeven whenparties nominally use the same product (e.g., popular enterprise resource planning
systems).  A vendor offering to sell its product over the Internet controls only its
own servers and databases.  The customer
Õs client software is likely to be a genericWorld Wide Web browser; the Web, of course, is implemented by numerous Inter-
net service providers running routers and other systems and software that has towork right to support the communications aspects of e-commerce.  The vendor
Õssoftware is likely to be part of a complex information technology system that must
be integrated with a payment mechanism (e.g., credit card verification or maybe anelectronic cash service) as well as the software of a shipping firm to track thestatus of orders.  It also interacts with suppliers to manage and pay for the flow of

materials and component parts.  Such an e-commerce application spans multiple
administrative domains, including firms and individual consumers.  No single entity
has access to, or control over, the complete system for systematic testing; nor
does anyone have access to all the source code that defines the system.  It is notsurprising, for example, that even with the best intentions, privacy or security
glitches arise because of the difficulty of assuring the appropriate design and per-
formance of so many systems and system levels.ity and cross-module, cross-layer interactions that arise in large IT sys-tems.  The IT community needs to understand better the root causes of the

problems exhibited in large-scale systems and to articulate that under-
standing in ways that will bring more good minds and ideas to bear on
the problems.  Better software-based tools are needed for managing com-

plexity, and best practices need to be codified and propagated so that,
collectively, designers and engineers repeat methods and approaches that
appear to work and avoid those whose failure has been demonstrated.Limitations of Past ResearchPart of the reason that better approaches to designing scalable, reli-able, flexible large-scale IT systems do not yet exist is a lack of attention
from the research community.  Traditionally, IT systems research has

emphasized advances in performance, functionality, and cost, primarily
to improve device (or component) characteristics (Hennessy, 1999).  The
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120MAKING IT BETTERBOX 3.7Abstraction, Modularity, and LayeringComputer scientists have long used a set of tools known as abstraction, mod-ularity, and layering to help them deal with the complexity of designing information
technology (IT) systems.  The limits of these approaches are tested by large-scale
systems in a variety of ways:¥Abstraction is the process of simplifying the description of an element of a
system to hide unnecessary details and allow greater focus on attributes that areimportant to system analysis or design.  The trick is to select an appropriate

abstraction that preserves the necessary attributes of the element without becom-ing unrealistic.  Using abstraction, for example, one can form a simplified abstractmodel of a packet router and actually prove things about the interconnections of
such routers.  To some extent, however, performance is the enemy of abstraction.
When an algorithm or system is tuned to improve performance, it usually departsfrom its simple, abstract form, giving up many of the benefits of reasoning about
the abstraction.¥Modularity refers to the decomposition of a system into smaller subsystems
that can be developed separately (and in parallel).  Modules encapsulate the inter-

nal details of a system component and specify a set of interfaces for allowinginteraction among components.  As such, changes in the internal configuration of
one module do not necessarily require changes to other modules.  By reducing the

complexity of intersystem dependencies, modularity facilitates more rapid recon-figuration of systems to meet operational requirements.  As the scale and com-
plexity of IT systems grow, however, it becomes more difficult to separate function-ality cleanly, and the set of interfaces can become more complicated, increasingthe possibility of errors in implementation or the possibility that particular circum-
stances will not be sufficiently addressed.¥Layering is a form of modularity that decomposes systems into horizontal
strata (layers), each of which depends on the layer below and provides services to
the layer above (by adding its own capabilities to those of the lower layers).  Layer-
ing allows capability to be added to a system by building on what already exists inlower layers.  It also allows the implementation of one layer to be changed without

necessarily affecting the layers above.  Layering is helpful in large-scale systems,but only to a point.  It can lead to reduced performance because of the additional
overhead associated with moving between layers.  Furthermore, when the lower

layers fail to do their jobs, the upper-level abstractions fail, and in ways that maynot be easily recognizable.  A common layer in networks is the transport layer,
which allows users to assume that each node in a distributed computation has
some number of reliable transport paths to other nodes.  If one or more of these
fail, then users can quickly find it hard to reason about the system as a whole,unless care has been taken when implementing the lower layers to reduce the
difficulties involved in analyzing failures.SOURCES:  The definitions of abstraction, modularity, and layering derive from those in CSTB
(1999b) and Messerschmitt (2000).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS121problems in large-scale systems stem not so much from the componentsbut rather from the way they are customized, assembled, tested, deployed,
operated, and modified to serve a particular purpose, especially when
they are combined with other components into larger systems and when
such systems span organizational boundaries or connect even larger num-
bers of embedded devices working in concert.30  The organizations that
might be best positioned to understand these issues, namely, systems
integrators and end users, tend not to conduct the types of research that
might yield greater insight.This is not to say that problems of scalability, complexity, heterogene-ity, flexibility, trustworthiness, and distributed management have been
absent from the IT systems research agenda.  Several programs over the

past decade have made forays into this arena, but with shifting priorities
and emphases.  The High Performance Computing and Communications
Initiative (HPCCI) began with a priority familiar to researchers from ear-
lier decadesÑa push for higher-performance IT systems (e.g., increasedprocessing and communications speed).  By the mid-1990s, attention to

issues such as scale and heterogeneity was growing; these issues were
emphasized in the recommendations in CSTBÕs Brooks-Sutherland report,Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to
Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure (CSTB, 1995b).  The mid-
1990s also saw concerns about information systems trustworthiness begin
to coalesce, as evidenced by the 1995 workshop on high-confidence sys-
tems sponsored by the Committee on Information and Communications
(CIC, 1995) and a 1997 workshop on the same topic by the committeeÕssuccessor, the Committee on Computing, Information, and Communica-
tions of the National Science and Technology Council (CCIC, 1997).  The

High Confidence Systems research program was added under the HPCCI
umbrella, but concerns about the limitations of existing research efforts
were expressed in a variety of reports on critical infrastructure and in the
associated calls for research.31The Information Technology for the Twenty-First Century (IT2) initia-tive, begun in 1999, carries these themes forward.  This new initiative, led

by the National Science Foundation (NSF) but joined by several other
federal agencies, is pursuing breakthrough research and research to apply
IT successfully in applications that benefit society.  To a lesser extent, it

may support research directed at the challenges of building large, com-
plex information systems.  In particular, NSF
Õs Information TechnologyResearch (ITR) initiative will fund large research projects that bring to-
gether interdisciplinary teams for several years.  Issues such as scalability

and software are clearly on the agenda.  Work in these areas may build on

a workshop NSF convened in the summer of 1997 to identify significant
new approaches to systems research.  Some of the themes that emerged
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122MAKING IT BETTERfrom that workshop included developing high-confidence systems withpredictable properties at predictable cost, developing global-scale sys-
tems, and making architectures dynamic and adaptive (Kavi et al., 1999).
These three themes are congruent with the research needs identified in
this chapter.A number of other programs sponsored by the NSF and the DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in late 1999 and early 2000
promise continued exploration of systems issues:¥Information Assurance and Survivability (DARPA)ÑThis large, mul-tidimensional program is focused on research that will enable the DOD
and the nation to build IT systems that are trustworthy, meaning that they
will be able to quickly detect intrusions and attacks, be reasonably secure
against them, and recover quickly from them.  The program is clearly

focused on systems issues, such as the joint design of new protocols,
distributed intrusion-detection mechanisms, and information integration
methods that can collectively be used to design, build, and operate net-
works that are trustworthy and secure.  Program managers are making a

conscious effort to bring new people with new ideas and new approaches
into the program, and they are encouraging interdisciplinary approaches,
with an emphasis on testbeds.  Researchers are encouraged to combine

their respective competencies to pursue breakthrough system approaches
rather than continue work in more established directions.  The projects

are proposed by industry, universities, and government agencies, bring-
ing together a wide range of perspectives.¥Scalable Enterprise Systems (NSF)ÑThis is a new research programsponsored by the Engineering Directorate of NSF.  A solicitation for pro-

posals was issued in 1999, and the funding decision process is in progress
for proposals submitted in late 1999.  In principle, this program could be

a first step toward addressing challenges related to the design, deploy-
ment, and operation of large enterprise systems that are reliable.  It aims

for systems that are predictable in their behavior and meet the perfor-
mance requirements of their users.  The NSF has asked for phase 1 pro-

posals for small, exploratory projects, a good approach for soliciting and
funding a reasonably large number of innovative approaches.  It is too

soon to tell whether this program will address systems needs of the sort
outlined in the chapter.  One issue is whether the program will attempt to

develop practical engineering approaches to the full range of problems
associated with scalable systems.  Another concern is the traditional NSF

peer review process.  If the peer review process emphasizes past publica-

tions and other evidence of past results at the expense of novelty and the
potential relevance of the approaches proposed, and if the peer reviewers
fail to adequately appreciate proposals that bring together interdiscipli-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS123nary teams with competencies that allow them to address the challengesfrom new perspectives (even if the teams have not addressed these par-
ticular problems in the past), then the program will discourage researchers
from extending their competencies into new areas in which they can col-
lectively have an impact.  This concern is not limited to this one pro-

gramÑit extends to a range of initiatives NSF is entering into that attemptto push research in new directions or bring together researchers from
multiple disciplines.¥Next Generation Internet (NGI) (DARPA and NSF along with theDepartments of Energy, Commerce, and Health and Human Services, and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration)ÑThis program is support-ing a substantial number of multidisciplinary research initiatives, both
large and small, aimed at understanding and addressing the challenges
associated with high-speed networks capable of transmitting data at
speeds 100 to 1,000 times those possible on the Internet.  It has three

components:  (1) research on high-speed networking, (2) development of

revolutionary applications that take advantage of improved networking
capability, and (3) deployment of high-speed testbed networks for experi-
mentation.  Although some of the NGI research is properly directed at

traditional technology problems, such as creating higher-speed devices
and subsystems, a substantial portion of the projects is directed at prob-
lems associated with large, complex, distributed systems, addressing
questions such as how to provide quality of service in a network con-
structed of distributed and autonomous subnetworks and network man-
agement.What is missing from existing federal research programs is a coherentapproach to attacking the gamut of systems problemsÑa thrust that spe-cifically targets large-scale systems and their associated problems and
pursues fundamental research to address them.  Such an effort would

need to support research along many different dimensionsÑtheory, archi-tecture, design methodologies, and the likeÑbecause no single approachto system design will be able to address the full scope of challenges
presented by large-scale systems.32  It is possible (although, in the com-
mitteeÕs judgment, unlikely) that dramatically improved methodologiesfor the design of large-scale systems are beyond human capabilityÑcer-tainly, it is difficult to get oneÕs arms around the challenge (especially forresearchers who have little hands-on experience with large-scale systems)
and validate the outcomes.  But the problems in large systems are too

pervasive, expensive, and fundamental to be largely ignored any longer.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124MAKING IT BETTERToward an Expanded Systems Research AgendaTwo distinct but complementary styles of research can provide insightinto large-scale systems:¥Case researchÑresearch that attacks a specific large-scale systemapplication (whether a distributed database or the Internet) and attempts
to improve it to make it more functional, scalable, robust, and so on; and¥Methodology researchÑresearch that addresses the issues involvedin designing large-scale systems generally, looking for architectures, tech-
niques, and tools that can make significant advances in the ways that
large-scale systems are designed.Methodology research is distinguished from case research in that itaddresses generic issues that plague most or all large-scale systems and
looks for dramatic improvements in the methodologies for the design of
all large-scale systems.  The goal of such work is not to make incremental

advances in existing systems (which is frequently the agenda of case
research), but rather to create new design methodologies that result in
large-scale systems that are intrinsically superior to existing systems in
the dimensions of concern (such as vulnerability or flexibility or
scalability).  This objective makes methodology research potentially much

more beneficial to the nation (financially and otherwise).Case research and methodology research are complementary:  case
research identifies specific shortcomings and problems in large-scale sys-
tem design methodologies that can be more fully explored through meth-
odology research, and improved methodologies arising from methodol-
ogy research can be validated by trying them out on one or more specific
cases using case research.  Case research is by far more common today

than methodology research, in part because the latter is riskier and less
likely to have near-term payoff.  This is not to say that methodology

research is nonexistent.  There have been a few notable successes in

(1) architectural techniques, including abstraction and encapsulation, that
were conceptualized in the 1970s and used in the design of many IT
systems, (2) transaction processing, which encompasses a collection of
techniques that make large distributed systems much easier to developÑsome would say even feasible (Gray and Reuter, 1993),33 (3) application
components, generic and reusable collections of functionality that con-
tribute to system correctness and stability because elements that are
widely reused are inherently more extensively tested, and (4) security,
which is receiving increasing attention because of the current attention to
e-commerce.  Individually and collectively, these examples fall far short
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS125of resolving the serious challenges that lie ahead in the design and opera-tion of large-scale IT systems, but they provide some indication of the
advances that could come out of additional methodological research.
There is a need for dramatically new ideas about how to approach the
design of large-scale systems, with the goal of dramatically improving
outcomes in terms of successful deployment and the desirable qualities
mentioned earlier.  The investment in methodology research needs to be

greatly expanded to stimulate more research that pursues high-risk
approaches to system design and to foster greater collaboration among IT
researchers in universities and industry and end users with operational
knowledge of large-scale system problems.An expanded research agenda would need to address systems thatare (1) large in scale, meaning there are massive numbers of elementsinteracting within the system, and (2) highly complex, meaning that theinteractions among those elements are both highly heterogeneous and
complicated in nature.  The low rate of success in designing large-scale

systems today does not mean that research should focus solely on known
failures, although they would offer useful insight.  Rather, much of the

research should target systems that are much larger in scale and complex-
ity than the systems that have been attempted to date.  The goal of the

research should be to explore methodologies for structuring and architec-
ture that will enable practical, large-scale systems to be successfully
constructed and deployed.  Measures of success in this program would

include the following:¥A dramatic, or at least substantial, improvement in practitionersÕsuccess in constructing and deploying large-scale systems and¥A dramatic, or at least substantial, increase in the scale and com-plexity of systems that practitioners will reasonably attempt to develop.Because of the tremendous resources being wasted in large-scale ITsystem failures today, success in the first of these two measures alone
could justify considerable investment in research.  Of course, favorable

outcomes will become evident only with time, as larger-scale systems are
attempted.  Thus, the research programs will have to rely on qualitative

measures in the short term, such as a better understanding of large-scale
systems, clearer reasoning about the correct behavior of such systems,
and even optimism about improved prospects for large-scale systems on
the part of practitioners.  In the longer term, metrics and benchmarks

could be developed for assessing improvements in system design and
comparing the merits of competing approaches.34Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126MAKING IT BETTERDesigning a Research ProgramA range of approaches needs to be pursued if progress is to be madeon large-scale IT systems.  These approaches include theoretical computer

science, computer systems architecture, analogies to large systems in the
natural and social sciences, programming methodologies, and continued
extensions of ongoing work in areas such as software components and
mobile code.  Experimental work will be extremely important and, in this

context, inherently problematic, because the systems of interest are
beyond the current capability of engineers to implement and because the
construction of large-scale IT systems is especially difficult in a research
environment.  Nevertheless, experiments can be done in the context of

existing large-scale systems, attempting incremental improvements.  Fur-

thermore, useful insights into the behavior of large-scale extensions can
be inferred from small-scale prototypes.  Of course, the best ideas for

pursuing research in large-scale systems will come from the research com-
munity itself, but the following examples show the range of approaches
needed in a comprehensive attempt to develop a stronger scientific and
engineering basis for large-scale IT systems.Theoretical ApproachesOne element of any approach to studying the properties of systems ofa scale and complexity exceeding current capabilities is to develop theo-
retical constructs of behaviors.  Theoretical computer science has been

quite successful in applying such methodologies to, for example, the com-
puting requirements for algorithms of arbitrary complexity, quantifying
which algorithms have desirable properties and which algorithms do not.
There have also been some efforts and successes in reasoning about pro-
tocols (algorithms executed among autonomous actors), which gets closer
to the heart of large-scale systems.35  Similar methodologies could be
applied to large-scale systems.  One direction for research would be to

construct certain constraints on the behaviors of elements of the system
and then to reason deductively about desirable properties of the system
as a whole.  Another approach would be to define helpful properties of

large-scale systems and draw inferences about the characteristics of con-
stituent actors that ensure these properties.Architectural ApproachesEfforts are also needed to develop further the nascent fields of systemor software architecture (Shaw and Garlan, 1996; Rechtine and Maier,
1997).  System architects
Ñsoftware architects, in particularÑare similarMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS127to building architects in that they need to understand the needs and inter-ests of their users and be aware of the characteristics of the components
that the users had developed previously.  The architect
Õs job is then tomarry user needs to the available resources in such a way that the result-
ing system will be useful for many years, even if it undergoes significant
change during its lifetime.Work on architectural approaches could help extend existing prin-ciples of abstraction, modularity, and layering to large-scale systemsÑorto augment them with additional architectural tools.  Recent work spon-

sored by DARPA, for example, recognized the difficulties introduced into
the modeling of complex systems by insufficient understanding, informa-
tion, and computer processing power, and evaluated a number of differ-
ent frameworks of abstraction for modeling such systems.36  This work
combined an architectural approach to large-scale system problems with
the theoretical basis advocated above, and it illustrates the promise of
architectural methodologies for large-scale system design. Another ap-
proach may be to investigate alternatives to the top-down approach to
decomposing systems advocated by structured programming (which
tends to work on a small scale only) and to the bottom-up approach to
system design embodied in notions of component software (described
below).  For example, a middle-out approach that breaks systems into

horizontal layers or platforms that are standardized across systems and
can be tuned to particular applications might be worth further evaluation.Inspiration from Natural and Social SystemsWork on large-scale IT systems could also draw on analogies in naturaland social systems.  Some natural and social systems display a scale and

complexity far beyond what has been achieved in technological systems.
Research may determine how such characteristics are achieved in natural
and social systems, and whether those lessons can be applied to IT sys-
tems.  Two such systems that are systematic and purposeful
Ñachievinguseful higher goals through the composition of many elementsÑare eco-logical systems and the economy, both of which might usefully serve as
models (Box 3.8).  DARPA has already supported research on information

systems trustworthiness that draws on biological models, and its explora-
tion of other intersections between computing and biology suggest the
potential for more cross-fertilization between these two disciplines.37Software Development ProcessesThe ability of programmers to design and develop large-scale soft-ware systems could, in principle, benefit from better methodologies, pro-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128MAKING IT BETTERBOX 3.8Ecological and Economic Systems as Models for Large-ScaleInformation Technology SystemsBiological and economic systems could serve as models of complex systems.As such, they could inform the development of large-scale information technologysystems.  An ecological system achieves a remarkable level of diversity and
heterogeneity with mutual dependence, through a process of natural selection.
Researchers could examine processes like natural selection for possible applica-bility to technological systems and study the specific mechanisms of interactionand coordination that have evolved in such systems.  Of course, analogies have

been shown between technological and biological systems for many years, andthe concept has been pursued concretely in, for example, genetic algorithms andneural networks.The economy also achieves a scale of purposeful heterogeneity with mutualdependence far beyond that in any technological system.  Experience suggests
strongly that central planningÑthe systematic design of an economy top-down,much as technological systems are designed todayÑis not a viable methodology.The most successful economic systems are composed of semiautonomous actorswho act in accordance with self-interest within the imposed constraints of an incen-
tive system.  This approach differs from technological systems in that it uses incen-
tives rather than dogmatic behavioral expectations and in terms of the degree ofautonomy delegated to its agents and the degree of intelligence (human and orga-
nizational) with which those agents are endowed.  This latter feature is likely to
distinguish economic systems from technological ones for some time to come,although of course there has been considerable effort to emulate human intelli-gence in limited ways in the context of artificial intelligence research.1Arguably the greatest opportunity lies in the application of economic theory to themethodology of large-scale system design.  Microeconomic and macroeconomic
theories are limited by the approximations that need to be made in certain model-ing assumptions about the behavior of economic actors and organizations.  This

same limitation need not apply to technological systems constructed in accordancewith economic principles, because these systems can follow prescribed principlesby construction.  Theoretical economics is replete with tools, such as game theory,

that are interesting to consider in this context.  A handful of organizations, includ-
ing the Santa Fe Institute, are pursuing interdisciplinary research along these lines,examining the way aggregate behaviors can arise from the actions of independent
agents.1 This work provides an interesting link to the biological analogies mentioned above, given that
human intelligence itself arose through an evolutionary process.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS129gramming environments, and tools for software development.  The field
of software engineering was created 30 years ago to deal with the predict-
ability, time, and cost issues related to software development, and many
problems identified in the 1960s persist today (as CSTB committees report
regularly).  Good engineering practice has contributed to improvements

in the development of small and even medium-sized modules, yielding
modest improvements in the productivity of programmers (Boehm,
1993).38  Further improvements are needed in large-scale systems and in
methods for addressing their inherent problems.  In particular, software

engineering techniques must scale to very large and complex systems.
Software development is itself an intense collaborative task, which could
make better use of tools that can greatly facilitate collaborative develop-
ment.  There is also room for improvement in software testing, a time-

consuming and expensive aspect of the development process.  Challeng-

ing issues include the testing of large, concurrent software systems as
well as multimedia systems.  Other issues include the development of

processes that work well even when people have less-than-optimal
skills.39Extensions of Existing ApproachesExisting approaches to large-scale system design, including some thatare in commercial practice, show promise for facilitating the development
of large-scale systems and could benefit from greater attention from the
research community.  Two approaches worth mentioning are methodolo-

gies based on component software and mobile code.The ideal of component software is to construct systems by assem-bling and integrating preexisting modules of code with known function-
ality.  The elements are purchased as is, rather than constructed specifi-

cally for system needs, and combined in new ways, possibly with other
newly developed elements, to create a system.  Two existing approaches

are the reuse of components (reusable modules) and the reuse of frame-
works (reusable architectures for specific application domains).  Compo-

nent reuse is common in the manufacture of physical goods and was one
of the major innovations of the industrial revolution.40  Among the prac-
tical advantages of this approach are the time and cost efficiencies gained
from avoiding a new development effort and the improved quality of
components that are tested by reuse in many systems.  The most promis-

ing approach is the containment of complexity by the substitution of
assembly for traditional programming, with the possibility of this assem-
bly being performed by end users.41  Reuse is common in computing andnetworking infrastructure.  Increasingly, existing software design pat-

terns are adapted and applied as an alternative to custom-crafting majorMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130MAKING IT BETTERsoftware structures.  For example, many client-server applications use
similar designs and code.  Emerging component software frameworks,

such as JavaBeans, exploit libraries of predefined elements that fit within
a common design framework.  Applications are built by assembling exist-

ing components as well as by creating new, unique components that fit
within the framework.Several factors, some technological and some economic, have limitedthe utility of component software to date (Szyperski, 1998).  The biggest

obstacle to software reuse is the complexity of software structure and
interaction, which is much greater than that found in the physical parts
and assemblies of industrial production.  Reuse via very high level lan-

guages has proven effective for small systems but does not scale well
(Boehm, 1999).  Furthermore, the fragmentation of the software industry
Ñresulting in part from the lower transaction and coordination costs made
possible by networked computingÑhas made it difficult to implementreuse on a large scale, and modest improvements in programming pro-
ductivity are being swamped by expanding needs.  Improvements in

techniques for finding and validating chunks of reusable code may
improve the prospects for this technique.  More research is required to

determine how well this approach applies to large-scale systems.Another approach receiving commercial attention is mobile code,which abandons the architectural principle that the elements of a system
are static in their behaviors and interaction with other elements and
instead allows elements to influence the behavior of other elements in
richer ways beyond simple interaction.  More generally, the capabilities of

components can be dynamically extended and modified by providing
them with programming code.  Of course, simply moving the execution

of code around a system provides no fundamental change in the expres-
siveness of such code, but it does fundamentally alter architectural
assumptions about the type and flexibility of functionality encapsulated
in system elements.  It therefore illustrates the possibilities for substan-

tially new architectural approaches to system design that could improve
the ability to make systems more reliable or easier to build (although such
potential still needs to be demonstrated).  Examples of interesting research

(of the case variety rather than the methodology variety) include Jini (i.e.,
opportunistic cooperation of Internet appliances) and active networks
(i.e., using mobile code to add new flexibility and capability to networks).
At the same time, mobile code can introduce new concerns regarding
system trustworthiness.  Addressing those concerns may add to the per-

ceived complexity of a system.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS131Support for Research InfrastructureResearch on large-scale systems will have a significant experimentalcomponent and, as such, will necessitate support for research infrastruc-
tureÑartifacts that researchers can use to try out new approaches and canexamine closely to understand existing modes of failure.42  Researchers
need access to large, distributed systems if they are to study large sys-
tems, because the phenomena of interest are those explicitly associated
with scale, and the types of problems experienced to date tend to be
exhibited only on such systems.  Furthermore, researchers must be able to

demonstrate convincingly the capabilities of the advanced approaches
that they develop.  They will not be able to convince industry to adopt

new practices unless they can show how well these practices have worked
in an actual large-scale system.  Through such demonstrations, research

that leverages infrastructure can improve the performance, cost, or other
properties of IT systems.43Access to research infrastructure is especially problematic when work-
ing with large-scale systems because systems of such large size and scale
typically cannot be constructed in a lab, and because researchers cannot
generally gain access to operational systems used in industry or govern-
ment.  Such systems often need to operate continuously, and operators

are understandably unwilling to allow experimentation with mission-
critical systems.  In some contexts, additional concerns may arise relating

to the protection of proprietary information.44  Such concerns have long
roots.  In the late 1970s, the late Jonathan Postel complained that the

success of the ARPANET (a predecessor of the Internet) and its use as a
production system (that is, for everyday, routine communications) was
interfering with his ability to try new networking protocols that might
ÒbreakÓ the network.  In the early 1990s, with the commercialization of
the Internet looming, Congress held hearings to address the question of
what it means for a network to be experimental or production, and the
prospects for experimental use of the Internet dimmedÑeven though itsusers at the time were limited to the research and education community.
That todayÕs Internet is much larger than the Internet of a decade ago andcontinuing to grow quickly makes even more remote the prospect of

research access to comparably large-scale network systems.  At the same

time, it increases the value of researcher access to Òlarge-enoughÓ-scalenetwork systems to do the research that can help to justify the depen-
dence on the Internet that so many want to see.Several large-scale infrastructures have been put in place by govern-ment and private-sector organizations largely for purposes of experimen-
tation.  The NGI program mentioned above, for example, is deploying

testbed networks across which technologists can demonstrate and evalu-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132MAKING IT BETTERate new approaches for improving security, quality of service, and net-work management.  But even then, only 
ÒstableÓ technologies are to be
deployed so that the network can also be used to demonstrate new, high-
end applications (LSN Next Generation Implementation Team, 1998).The Internet 2 and Abilene networks being deployed by the privatesector have similar intentions.  In the early and mid-1990s, the Corpora-

tion for National Research Initiatives organized the creation of a set of
five testbeds to demonstrate high-speed networking technologies, sys-
tems, and applications.  Participants came from industry, government,

and academia, and each testbed was a relatively large research project.
Many lessons were learned about the difficulties involved in implement-
ing very high speed (1 Gbps) networks and very high speed networking
applications on an end-to-end basis.  Lessons learned from these testbeds

have been, and continue to be, incorporated into current and emerging
computers and networks.  Because these testbeds brought together inter-

disciplinary teams and addressed complex end-to-end system issues, they
were representative of the research in large-scale systems that this chap-
ter describes; however, because the testbeds were operational over large
geographical areas (spanning hundreds of miles), a large share of the
effort and cost was associated with the construction and operation of the
physical infrastructure rather than the research itself.  With the benefit of
hindsight, it might have been possible to achieve a better balance to ensure
that building, maintaining, and operating a research testbed did not inad-
vertently become the principal objective, as opposed to gaining research
insights.  Yet this tension between funding for infrastructure, per se, and

funding for the research that uses it continues to haunt federally funded
networking research.Existing infrastructure programs have a critical limitation with respectto the kind of research envisioned in this report:  they help investigators

in universities and government laboratories routinely access dedicated
computers and networks used for scientific research or related technical
work, but they do not provide researchers with access to experimental or
operational large-scale systems used for purposes other than scienceÑcomputers and networks used for everything from government functions
(tax processing, benefits processing) through critical infrastructure man-
agement (air traffic control, power system management) to a wide range
of business and e-commerce application systems.  Given the problems

experienced with large-scale IT systems, gaining some kind of access is
important.  Even indirect access in the form of data about system perfor-

mance and other attributes could be valuable.45  Instrumenting opera-
tional systems to collect needed data on their operations and allowing
researchers to observe their operation in an active environment would
greatly benefit research.  Figuring out what is possible, with what kinds
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS133of precautions, compensation, and incentives, will require focused dis-cussions and negotiation among key decision makers in the research com-
munity and among candidate system managers.  The federal government

can facilitate and encourage such discussions by linking the IT research
community to system managers within federal agencies or by brokering
access to elements of the commercial infrastructure.46Experimental academic networks could, with some additional effort,be made more useful to IT researchers.  Most such networks, such as the

Internet 2, are limited by Acceptable Use Policies (AUPs) to carrying aca-
demic traffic and may therefore not be used to study business applica-
tions.  One option would be to modify AUPs to allow some forms of

business traffic to use the research Internet, so as to create a laboratory for
studying the issues.  Firms might be willing to bear the cost of maintain-

ing backups for their commercial traffic on the commercial Internet if they
could use the research network at below market prices.47  Government
could also fund some data collection activities by Internet service pro-
viders (ISPs) that would be helpful to researchers trying to understand
the evolution of networking.  The commercialization of the Internet also

put an end to systematic public data collection on network traffic.  Unlike

the regulated common carriers, who must report minutes of telephone
calling statistics to the FCC, unregulated ISPs do not regularly disclose
information on aggregate traffic or traffic by type.  Thus, for example,

published estimates of the portion of Internet traffic that is related to the
Web vary widely.MOVING FORWARDDespite the myriad problems associated with large-scale IT systems,a coherent, multifaceted research program combining the elements
described above could improve the ability to engineer such systems.  Such

work would help avert continuing problems in designing, developing,
and operating large-scale systems and could open the doors to many
more innovative uses of IT systems.  It could also lead to expanded educa-

tional programs for students in computer science and engineering that
would help them better appreciate systems problems in their future work,
whether as researchers or users of IT.  Because IT is less limited by physi-

cal constraints than are other technologies, much of what can be imagined
for IT can, with better science and engineering, be achieved.  It is not clear

which techniques for improving the design, development, deployment,
and operation of large-scale systems will prove the most effective.  Each

has its strengths and weaknesses.  Only with research aimed at improving

both the science and the engineering of large-scale systems will this
potential be unlocked.  This is a challenge that has long eluded the IT
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134MAKING IT BETTERresearch community, but given the role that large-scale IT systems play insocietyÑand are likely to play in the futureÑthe time has come to addressit head on.REFERENCESAdams, Duane.  1999.  
ÒIs It Time to Reinvent Computer Science?Ó  Working paper.
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pa. May 4.Barr, Avron, and Shirley Tessler.  1998.  
ÒHow Will the Software Talent Shortage End?ÓAmerican Programmer 11(1).  Available online at <http://www.cutter.com/itjournal/
itjtoc.htm#jan98>.Bernstein, Lawrence.  1997.  
ÒSoftware Investment Strategy,Ó Bell Labs Technical Journal2(3):233-242.Boehm, Barry W.  1993. 
ÒEconomic Analysis of Software Technology Investments,Ó in
Analytical Methods in Software Engineering Economics, Thomas Gulledge and WilliamHutzler, eds. Springer-Verlag, New York.Boehm, Barry W.  1999.  
ÒManaging Software Productivity and Reuse,Ó IEEE Computer32(9):111-113.Brooks, Frederick P.  1987.  
ÒNo Silver Bullet: Essence and Accidents of Software Engineer-ing,Ó IEEE Computer 20(4):10-19.
Committee on Information and Communications (CIC).  1995.  
America in the Age of Informa-tion.  National Science and Technology Council, Washington, D.C.  Available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/ccic/cic_forum_v224/cover.html>.Committee on Computing, Information, and Communications (CCIC).  1997
.  Research Chal-
lenges in High Confidence Systems.  Proceedings of the Committee on Computing, Infor-mation, and Communications Workshop, August 6-7, National Coordination Officefor Computing, Information, and Communications, Arlington, Va.  Available online at
<http://www.ccic.gov/pubs/hcs-Aug97/>.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1994.  Academic Careers for Experimental Computer Scientists and Engineers.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1995a.  Continued Review of Tax Systems Modernization for the Internal Revenue Service.National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1995b.  Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Sup-port the NationÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1997.  The Evolution of Untethered Communications.  National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999a.  Trust in Cyberspace, Fred B. Schneider, ed.  National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999b.  Realizing the Potential of C4I:  Fundamental Challenges
.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS135Davies, Jennifer. 1998.  CONFIRM:  Computerized Reservation System
ÑCase Facts.  Case study
material for course on ethical issues of information technology, University ofWolverhampton (U.K.), School of Computing and Information Technology, March 20.
Available online at <http://www.scit.wlv.ac.uk/~cm1995/cbr/cases/case06/four.htm>.Ewusi-Mensah, Kweku.  1997.  
ÒCritical Issues in Abandoned Information Systems Devel-opment Projects,Ó Communications of the ACM 40(9):74-80.
Fishman, Charles.  1996.  
ÒThey Write the Right Stuff,Ó Fast Company, December.  Available
online at <www.fastcompany.com/online/06/writestuff.html>.Gibbs, W.W.  1994.  
ÒSoftwareÕs Chronic Crisis,Ó Scientific American 264(9):86-95.
Gray, Jim, and Andreas Reuter.  1993.  
Transaction Processing Concepts and Techniques.Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco.Hennessy, John.  1999.  
ÒThe Future of Systems Research,Ó IEEE Computer 32(8):27-33.
Johnson, Jim.  1999.  
ÒTurning Chaos into Success,Ó Software Magazine, December.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.softwaremag.com/archives/1999dec/Success.html>.Jones, C.  1996.  
Applied Software Measurement.  McGraw-Hill, New York.
Junnarkar, Sandeep.  1999.  
ÒBeyond.com Revived After Extended Outage,Ó CNET News.com,October 22.  Available online at <http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1007-200-922552.html>.
Kavi, Krishna, James C. Browne, and Anand Tripathi.  1999.  ÒComputer Systems Research:The Pressure Is On,Ó IEEE Computer 32(1):30-39.Large Scale Networking (LSN) Next Generation Implementation Team.  1998.  
Next Genera-tion Internet Implementation Plan.  National Coordination Office for Computing, Infor-
mation, and Communications, Arlington, Va., February.Layton, Lyndsey.  1999.  
ÒComputer Failure Puzzles Metro: Opening Delayed, Rush HourSlowed,Ó Washington Post, September 25, p. B1.Li, Allen.  1994.  
ÒAdvance Automation System:  Implications of Problems and Recent
Changes.Ó  GAO/T-RCED-94-188.  Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Trans-
portation Issues, Resources, Community, and Economic Development Division, U.S.General Accounting Office, before the Subcommittee on Aviation, Committee on Public
Works and Transportation, U.S. House of Representatives, April 13.Luenig, Erich.  1999.  
ÒSchwab Suffers Repeated Online Outages,Ó CNET News.com, October22.  Available online at <http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1007-200-922368.html>.
Lyytinen, Kalle.  1987.  
ÒDifferent Perspectives on Information Systems:  Problems and
Solutions,Ó ACM Computing Surveys 19(1):5-46.Meehan, Michael.  2000.  
ÒUpdate:  System Outages Top Online Brokerage Execs
Õ Con-
cerns,Ó Computerworld, April 4.  Available online at <http://www.computerworld.com/
home/print.nsf/all/000404D212>.Messerschmitt, David G.  2000.  
Understanding Networked Applications:  A First Course
.  Morgan
Kaufman, San Francisco.National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC).  1997.  Reports sub-mitted for NSTAC XX (Volume I: Information Infrastructure Group Report, Network
Group Intrusion Detection Subgroup Report, Network Group Widespread OutageSubgroup Report; Volume II: Legislative and Regulatory Group Report, OperationsSupport Group Report; Volume III: National Coordinating Center for Telecommunica-
tions Vision Subgroup Report, Information Assurance, Financial Services Risk Assess-ment Report, Interim Transportation Information Risk Assessment Report), Washing-ton, D.C., December 11.Nelson, Emily, and Evan Ramstad.  1999.  
ÒTrick or Treat:  Hershey
Õs Biggest Dud HasTurned Out to Be Its New Technology,Ó Wall Street Journal, October 29, pp. A1, A6.Network Reliability and Interoperability Council (NRIC).  1997.  
Report of the Network Reli-ability and Interoperability Council.  NRIC, Washington, D.C.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136MAKING IT BETTERNorman, Donald A..  1998.  
The Invisible Computer:  Why Good Products Can Fail, the Personal
Computer Is So Complex, and Information Appliances Are the Solution.  MIT Press, Cam-bridge, Mass.OÕHara, Colleen.  1999.  
ÒSTARS Delayed Again; FAA Seeks Tech Patch,Ó Federal Computer
Week, April 12, p. 1.Oz, Effy.  1997.  
ÒWhen Professional Standards Are Lax:  The CONFIRM Failure and Its
Lessons,Ó Communications of the ACM 37(10):29-36.Perrow, Charles.  1984.  
Normal Accidents: Living With High-Risk Technologies.  Basic Books,
New York.PresidentÕs Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection (PCCIP).  1997.  
Critical Foun-dations.  Washington, D.C.
Ralston, Anthony, ed.  1993.  
Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 3rd ed., International ThomsonPublishers.Reason, James.  1990.  
Human Error.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Rechtine, E., and M.W. Maier.  1997.  The Art of Systems Architecting.  CRC Press, New York.Shaw, M., and D. Garlan.  1996.  
Software Architecture.  Prentice-Hall,  New York.
Standish Group International, Inc.  1995.  
The Chaos.  Standish Group International, West
Yarmouth, Mass.  Available online at <http://www.standishgroup.com/chaos.html>.
Sunday Examiner and Chronicle.  1999.  
ÒSilicon Valley Expertise Stops at Capitol Steps,ÓAugust 8, editorial, Sunday section, p. 6.Szyperski, C.  1998.  
Component Software: Beyond Object-Oriented Programming.  Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Mass.Transition Office of the PresidentÕs Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection(TOPCCIP).  1998.  
ÒPreliminary Research and Development Roadmap for Protectingand Assuring Critical National Infrastructures.ÓU.S. General Accounting Office (GAO).  1994.  
Air Traffic Control:  Status of FAA
Õs Moderniza-tion Program.  GAO/RCED-94-167FS.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C., April.U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO).  1997.  
Air Traffic Control:  Immature Software Acquisi-
tion Processes Increase FAA System Acquisition Risks.  GAO/AIMD-97-47.  U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C., March.U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO).  1998.  
Air Traffic Control:  Status of FAA
Õs Moderniza-tion Program.  GAO/RCED-99-25.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.,
December.U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO).  1999a.  
Major Performance and Management Issues:DOT Challenges.  GAO/OCG-99-13.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C.U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO).  1999b.  
High Risk Update.  GAO/HR-99-1.  U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., January.U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO).  1999c.  
Air Traffic Control:  Observations on FAA
Õs AirTraffic Control Modernization Program.  GAO/T-RCED/AIMD-99-137.  U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C., March.NOTES1.The term 
ÒenterpriseÓ is used here in its general sense to encompass corporations,
governments, and universities; typical applications include e-commerce, tax collection, air
traffic control, and remote learning.  A previous CSTB report used the term 
Ònetworkedinformation systemÓ to cover the range of such systems.  See CSTB (1999a).
2.See, for example PCCIP (1997), TOPCCIP (1998), NSTAC (1997), and NRIC (1997).

3.The complexity of some components is so great that they easily meet the definition
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS137of system.  For example, no single individual can understand all aspects of the design of a
modern microprocessor, but compared to numbers of large-scale IT infrastructures, fewsuch designs are created.  Because microprocessors tend to be manufactured in great quan-

tity, huge efforts are mounted to test designs.  In fact, more effort is spent in verifying the
performance of microprocessors than in designing them.  In the original Pentium Pro, which
had about 5.5 million transistors in the central processing unit, Intel found and corrected
1,200 design errors prior to production; in its forthcoming Willamette processor, which has30 million transistors in the central processing unit, engineers have found and corrected8,500 design flaws (data from Robert Colwell, Intel, personal communication, March 14,
2000).  Despite these efforts, bugs in microprocessors occasionally slip through.  For exam-
ple, Intel shipped many thousands of microprocessors that computed the wrong answer forcertain arithmetic division problems.4.A 1995 study of system development efforts by the Standish Group found that only
16 percent of projects were completed on time and within the predicted budget.  Approxi-
mately one-third were never completed, and more than half were completed later than
expected, exceeded the budget, or lacked the planned functionality.  Projects that either
exceeded budget or were canceled cost, on average, 89 percent more than originally esti-mated, with more than 10 percent of projects costing more than twice the original estimate.
Approximately 32 percent of the completed projects had less than half the functionalityoriginally envisioned, and fewer than 8 percent were fully functional.  See Standish Group
International, Inc. (1995).  A subsequent study (Johnson, 1999) showed some improvement

in large-scale system development, but continuing failures.  The study reports that 28 per-
cent of projects were canceled before completion and 46 percent were completed overbudget.  The remaining 26 percent were completed on time and within the predicted budget.
5.The General Accounting Office is a regular source of reports on federal system prob-
lems, for example.6.Data on IRS expenditures come from the GAO (1999b).  For a discussion of the
problems facing the IRS tax systems modernization project, see CSTB (1995a).7.In the late 1990s, concern about the Y2K computer problem led to both overhauls of
existing systems and projects to develop new systems to replace older ones.  These activi-
ties put a spotlight on systems issues, but it is important to understand that they involvedthe application of existing knowledge and technology rather than fundamental advances.
They are believed to have reduced the number of relatively old systems still in use, but theymay have introduced new problems because of the haste with which much of the work wasundertaken.  It will be a while before the effects of Y2K fixes can be assessed.
8.These problems have been reported in several articles in the 
Chronicle of HigherEducationÕs online edition.9.There are many examples that demonstrate why it is a good idea to have separate
knowledge management systems and data warehouses, not the least of which is a socialone.  An information system that people will use to make informed decisions relies on a
very different database design than a system for managing the integrity of transactions.10.MEMS technology is exploding in terms of its applicability.  In a few years, MEMS
wallpaper will be able to sense and condition an environment.  It could be used to create
active wing surfaces on aircraft that can respond to changes in wind speed and desired
flight characteristics to minimize drag.  On a larger scale, a square mile of MEMS wallpaper
may have more nodes than the entire Internet will have at that time.  Clearly, scalability
will be a key factor.11.For a discussion of information appliances, see Norman (1998).
12.For example, in some instances, a manual fallback option may no longer exist or be
practical.13.As an example of the increasing scale of usage consider the following statistic:
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138MAKING IT BETTERbetween January 1997 and January 2000, the percentage of commission-based trades beingconducted online by Boston-based Fidelity Investments Institutional Services Company,Inc., jumped from 7 percent to 85 percent.  Many online brokerages have discussed the

possibility of turning down potential online accounts as a means of addressing such growth.See Meehan (2000).14.This discussion of complexity borrows from the work of Perrow (1984) and Reason
(1990).15.However, as any commuter knows, just one small accident or other disturbance in
normal traffic patterns can create significant delays on busy roadways.16.See CSTB (1999a), especially Chapter 5, 
ÒTrustworthy Systems from UntrustworthyComponents.Ó17.Middleware is a layer of software that lies between the operating system and the
application software.  Different middleware solutions support different classes of applica-
tions; two distinct types support storage and communications.  See Messerschmitt (2000).
18.A discussion of the fundamental problems in mobile and wireless communications
can be found in CSTB (1997).19.For example, a typical desktop computer contains an operating system and applica-
tion software developed by many different companies.  Although an automobile may also

be composed of components from a number of suppliers, they tend to be fitted together intoa test car before manufacture, and final assembly of each car takes place in a limited num-ber of locations.  A desktop computer is essentially assembled in each home or office
Ñanassembly line of one.20.This phenomenon is seen in the FAA and IRS systems modernization efforts.
21.In the Standish Group
Õs survey cited earlier in this chapter, respondents blamedincomplete or changing requirements for many of the problems they faced in system devel-opment efforts.  The more a project
Õs requirements and specifications changed, the morelikely it was that the project would take longer than originally planned.  And the longer a
project took to complete, the more likely it was that the aims of the organization requestingthe system would change.  In some cases, a project was delayed so long that the larger

initiative it was designed to support was discontinued.22.Indeed, the very notion of sociotechnical systems that is discussed in this report has
been more thoroughly investigated outside the United States.  U.S. researchers could ben-

efit from more international cooperation.  See, for example, Lyytinen (1987).
23.For example, simply upgrading the memory in a personal computer can lead to
timing mismatches that cause memory failures that, in turn, lead to the loss of application
dataÑeven if the memory chips themselves are functioning perfectly.  In other words, the
system fails to work even if all of its components work.  Similar problems can occur when a
server is upgraded in a large network.24.Architecture relates to interoperability and to ease of upgrading IT systems. A useful
definition of the term ÒarchitectureÓ is the development and specification of the overall
structure, logical components, and  logical interrelationships of a computer, its operating

system, a network, or other conception.  An architecture can be a reference model for use
with specific product architectures or it can be a specific product architecture, such as thatfor an Intel Pentium microprocessor or for IBMÕs OS/390 operating system.  An architec-
ture differs from a design in that it is broader in scope.  An architecture is a design, but most
designs are not architectures.  A single component or a new function has a design that has
to fit within the overall architecture.  This definition is derived from the online resource

whatis.com (<www.whatis.com>) and is based on Ralston (1976).25.For decades, financial services have been delivered by organizations composed of
elements that themselves are not perfectly trustworthy.  Few, if any, of the techniques
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS139developed by this industry have been adapted for use in software systems outside thefinancial services industry itself.26.The examples of attacks on critical infrastructures and IT systems cited in this para-
graph are derived from CSTB (1999a).27.Hewlett-Packard, for example, claims that it can achieve 99.999 percent reliability in
some of its hardware systems.28.As the telephone industry has become more competitive, with more providers of
telecommunications services and more suppliers of telecommunications equipment, thepotential for compatibility and reliability problems has grown.29.Other techniques have been used to create highly reliable software, suggesting hope
for improvement in general practice.  The software for the space shuttle system, for exam-
ple, has performed with a high level of reliability because it is well maintained and the
programmers are intimately familiar with it.  They also use a number of the tools discussedin this chapter.  See Fishman (1996).
30.As an example, customization usually is accomplished through the programming of
general-purpose computers; huge computer programs often are built to form the core func-tionality of the system.  How to design and construct such large computer programs is the
focus of research in software engineering.  Current research efforts, however, do not go far

enough, as discussed later in this chapter.  For a lengthier discussion of the challenges of
developing better ÒglueÓ to hold together compound systems, see CSTB (1999a).
31.See TOPCCIP (1998) and CSTB (1999a).

32.In fact, a famous paper by Fred Brooks argues that there will be no single major
improvement in the ability to develop large-scale software.  See Brooks (1987).
33.Transaction processing does this by capturing some inherent challenges (such as an
explosion of failure modes and resource conflicts due to concurrency) that plague all dis-tributed systems and by providing countermeasures within an infrastructure supportingthe application development.34.Benchmarks play an important role in driving innovation by focusing system designers
on improving particular attributes of a system.  If the benchmark does not truly reflect the

capabilities of the system, then engineering effortÑand consumersÑcan be misdirected.An example might be the focus on microprocessor clock speeds as an indicator of perfor-mance.  Consumers tend to look at such statistics when they purchase computers even

though the architecture of a microprocessor can significantly influence the performanceactually delivered.35.As a simple example, automata theory can reason about the properties (such as
decidability) of finite automata of arbitrary complexity.  Here, the term 
ÒcomplexityÓ is
interpreted differently than in the systems sense, in terms of the number of elements oroperations but not necessarily their heterogeneity or the intricacy of their interaction.36.To quote from the abstract of this study, titled 
Representation and Analysis for Model-ing, Specification, Design, Prediction, Control and Assurance of Large Scale, Complex Systems:ÒComplete modeling of complex systems is not possible because of insufficient understand-ing, insufficient information, or insufficient computer cycles.  This study focuses on the useof abstraction in modeling such systems.  Abstraction of such systems is based on a semantic
framework, and the choice of semantic framework affects the ability to model particular
features of the system such as concurrency, adaptability, security, robustness in the pres-ence of faults, and real-time performance.  A rich variety of semantic frameworks have been
developed over time.  This study will examine their usefulness for modeling complex sys-

tems.  In particular, questions to be addressed include the scalability (Do the semantics
support hierarchy? Is it practical to have a very large number of components?), heterogene-ity (Can it be combined with other semantic frameworks at multiple levels of abstraction?),
and formalism (Are the formal properties of the semantics useful?).  The study will also
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140MAKING IT BETTERaddress how to choose semantic frameworks, how to ensure model fidelity (Does the modelbehavior match the system being modeled?), how to recognize and manage emergentbehavior, and how to specify and guarantee behavior constraints.Ó  Additional informationabout this project is available online at <http://ptolemy.eecs.berkeley.edu/~eal/towers/index.html>.37.The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board initiated a study in early 2000
that will examine a range of possible interactions between computer science and the bio-logical sciences, such as the use of biologically inspired models in the design of IT systems.Additional information is available on the CSTB home page, <www.cstb.org>.38.By one estimate, based on the ratio of machine lines of code to source lines of code,
the productivity of programmers has increased by a factor of ten every 20 years (or 12percent a year) since the mid-1960s (see Bernstein, 1997).39.Problem-ridden federal systems have been associated with personnel who may have
less, or less current, training than their counterparts in leading private-sector environments.The association lends credence to the notion that the effectiveness of a process can vary
with the people using it.  See CSTB (1995a).
40.Reuse was one of the foundations of the industrial revolution.  Standard, interchange-
able parts used in industrial production can be equated to IT components.  The analogy to

IT frameworks came later in the industrial world but recently has become common.  For
example, todayÕs automobiles usually are designed around common platforms that permitthe design of different car models without major new investments in the underbody and
drive train.41.The ability to define, manipulate, and test software interfaces is valuable to any
software project.  If interfaces could be designed in such a way that software modules could

first be tested separately and then assembled with the assurance of correct operation, thenlarge-scale system engineering would become simpler.  Much of the theory and engineer-
ing practice and many of the tools developed as part of IT research can be applied to thesebig systems.42.An 
ÒartifactÓ in the terminology of experimental computer science and engineering
refers to an instance or implementation of one or more computational phenomena, such ashardware, software, or a combination of the two.  Artifacts provide researchers with testbeds
for direct measurement and experimentation; proving new concepts (i.e., that a particular
assembly of components can perform a particular set of functions or meet a particular set ofrequirements); and demonstrating the existence and feasibility of certain phenomena.  See
CSTB (1994).43.For example, when the Defense Department
Õs ARPANET was first built in the 1970s,it used the Network Control Protocol, which was designed in parallel with the network.Over time, it became apparent that networks built with quite different technologies would
need to be connected, and users gained experience with the network and NCP.  These two
problems provoked research that eventually led to the development of the TCP/IP proto-col, which became the standard way that computers could communicate over any network.
As the network grew into a large Internet and applications emerged that require largebandwidth, congestion became a problem in the network.  This, too, has led to research into
adaptive control algorithms that the computers attached to the network must use to detect
and mitigate congestion.  Even so, the Internet is far from perfect.  Research is under way
into methods to guarantee quality of service for data transmission that could support, forexample, robust transmission of digitized voice and video.  Extending the Internet to con-

nect mobile computers using radio communications is also an area of active research.44.Generally speaking, industry-university IT research collaboration has been con-
strained by intellectual property protection arrangements, generating enough expressions
of concern that CSTB is exploring how to organize a project on that topic.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH ON LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS14145.Networking researchers, for example, have been clamoring for better data about
Internet traffic and performance.  They have been attempting to develop broader and more
accurate Internet traffic and performance data for some time.  Federal support associated

with networking research might provide vehicles for better Internet Service Provider datacollection.46.The new Digital Government program being coordinated by the National Science
Foundation may yield valuable experience in the practical aspects of engaging organizationswith production systems problems for the purpose of collaborating with IT researchers.More information on this program is contained in Chapter 4.47.On the one hand, business users should not benefit from subsidies intended for
researchers (if they did, there would be a risk of overloading the academic-research net-works).  On the other hand, given the expectation that a research network is less stable than

a production one, business users would be expected to pay for backup commercial net-working and would be motivated to use a research network only at a discount.  Systematic
examination of actual users and applications would be necessary for concrete assessment of
the traffic trade-offs.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1424Research Motivated by Social
Applications of Information Technology
The diffusion of the Internet, combined with advances in basiccomputing and communications technologies, is poised to funda-
mentally alter the nature of information technology (IT) research.As IT continues to move from the relatively simple realm of back-office
transactions processing and personal productivity-enhancement tools into
less specialized, mass-market contexts that support electronic commerce
(e-commerce), delivery of government services, and personal interactions,
the set of problems that motivates IT research is continuing to change.
Many of the new applications are social applications that serve groups of
people in shared activities.  Simple social applications support the col-

laboration of geographically dispersed groups of people engaged in a
shared task, such as designing a new product or writing a report.  More

sophisticated social applications support a range of business, economic,
and societal functions, such as manufacturing processes or distance edu-
cation.  Social applications tend to integrate IT into larger 
sociotechnicalsystems that involve people, organizations, and other technologies and
that derive their functionality from the complex interactions of IT with
nontechnical system elements.  Many of the social applications comprise

large-scale systems of the kind described in Chapter 3, but social applica-
tions of IT pose a number of additional interesting research problems, the
solutions to which will require more explicit collaboration among IT
researchers, end users, and researchers in other disciplines.  Progress

along purely technical dimensions, such as processing power, communi-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS143cations speed, and data storage densities, will no longer suffice; a moreholistic view is needed (Brown and Duguid, 2000).This chapter examines the increasing integration of IT into larger,social applications and the shortcomings of todayÕs technology relative to
a complex set of expectations.  The first two sections lay the groundwork

for the analysis by identifying the characteristics of social applications
and the many challenges they present.  Underlying this discussion is the

idea that, because IT is proliferating in social applications, research on
social applications should be expanded in amount, scope, and depth and,
furthermore, that this new research will require approaches that are some-
what different from those taken in much of the more narrowly technology-
oriented research that is common today.The third section discusses ways in which interdisciplinary researchcan play an important role in this arena and identifies some initial steps in
this direction.  Just as scientific computing has benefited from closer inter-

action between technologists and natural scientists, so can the more-social
applications of IT deployed today benefit from collaboration between
technologists and social scientists (including experts in law and business
as well as psychology, sociology, anthropology, and economics).  The

fourth section examines mechanisms for pursuing technical and non-
technical research that could increase understanding of social applications
of IT and thereby enhance capabilities to design, develop, deploy, and
operate them.  Building on the groundwork laid in the present chapter,

Chapter 5 identifies specific steps that could be taken to stimulate more of
this type of research.The development of appropriate mechanisms for funding and con-ducting research on the sociotechnical dimensions of IT systems will be a
significant challenge.  This work can build on some important founda-

tions, notably research on human-computer interactions and computer-
supported cooperative work. These existing research efforts are inher-
ently multidisciplinary in outlook because they are concerned with the
ways in which people relate to systems.  Experience to date in these areas

illustrates both the promise of social applications and the practical prob-
lems involved.  Multidisciplinary research is always problematic because

of the difficulties inherent in bridging the gaps separating different com-
munities of researchers.  Compounding these problems is the need im-

plied by the concept of social applications to engage not only established
researchers in other disciplines but also end users of IT systems who
understand the context in which IT systems operate and directly confront
problems of implementation, ease of use, performance, and operation.
Many end-user organizations have little or no history of conducting
research, especially IT-related research.  New mechanisms may thereforeMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144MAKING IT BETTERbe needed, and some ongoing activities are suggestive of the types ofstructures that may be effective.The discussion proceeds at a high level because it is intended to bridgeresearch themes each of which could justify detailed examination.  Such

examinations have been provided already by the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) in more focused assessments.  This

chapter points to that other work, which established an intellectual history
developed through separate engagements with segments of the research
community.  That this chapter echoes and amplifies ideas raised previously
is important enough to be acknowledged explicitly:  research ideas and

suggestions for how to make progress in the field either recur or linger
largely unaddressed because the problems are difficult, because the rec-
ommendations are aimed at subsets of the research community despite
broader relevance, and/or because there is a lack of readiness, whether
due to insufficient insight and understanding of the needs or inadequate
capabilities.  The committee recognizes that it has focused on difficult

problems but believes that the time is right to address them; its recom-
mendations are aimed at promoting both understanding and capability.SOCIAL APPLICATIONS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThanks in large part to networking, IT has become a factor in largeorganizational constructs, whether whole enterprises, groups of enter-
prises that interact in commerce, or the overarching mix of enterprises
and activities (economic and other) that constitute the nationÕs economyof social structure.  It also supports interactions among smaller groups of
uses (e.g., in chat rooms and discussion groups).  Information technology

stands poised to dramatically transform the way people live, work, and
play and the way organizations large and small conduct business.  With

continued research, development, and deployment, IT systems could enable
users to routinely access information of many types (text, images, video,
etc.) from any location, participate in continuing education programs from
the home or office, shop at their convenience, work from home rather
than commute to a central office, consult with medical practitioners
remotely, or access government services and receive government benefits
electronically.1As such, IT joins mass transportation and more traditional tele-communications (i.e., telephony, broadcast media) as a foundation for the
social interactions that form one basis of society, industry, and commerce
(Mitchell, 1996).  Those long-standing societal infrastructures
Ñtranspor-tation and telecommunicationsÑprofoundly affected aspects of society,contributing to the rise of suburbs, the globalization of industry, and the
decreasing isolation of political economies.  Similarly, networked IT is
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS145increasingly affecting society, as todayÕs debates about topics such astechnological literacy and the digital divide attest (Cairncross, 1997).
These issues are not necessarily unanticipatedÑone of the pioneers of theInternet, Leonard Kleinrock, recognized and wrote about some of these
challenges in 1974 (Kleinrock, 1974), but they have not been adequately
addressed by researchers in technology areas or other fields, and they are
growing in importance as IT becomes more pervasive in society.TodayÕs IT systems put a premium on the explicit consideration of thecontext (e.g., organizational, societal, or business) in which IT systems are
deployed and the organizational structures, human factors, and other
types of technology (e.g., transportation and materials transformation)
that are involved in completing a certain task.  In these social applications

of IT, computing, storage, and communications technologies are pro-

foundly influenced by the people involved, the choices they make, and
various aspects of human behavior in the design and implementation of
the system.  Such systems often display a host of other features that make

them especially challenging topics for research:¥They are often large in scale and high in complexity (see Chapter 3).¥They can be geographically distributed and vulnerable to mali-cious attacks or unintentional errors.¥They are often deployed and operated in an environment that islargely uncoordinated.¥They have critical requirements for availability and security, withthe potential for significant losses (financial, human, or otherwise) if they
fail.¥They include people and organizations, along with technology, asessential elements.¥They are deeply affected by social, economic, and political con-siderations, such as privacy, productivity, strategic business advantage,
national security, poverty, equitable access, and so on.¥Their design must take into consideration the human and organi-zational context in which the systems are deployed and the interactions
among people, organizations, and technology.Although the first four of these characteristics are common to manylarge-scale IT systems discussed in Chapter 3, the last three characteristics
are especially true of social applications and demand special attention.
Consider, for example, the systems used in e-commerce or air traffic con-
trol.  In both of these cases, the interactions among IT, people, and  orga-

nizational structures are fundamental to system performance.  The IT is

placed in an existing social and organizational environment in an attempt
to improve quality, productivity, speed, and other performance attributes.2Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146MAKING IT BETTEROverwhelmingly, the most important opportunities lie not in simply auto-mating existing applications, but rather in rethinking and remolding the
structure and organization of the business process to reflect the best uses
of IT and in redesigning and remolding the technology to make it most
valuable in its (rethought) application context.  The challenge is to 
rein-vent both the application and the supporting technology to make the com-
bination of technology and applications effective.  In business, this is

often called reengineering or 
transforming a business process, but the con-
cept applies to the full range of social applications of IT.Transformation requires a rethinking of the entire sociotechnical sys-tem, not just the IT portion.  Because most social applications involve

individuals, brought together in organizations, and technologies that relate
to the movement or alteration of materials or other physical items, a criti-
cal part of such a transformation is the identification of the capabilities
that each elementÑpeople, IT, and other technologiesÑmost beneficiallycontribute to the process, and the determination of how these elements
can best work together.  These processes are often constrained by com-

plex social and regulatory issues and must take into account a number of
nontechnical factors, such as capital budgets, work rules, skill sets, and
administrative organizations.  Nevertheless, the creative use of new IT

capabilities can result in new, transforming applications.  E-commerce,

for example, has given rise to electronic auctions.  The auction concept is

not new, of course; what is new is its application to the selling of common
goods and services, both new and used, and the participation of large
numbers of buyers and sellers in an electronic marketplace, with new
ways for individuals to research price and value and new ways to negoti-
ate.  Another example is air traffic control.  Advances in technology have
produced a fundamental change in the way these systems are conceptual-
ized and designed, moving away from a centralized command-and-control
model that controls all aspects of an aircraftÕs flight plan to a systemknown as free flight, which will give individual pilots greater autonomyÑand more information on which to base judgments (Wald, 2000).The changing nature of work is broadening the contexts in which ITmust operate.  Employees are no longer expected to sit at a single com-

puter in an assigned office to complete their work.  Even a simple applica-

tion to enter employee expense reports must be accessible via many dif-
ferent devices in different locations:  a desktop computer at work, a

desktop computer at home, a laptop computer or handheld devices when
traveling, and perhaps even a wireless phone.  If an organization cannot

offer remote access to IT services, it may limit the effectiveness of its staff.
As IT systems are used to manage more aspects of a business, the proper-
ties of the IT system and the behavior of employees become more tightly
interlinked.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS147IT-inspired transformations occur at all levels within organizations,as is evidenced in, for example, the flattening of traditional hierarchies,
globalization of many business organizations and activities, and emer-
gence of new classes of nomadic workers who are not even assigned
permanent offices.  As these trends demonstrate, the design of organiza-

tions is a matter of both people and IT, leveraging the strongest capabili-
ties of each (Walton, 1989). New methodologies are needed for the design
of enterprise applications that more deeply integrate the organizational
design and the IT system design. Such methodologies can be developed
only through collaborative research in the disciplines concerned, includ-
ing technology, industrial engineering, business, psychology, and others.
The challenges are compounded by the reality that all the information
systems that must work together in support of an organization or society
cannot be developed at once; rather, new elements are continually added
to an existing mix of legacy technologies and applications.  Capricious

organizational requirements, particularly in a competitive business con-
text, add another dimension to the challenge that has proven difficult to
overcome.Of course, IT has always been designed and used in one context oranother.  Even traditional applications (e.g., word processing) that could

be used on individual computers without networking or pursued inde-
pendently of other applications have had important interactions with job
definitions and human relationships within organizations.3  Social scien-tists studying such applications have reported on changes in status, hier-
archy, work flow, job design, job satisfaction, productivity, and so on, all
of which have contributed to ideas for enhancing early applications and
evolving new ones.4  Some of these ideas have contributed to computer
science in arenas such as human-computer interaction (HCI, which includes
the design of interfaces between people and systems and the design of
systems for computer-supported cooperative work), but compared to the
opportunities emerging now, those instances of interdisciplinary research
are too few and too isolated.5  The evolution of HCI is a promising indica-
tor that progress is possible if social applications are addressed through
IT research that draws on multiple disciplines:  the subdisciplines 
Òformintertwined roots in computer graphics, operating systems, human fac-
tors, ergonomics, industrial engineering, cognitive psychology, and the
systems part of computer scienceÓ and draw from 
Òsupporting knowl-edge on both the machine and the human sideÓ (ACM, 1992).
A much greater degree of interaction between IT applications andcontext is now possible.6  Interest in optimizing that interaction
Ñwhileaddressing issues of complexity and scaleÑcreates an imperative forexplicit and substantial attention to context in application design andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148MAKING IT BETTERimplementation, which, in turn, implies explicit and substantial attentionto the behavior of people as individuals and as members of groups.Great opportunities await progress in the sociotechnical systems thatunderlie IT, because such progress would enable far greater capabilities
than have yet been implemented in all existing feature sets and their
combinations.  The IT itself can be used more effectively
Ñand it can becombined better with people and their activities as they work, live, and
play.  The challenge is twofold:  (1) to reinvent social applications to

improve the combinations of behavior and IT with the aim of producing
better economic and social outcomes and (2) to invent new social applica-
tions that enhance the economy, culture, or quality of life.
7  Both processes
build on past experience with IT, which has demonstrated that tasks are
typically automated directly at first and subsequently reconceptualized
or reinvented to take better advantage of new technology.  Both processes

focus on the role of individual users and organizations as major players in
social applications.RESEARCH CHALLENGES IN SOCIAL APPLICATIONS OFINFORMATION TECHNOLOGYSocial applications of IT can motivate research on a range of questionsas broad as the applications themselves, with the questions reflecting the
particular circumstances in which specific applications are deployed.
Some social applications are associated with a given industry or industry
sector (e.g., online stock trading systems or flight reservations systems),
some cut across the economy (e.g., business-to-business e-commerce sys-
tems), and others are specific to a particular organization or function.
Despite the fact that it is motivated by applications, the research that
results from an examination of social applications can be highly funda-
mental, in that it requires investigations into, and the development of,
basic IT capabilities that are widely applicable to a wide range of systems.
The research also tends to be highly interdisciplinary, drawing on the
expertise of people in the IT and social science communities, as well as
end users who understand the way systems are used in different indus-
tries and functions.Despite their diversity, the social applications of IT tend to have incommon a set of elements that support (1) group interaction, (2) knowledge
management, (3) commerce, and (4) control and coordination.  Although

some social applications of IT emphasize one or another of these ele-
ments, they usually emphasize at least two (Box 4.1).  Each of these types
of functionality presents a set of interesting research challenges.  An

examination of each one will provide a sampling of the types of problemsMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS149BOX 4.1Social Applications of Information Technology:Examples and Features¥Electronic commerceÑBusiness-to-business procurement of goods andservices involves the capture and presentation of large amounts of information onavailable goods and services (knowledge-based features); negotiation of termsand conditions for sale and fulfillment between purchasing agents in one organiza-
tion and sales agents in another organization (group-based features); periodicordering and shipment of, and payment for, goods and services in accordance withthose terms and conditions (commerce-based features); infrastructure supporting
payments by credit card or bank transfer (control-based features), and post-salesupport (group-based features).¥Delivery of government servicesÑGovernment tax-collection applicationsinvolve the gathering and assimilation of data from throughout the economy(knowledge-based features); conveying of tax returns with tax payments(commerce-based features); infrastructure supporting payments and refunds
(control-based features); and interactions among tax agents, citizens, and accoun-tants in dealing with exceptional cases (group-based features).¥Manufacturing designÑComputer-aided automotive design involves largerepositories of design information (knowledge-based features), coordination ofconcurrent design activities distributed over global design centers (control-basedfeatures), and collaboration of the designers (group-based features).¥Air traffic controlÑAir traffic control systems are critical infrastructures thatcombine the coordination of planes and airport facilities (control-based features)with the collaboration of pilots and air controllers (group-based features) and infor-mation on aircraft type, flight plans and carriers, weather, and so on (knowledge-based features).  Air traffic control uses information technology of increasing

sophistication to reduce the incidence of human error and extend human controllercapabilities to manage a volume of air traffic.that could be addressed if social applications were to play a more signifi-cant role in motivating IT research.Group ApplicationsAn important feature of social applications and their context is thatthey involve people as members of groups.  With networking, computing

moves from enhancing the productivity of individuals in tasks they per-
form alone to supporting the needs and enhancing the productivity or
social interactions of groups of people, or helping people find other, like-
minded peopleÑa class of applications called group applications in thisMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150MAKING IT BETTERreport.  Group-based elements support activities, including interaction or
collaboration, among groups of individual users.  Individuals and groups

can now publish and manage information, literally on a global scale, as
illustrated by many of the well-known Internet applications, such as elec-
tronic mail (e-mail), discussion forums, and the World Wide Web.  But the

Web affords comparatively static, passive information sharing with rela-
tively little accommodation for variation in individual capabilities or pref-
erences.  To improve on this technology
Ñand support a wider range ofinteractionsÑresearchers must delve into group dynamics and inter-action, human learning and cognition, human impairments, and other
variations on these themes and how they might be supported by IT.  Such

research depends on insight from psychology and sociology as well as
computer science and electrical engineering.  It also depends on insight

from specific domains that may shape real-world contexts:  for example,

different requirements will be associated with groups engaged in routine
teaching and learning as opposed to groups collaborating on responses to
natural disasters, when one can expect extreme variations in available
technology, skill sets, responsibilities, and work environments and where
crisis conditions affect needs for the type, delivery rate, and comprehensi-
bility of information gathered, analyzed, and shared (CSTB, 1996, 1999).Knowledge ManagementKnowledge-based elements support the capture, retrieval, and manipu-lation of 
knowledge, typically drawing on massive collections of informa-tion.   Although more and more data are being generated or recorded in

networked computers, finding essential information is increasingly diffi-
cult.  As the nation shifts from an industrial to an information economy

(Shapiro and Varian, 1998), the role of physical assets as a source of com-
petitive advantage is diminishing.  To see the role that knowledge is

playing in the economy, one need look no further than stock market valu-
ations of Internet start-ups that have negligible physical assets but consid-
erable intellectual property.  The acquisition or discovery of knowledge

(which is derived from information), plus the strategic management and
exploitation of that knowledgeÑa process called knowledge manage-mentÑare therefore an increasing focus of many companies, both newand established (OÕLeary, 1998).8  The goal is to be able to find, under-
stand, and use the massive amounts of information and knowledge that
reside within an enterprise.Tools for searching for information remain frustratingly poor.  Whileit may seem easy enough for people to express their information needs to
one another, computer retrieval techniques are unable to filter out a large
number of useless search results.  To counter the technology shortcomings,
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS151organizations today manage knowledge using a combination of peopleand computers.  Much as a library contains books that record informa-

tion, as well as librarians to organize and index it, computers are used to
store and transmit information but are able to organize and index only
data that have a precise, logical structure.  Managing knowledge that is

encoded as expository text is largely beyond todayÕs IT capabilities.Historically, IT contributed to information management throughsystems for collecting and storing information (i.e., databases), finding
and retrieving it (i.e., information retrieval), and processing online trans-
actions.  These systems provided experience with the types of functions

that people now want to extend, combine, and enhance in new and more
powerful ways.  Data warehousing, which captures a historical record of

an entire enterpriseÕs transactions, and data mining, which attempts toanalyze data to identify hidden trends and correlations, represent the
current state of the art in knowledge discovery and management.  For the

most part, knowledge discovery and management strain current IT.Distributed transaction databases with properties such as automaticload balancing and historical archiving have been suggested, but they are
beyond the current state of the art.9  In addition, end users are beginningto recognize that knowledge management projects require as much social
science as computer science because the systems must serve the evolving
mission needs of their users.  According to some industry analysts, data

warehousing projects fail more often for organizational reasons than for
technical ones (Deck, 1999).CommerceCommerce-based elements support the interaction of organizations(including businesses, government entities, and universities) with other
organizations and with individuals, whether consumers, citizens and tax-
payers, or students.  Today
Õs most obvious example is e-commerce, thebuying and selling of goods and services, especially among organiza-
tions.  Business-to-business applications of IT have expanded dramati-

cally from straightforward replacement of paper documentation (such as
purchase orders and invoices) in electronic data interchange and elec-
tronic bank-to-bank wiring of funds, both of which have been in use for
some time.  In the emerging model, IT is integrated into all business-to-

business operational activities except for the flow of material goods.  This

new e-commerce (Keen and Balance, 1997) includes activities such as elec-
tronic money management (direct transfers of money in electronic forms
between businesses), electronic business logistics (coordination of suppli-
ers and customers) and supply chain management (integration of busi-
ness processes across businesses with supplier/customer relationships).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152MAKING IT BETTERMost of these activities also apply to nonbusiness organizations, such asgovernment entities involved in procurement, tax collection, licensing
fees, and so on.The development of Internet-based e-commerce has important impli-cations for IT and related research.  First, it has amplified the role of

information about individuals as an element of business strategy and
therefore of knowledge management.  Now IT is being used to collect and

analyze information about individuals as actual or potential customersÑinformation that can be used for product design, marketing, and cus-
tomer service.  The result is a predictable tension between those inter-

ested in the commercial exploitation of information about individuals
and those concerned about protecting privacy (Diffie and Landau, 1997).
New questions are being asked:  Who knows what about whom?  Who

owns information about individuals?  Who is authorized to use that infor-

mation and for what purposes?  These concerns are related to those

surrounding the protection of intellectual property in a digital environ-
ment.10  Second, as illustrated by the growing attention to privacy as well
as the concerns about reliability, dependability, and trustworthiness dis-
cussed in Chapter 3, government entities are scrutinizing the nature and
use of IT in e-commerce.  The result may well involve a combination of

voluntary industry actions and government-mandated actions to promote
or avoid certain uses of IT, which would have implications for system
design and implementation constraints.  One certain result would be a

further change in the nature and impact of government, whichÑlike busi-nesses and other organizationsÑis itself affected by the use of IT.11Finally, e-commerce is redefining the business processes that spantraditional administrative and organizational boundaries (Davenport,
1993) and altering the relationships among organizations.12  Even before
the commercialization of the Internet, industry witnessed a strong trend
away from vertical integration and toward more specialized or horizon-
tally diversified firms, driven in part by lower coordination and trans-
action costs enabled by IT.  There is speculation about the prospects for

consolidation and concentration.  The equilibrium boundary of a firm is

largely set by the relationship between internal and external transaction
and coordination costs, and those costs are being profoundly influenced
by IT (Grenier and Metes, 1996).  Furthermore, the judicious application

of new IT can greatly influence these boundaries and the efficiency of the
economy as a wholeÑanother area deserving of research.Coordination and ControlControl- or coordination-based features support the coordination oflarge numbers of distributed elementsÑoften a combination of techno-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS153logical, informational, and humanÑin achieving the reliable operation ofa large-scale system.  They are especially prevalent in infrastructure sys-

tems that perform critical support functions for society as a whole, such as
the systems used in utilities (electric, gas, telephone, and networking),
finance (electronic funds transfer and auction markets), and transporta-
tion (air and rail networks).  These systems place extreme requirements

on features such as reliability and trustworthiness (see Chapter 3).  Many
require real-time operation and decision making, some of which will be
done in consultation with users and some of which must occur automati-
cally.  The specific needs, and the ways in which these needs are met, are
closely tied to the nature of the application.  For example, security prac-

tices limiting access to a system may need to incorporate different over-
ride features depending, for example, on whether the system is being
used to transfer funds between banks or to allow a doctor emergency
access to a patientÕs medical record.Common ChallengesDespite the diversity in social applications and the IT systems thatsupport them, there are common elements, and they can motivate research
that could inform the development of all such systems.  Obviously, the

broader the range of applications that benefit from particular technologi-
cal and methodological innovations, the greater the overall value of the
research.  This is an argument for focusing a large portion of IT research

on highly generic problems, such as the following:¥Social trustÑHow can people communicating with strangers inelectronic communities know who is trustworthy and who is not?¥Coordinating expertiseÑHow can systems and procedures make iteasier to elicit and coordinate the expertise of individuals, whether they
are doing system development or participating in discussion groups?¥Personal privacy and identityÑHow can systems and proceduresmake it easier for people to disclose as much as, but no more than, they
wish about their identity and personal information in online contexts?¥AgencyÑHow can people better instruct IT systems to make deci-sions on their behalf, e.g., to coordinate calendars and to process and
route messages (such as e-mail, faxes, and voice messages)?¥Community and collaborationÑHow can IT better support the activi-ties of groups of individuals seeking to communicate and collaborate
more effectively?¥Knowledge contentÑHow can the collection of, access to, and extrac-tion of value from vast amounts of information be made more effective?Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154MAKING IT BETTERHow can these tasks be better distributed among people and systems ofdifferent types?¥Business processesÑHow are repetitive, ongoing activities that meeta business goal best organized around technology, and how is technology
best organized around such processes?  Can common elements or strate-

gies be used?¥SecurityÑHow can researchers rethink IT to reduce the vulnerabil-ity of the infrastructure, applications, and people to various risks and
system failures?¥Operations and administrationÑHow can IT be designed for enhancedoperation and administration, particularly in a world in which many
applications need to interoperate with other applications and across orga-
nizational and political boundaries?¥Development methodologiesÑHow can software applications be devel-oped 
more effectively, with the goal of improving outcomes in terms ofmeeting application needs for functionality, interoperability with other
applications, and the flexibility to change in the future?All of these issues are common to a number of different applications,and all are receiving attention today by researchers in disciplines such as
computer science and engineering, information management and science,
the social sciences (particularly economics, psychology, and sociology),
and business.  However, this attention often has too narrow a disciplinary

focus.  Research in these areas would benefit from a multidisciplinary

approach because it pays more attention to application contexts and could
define new issues and requirements to inform the research.System-Specific ResearchIn addition to research in generic areas of concern such as those listedabove, IT research can address more specific application contexts as well.
The purpose, again, is to inform the research on IT by considering realistic
needs and contexts, with the goal of molding the technology to be more
powerful, effective, and secure.13  There are important reasons for doing
this.  First, any particular area of technological research is more critical to

some applications than to others.  Some applications stress a particular

facet of technology.  By identifying and studying the applications that are

most challenging, the IT research outcomes can have a broader and greater
impact.  Second, researchers pursuing generic technological concerns tend

to ignore interactions with other concerns or miss opportunities to address
different areas of concern with more holistic solutions.  The only practical

way to appreciate a full range of issues and how they interact with and
buttress one another is to look at the whole problem in specific applica-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS155tion contexts.  Finally, as the application domain of research narrows, the
impact of technology improvements to that application domain are likely
to be greater.As an example, consider the IT research objective Ògreater flexibilityto meet changing needs.Ó Can flexibility be addressed generically?  Cer-
tainly, as outlined in Chapter 3, and indeed it is worthwhile to search for
general approaches and principles.  But it is also worthwhile to first iden-

tify more specifically what sort of flexibility is needed, as informed by
particular applications domains.  Does flexibility imply the merging of

information systems when firms merge?  Does it mean adding new appli-

cations to a mix and ensuring that those new applications are inter-
operable with the old?  Does it mean adding features or modifying the

features of existing applications?  Does it mean layering new applications

on top of old ones?  Are there other options to explore?  To what extent is

the definition of flexibility itself flexible?  By examining particular appli-

cation domains, researchers can answer such questions with greater speci-
ficity, and the results may be more immediately useful.  At the same time,

of course, the results become less generally applicable; yet it is often pos-
sible to generalize from the specific case studied to a broader range of
similar cases.An essential part of research on the social applications of IT is build-ing and deploying experimental systems.  Often the utility of an applica-

tion cannot be predicted by its designers or by past experience.  For many

IT applications, the task is more like one of industrial product design than
business process reengineering.  Standards for IT research need to acknowl-

edge 
emerging social effects, not focus exclusively on the technology.  The
World Wide Web, for example, is based on extant technologies for docu-
ment management and hypertext, but the unique combination of these
technologies addressed a social need (to publish and communicate) with
a power that could not have been predicted from previous experience
with the technologies.CONDUCTING RESEARCH ON SOCIAL APPLICATIONSA Plausible ApproachResearch that addresses the social applications of IT would need totarget applications that serve groups of users, organizations (including
government, businesses, and others), the citizenry at large, and critical
infrastructure systems.  Examples include the following:
¥GroupsÑCollaboration, political activism, battlefield management,community development;Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156MAKING IT BETTER¥OrganizationsÑTax collection, census collection, military logistics,e-commerce;¥CitizensÑThe political process (polling and voting, citizen involve-ment in decision making), continuing education, entertainment, cultural
opportunities; and¥Critical infrastructureÑTransportation and communication net-works, intelligence gathering, nuclear power, and financial markets.The research would not only address todayÕs nascent social applica-tions (such as e-commerce) but also explore visionary new possibilities
that are unimagined today or even unimaginable owing to their scale and
complexity.  Much of this research would aim for visionary and revolu-

tionary advances through the creative application of technology.  Some

research would work from the bottom up, envisioning the potential capa-
bilities of technologies and identifying new opportunities that exploit
those capabilities.  Other research would work from the top down, catego-

rizing the major challenges experienced in the world today or tomorrowthat might be overcome by the creative application of existing and new
technology.  The research would aim to enhance the positive effects of IT

while identifying and minimizing its negative effects.14Similar to systems research, which needs to pursue both case researchand methodology research (as discussed in Chapter 3), research on social
applications would need to pursue both case research and generic
research.  Case research would identify target application areas such as

Òdigital democracyÓ (i.e., public participation in collective decision mak-
ing) and address the role IT could play in them.  Such research would also

seek new mechanisms for the political process and supporting technolo-
gies.  Generic research addresses issues such as group dynamics, decision

making, collaboration, enjoyment and satisfaction, and competition and
looks at how they apply to and can be mediated in social applications.
Generic research could also address how technology can be molded to
help in balancing economic benefits to organizations against the rights or
quality of life of individuals.  An important example of a generic research

topic is privacy; research would attempt to define what privacy entails in
different contexts and identify technological means to control the degree
of privacy as a function of circumstance and objectives.Outcomes of the research into the social applications of IT could beevaluated in terms of criteria such as (1) the extent to which society and
organizations benefit more from technological progress than they would
otherwise, with respect to whatever dimensions make sense in context
(e.g., productivity, quality, or effectiveness), (2) the extent to which the
negative consequences of technological progress are avoided or mitigated,
and (3) the extent to which technology is influenced by beneficial long-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS157term, visionary ideas rather than being simply the result of incrementalimprovements and near-term commercial exploitation.Research of the sort suggested in this chapter would help society reapthe rewards of Òlearning by doingÓ and would accelerate that process. It
would help researchers recognize patterns in their results and develop
new theories and would enable them to select better research targets and
exploit their work more effectively.  The new approach to research would

take nothing away from the tried-and-true work that continues to offer
many benefits; it would be an additional, complementary asset in the
overall production system.New Research TeamsThe tight linkages between the technical and nontechnical compo-nents of sociotechnical systems mean that effective research will have to
draw on a broad range of constituencies, much as work in civil engineer-
ing is influenced by architects, urban planners, and transportation engi-
neers (Box 4.2).  Technology researchers, social scientists, and domain

experts will have to work together to identify and solve problems related
to the social applications of IT.To date, research on the social applications of IT has tended to fallinto one of four categories:¥Research on IT systems addressing generic issues of technology,informed (it is hoped) by a knowledge of application needs and address-
ing a broad swath of application contexts rather than focusing on a single
context (examples include many of the issues mentioned in Chapter 3,
such as security, administration, and flexibility);¥Applications research that addresses a specific context, trying tosee how existing technologies can provide value to that application and
how that application context (such as an organization) can be reorganized
around IT technologies;¥Software engineering research that explores generic techniques fordeveloping and deploying new IT-based applications; examples include
the processes involved in understanding the application context, translat-
ing this understanding into requirements and specifications, implement-
ing the applications, measuring and refining their behavior, deploying
the application, training users, and supporting the deployed application
and its users; and¥Social science research that explores how people undertake differ-ent activities and exercise their different physical and mental abilities to
engage IT and other resources and research that explores how people
adapt the structure of organizations and activities in response to the intro-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158MAKING IT BETTERBOX 4.2Social Applications of Technology in the Construction IndustryThe interplay among civil engineering, architecture, transportation engineering,and urban planning demonstrates the multiple influences that impinge on social
applications of technology, in a setting that many people find somewhat morefamiliar than the information technology (IT) industry.  As such, the construction
industry provides a useful illustration of the direction in which IT is heading.Civil engineers are adept at achieving cost-effective structures based on well-specified plans provided by an architect.  The architect is adept at generating
those plans by understanding the local conditions and environment and interview-
ing future occupants of the building about their needs and wishes.  But neither of
these professionals can work in isolation.  Their work relates to both transportation
engineering and to land-use planning, and it is not difficult to see that isolated
decisions by architects and civil engineers can have unintended consequences inone of those domains, perhaps interrupting traffic patterns or altering the characterof a neighborhood.  Local interests, which may be expressed in plans for a given

structure, can be varied, but they must be aggregated for purposes of transporta-tion and land-use planning decisions.The construction process is clearly complicated by the involvement of three orfour professions with distinct cultures and perspectives.  However, this is one arena
in which there is a history of interaction and a comparatively mature legal andpolitical environment that impinges on the engineering activity, whichÑuntil therecent advent of intelligent transportation systems and the prospect of smarthomes, thanks to progress in ITÑhas itself been comparatively mature and stablefor a long time.duction of IT. This category includes the classical social science disci-plines themselvesÑe.g., psychology, social psychology, sociology, andanthropology.Clearly, a great deal of valuable research can be performed in thesefour categories.  Much of the research agenda discussed in Chapter 3 can

be cast into the first category, as can the research into component tech-
nologies that can and should be pursued (discussed in Chapter 1).  Much
of the research carried out in social-science-based disciplines, such as
information and library sciences and business, can be cast into the second
and fourth categories.  A modest amount of research (in comparison to

the size of the challenges) has been conducted in the third category.  It has

been pursued most notably by organizations such as the Software Engi-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS159neering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University and some academic com-puter science departments.Each of the four kinds of research has limitations if it becomes the solelens through which to examine the social applications of IT.  Because

social applications of IT link technology so tightly to people and organiza-
tions, a more integrative approach is needed.  In the technology arena, IT
is subject to few physical limits, so it can be molded in many different
ways.  To consider the technology in isolation is to miss opportunities to

mold it in directions that make it more useful.  Similarly, because a great

deal of research in application areas takes the current observed state of
technology as a given, it misses opportunities to think about ways in
which the technology could be different that would make it much more
useful.  One of the great unsolved problems is how, as a part of software

application conceptualization and development, to take into account the
rich interaction between the application context and the architectural
assumptions in the software application, as well as the issues of legacy
technology and applications and changing requirements.  This last chal-

lenge clearly embodies the consideration of technology (as it is and as it
could be) in conjunction with a deep understanding of the context.There is tremendous potential for expanded research agendas thatfall between these categories and combine multiple perspectives into a
more cohesive, holistic view.  Research that examines the impact of IT on
society and the economy is certainly needed, but equally important is
research on the impact that application contexts have on IT development
and software development methodologies as a part of the larger process
of application conceptualization and refinement.  New science and engi-

neering may arise from such research.  The discussion in this report

emphasizes research in which the goal is to refine the IT itself, often in
conjunction with meeting application needs more effectively.  Impact

remains an important issue, but there is an explicit goal of modifying the
technology to maximize the beneficial impacts and mitigate the adverse
ones.Who is in the best position to make contributions to IT as informed byapplicationsÑespecially the social applications of ITÑand how can researchon this topic best be organized?  The most effective researchers will have

an understanding of the potential of IT, both what might be possible
technically as well as what has already been achieved, as well as an under-
standing of the application context.  In general, opportunities for advancing

application areas using existing technologies are best addressed by 
applica-tion domain experts who have acquired a fairly substantial understand-
ing of the technology.  (There are certainly opportunities for technology

experts to participate in this research in consulting roles, but such partici-
pation is generally not greeted with enthusiasm.)  The use of application
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160MAKING IT BETTERdomains to inspire technology is a role predominantly for technologyresearchers who inform themselves about the characteristics and chal-
lenges inherent in particular problem domains.  Such knowledge can be

gained in at least two ways:  (1) by working directly with the end users

(individuals and organizations) in that application domain or (2) by col-
laborating with researchers who have the appropriate domain exper-
tise or expertise in disciplines directly relevant to the domain.Where the goal is to advance both the technologies and the ways ofaddressing application domain challenges, interdisciplinary research col-
laboration is generally needed.  Although some degree of collaboration

has always been necessary, the need for it is growing quickly, driven by
the availability of the Internet, the proliferation of IT applications in con-
sumer and other layperson contexts, and the rapid expansion of social
applications of IT generally.  These trends also argue for substantially

expanding the involvement of end users in setting the research agendas
and articulating the goals and constraints of the research, for it is the end
users who experience the opportunities and challenges in an immediate
and detailed fashion. Although several programs have been established
to bring together the diverse set of stakeholders needed to make progress
on social applications of IT, it is increasingly apparent that a broader and
more substantial effort is needed that uses multiple mechanisms to stimu-
late the type of research that will make significant progress.  There are

many practical barriers to the desired intellectual cross-fertilization, but
mechanisms exist for overcoming them, as outlined in the next section.MECHANISMS FOR SOCIAL APPLICATIONS RESEARCHParticipation of End-User OrganizationsTo date, end-user organizations have relied largely on their vendorsto perform long-term research in IT.  Vendor research, which emphasizes

components, needs to continue unabated if rapid advances in the speed
and capacity of IT are to be maintained.  However, when it comes to

research that affects the uses of IT, the constituencies who understand
and benefit from those usesÑthat is, end-user organizationsÑmust par-ticipate.  These organizations include (1) companies that are strongly

dependent on IT, including firms in almost all industries but especially
those in business and financial services and online commerce; (2) suppliers
of enterprise software used to automate major processes for corporations,
universities, and government agencies; (3) application developers that
develop customized software for large companies and government
agencies; and (4) systems integrators that integrate major infrastructureMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS161components (hardware and software) to meet the needs of large-scaleapplications.End users also include government agencies that depend heavily onIT systemsÑespecially those that have considerable difficulty deployingsuch systems effectively.  This group includes both traditional federal

supporters of IT researchÑthe Department of Defense, the National Sci-ence Foundation, the Department of Energy, and the National Aeronautics
and Space AdministrationÑas well as agencies that have a more limitedhistory of supporting research on IT, such as the Internal Revenue Service,

the Social Security Administration , and the Federal Aviation Administra-
tion.  All parts of the government are increasingly dependent on IT.  In

FY00, federal agencies were budgeted to spend more than $34 billion on
IT systems, up more than $1 billion over FY99.15  Information technology
is used both to run the back offices that store data and record transactions
and to interact with citizens doing business with the government.  Argu-

ably, the funding of basic IT research directly supports the missions of
these agencies (Wulf, 1999).  If new IT developments can increase the

effectiveness of these functions or reduce their cost, then the nation as a
whole will benefit.The greater participation of end-user organizations in IT researchcould have numerous benefits.  First, these organizations can bring sub-

stantive intellectual insight to the research process.  Research on social

applications of IT demands an understanding of the ways in which IT is
deployed in different organizations, the missions it supports, the require-
ments it must meet, and the problems that are experienced.  Such insight

can come only from end-user organizations that work with such systems
routinely and can foresee the ways in which such systems might be used
in the future.  Recognition of the benefits of researcher access to real

systems in situ is not new.  The CSTB, for example, first recommended

such access in 1989 in a report that provided recommendations for
research on complex software systems.  The participants at the time noted

that the problems identified dated back to the 1960s, and a reading today
suggests that many of the same problems persist now in software engi-
neering and related research (see Box 4.3).Second, end-user organizations could contribute funding, therebyexpanding the financial base for research related to IT.  Such an expansion

is necessary if research motivated by social applications is to grow with-
out crowding out existing research on components.  The well-publicized

and expensive failures of IT in end-user organizations also make a com-
pelling case for the expansion of research funding from all sources, includ-
ing the government.  Finally, end-user organizations will insist (appropri-

ately) that the research have an identifiable impact on the problems they
experience.  Thus, their involvement will focus the research community
ÕsMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162MAKING IT BETTERBOX 4.3Excerpts fromScaling Up:  A Research Agenda for Software Engineering
Short-Term Actions:  Foster Practitioner and Researcher Interactions
¥ÒThere is little academic investigation of the practices, techniques, or prob-lems out in the field today.  To rectify this situation, greater interaction among

researchers and practitioners is needed. . . .Ó¥ÒThat academic computer scientists do not often study large software sys-tems and the process of developing them is one reason that practitioners often feel
that the issues studied by academia do not adequately address the problems andchallenges. . . .Ó¥ÒAcademics do not study large systems because they do not have them orhave access to them. . . .Ó¥ÒThe disparity in perspective and exposure. . . hinders U.S. progress indeveloping complex software systems.ÓLong-Term Actions:  Legitimize Academic Exploration of Large Software
Systems¥ÒAcademic investigation of research topics based on problems encounteredin the Ôreal worldÕ by software developers could help. . . .
Ó¥ÒFunding is a major consideration. . . . [It] is difficult to study large systemscost-effectively.Ó¥ÒOne way to get around some of the difficulties of studying large systems incorporate settings would be to facilitate the study of large systems in governmentsettings. . . .ÓGlean Insights from Behavioral and Managerial Sciences¥ÒThere is a need to better understand how groups of people collaborate inlarge projects. . . .ÓSOURCE:  Computer Science and Technology Board (1989), pp. 19-21.
attention on social applications of IT to a much greater extent than wouldotherwise be expected.Engaging end users more directly in IT research will not be easy.Many cultural differences must be bridged, and practical issues in the
management of research must be resolved.  A sociotechnical systems per-

spective on any large-scale IT in context requires the identification andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS163analysis of human and organizational shortcomings as well as technicalones.  It is difficult to gain access to organizations, let alone financial

support, for projects that are likely to identify human shortcomings (as
well as technical ones) and publish them in the open literature.  Organiza-

tions may pay consultants for such work already, but contractual terms of
nondisclosure guarantee that the findings will not be subject to the scru-
tiny of peer review and will not become general knowledge.  Further-

more, because end users and systems integrators have not been actively
engaged in IT research, few have any internal research capacity or ability
to manage outside research and ensure its quality and relevance.  Conse-

quently, they may be unable (at least at first) to participate effectively in
the conduct of research.  If research is conducted by parties outside the

organizations, mechanisms will be needed to ensure that the research will
benefit the end-user community and influence actual practices.  Researchers

themselves will need active and ongoing contacts with end-user organi-
zations to gain hands-on experience with real issues and problems and
the ability to validate their ideas empirically in realistic environments.One approach would be for end-user organizations to pool theirresources and fund external research related to their interests, whether at
universities or industrial research labs, or in consortia established expressly
for this purpose.  This approach has been used by IT firms to support

research of mutual interest through organizations such as SEMATECH,
the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, the Semi-
conductor Research Corporation, and others (see Box 4.4).  Such arrange-
ments have produced mixed results to date; their success depends on
many factors, including the ability of the member organizations to agree
on a set of issues to address, the leadership of the consortia, and the
quality of the researchers (many are drawn from member companies).
When this model is used for research on the social applications of IT, the
mechanisms for transferring technology back to the end users could be a
problem.  There is ample evidence that before they can benefit from

research consortia, firms must have their own research and development
(R&D) operations in place.  Professor Wes Cohen of Carnegie Mellon

University has referred to this characteristic as Òabsorptive capacity.ÓConsortia in e-commerce or medical informatics, for example, would not
succeed if banks or health maintenance organizations did not have their
own internal research operations under way.Accordingly, one element of a larger strategy would be to try toincrease the amount of direct R&D conducted by firms that use IT sys-
tems. Many an applied research organization leverages external research
outcomesÑwhether funded by that organization or notÑfor internal ben-efit.  These organizations could be involved in choosing the recipients of

research funding.  Importantly, they have experience in identifying inter-
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164MAKING IT BETTERBOX 4.4Models for Pooling Information Technology ResearchCompanies in the information technology (IT) industry have at times joinedforces to fund research that will aid the entire industry.  The examples below could

serve as models for end-user organizations to pursue as they increase their partici-pation in IT-related research.¥Semiconductor manufacturing technology (SEMATECH)ÑThis consortiumallies 13 leading manufacturers of semiconductor devices from seven countries topursue advances in semiconductor fabrication equipment.  Established in 1987,

SEMATECH was originally supported by equal funding from its member com-panies and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency but ended its reli-ance on federal funding in 1997.  It has funded research on advanced technologies

for fabricating semiconductors, including lithography, packaging, testing, design,materials, and interconnect technologies.¥Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (MCC)ÑThis orga-nization provides research and development (R&D) services in electronics and IT.Its fundamental business is consortia R&D, in which members define and partici-pate in highly leveraged R&D projects that meet their strategic business require-
ments.  MCC members are eligible to participate in the projects and fund only
those projects of most interest to them.  Each participant receives a royalty-free,
unrestricted license to intellectual property resulting from a project, meaning that
each can use new technologies internally and/or commercialize them.  As of 1999,
the MCC had 17 members and 4 foreign project participants.¥Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC)ÑThis organization sponsorsbasic, precompetitive university research related to integrated circuit technology.It pools funding from industrial members and leverages federal and state govern-
ment support of key research programs.  The funding terms for contracts vary;
however, the trend is toward multiyear research efforts (typically 3 years) with aninitial 12-month funding term.  At the end of the multiyear period, the researchers

may compete again for new support.  The SRC supports two types of research
Ñcore and custom.  Core research is funded from the pool of SRC member funds
and constitutes most of the portfolio.  Custom research is funded by a single

company and represents 10 to 14 percent of the portfolio.  As of April 2000, SRC
had 40 members from industry and government and was funding work at 67 U.S.universities.nal problems and challenges worthy of research, and also in identifyingindividuals who can convey those challenges to external researchers.  In

other words, they are matchmakers, putting together internal and external
resources and facilitating access to internal facilities for empirical research
activities.  Such organizations can also be vehicles for ensuring that the

research project is chosen in consultation with organizations well versedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS165in this process.  Government agencies, for example, could enlist the aid of
federal agencies that are experienced in funding IT research, such as the
NSF, DOE, NASA, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA).The federal government is attempting to forge stronger links betweenthe IT research community and end users in federal agencies.  The Digital

Government program, for example, uses the NSF as an intermediary to
fund IT research addressing the medium- to long-term R&D and experi-
mental deployment needs of federal agencies.16  The program requires at
least one government agency to be Òsignificantly involved in defining andexecuting the researchÓ and requires recipients of grants to integrate intotheir projects experts in domains that are primarily or exclusively associ-
ated with government.  Agencies are encouraged to share facilities, data,

or personnel with the researchers and/or to provide funding either directly
or jointly with the NSF.17  Although the program is new and small (approxi-
mately $3 
million was allocated to it in FY00), it has succeeded in attract-ing a number of proposals that involve a range of federal agencies with
little or no experience in funding IT research.18  However, many projects
reflect the agenciesÕ interests in developing software and systems to meet
particular near-term needs and their desire to examine different tech-
nological solutions to determine which offers the best combination of
features.  NSF program managers hope to create a research culture in

federal agencies that will promote longer-term research and facilitate the
agenciesÕ adoption of new technologies once the research is completed,
but this process will take time.  Mechanisms may be needed to demon-

strate the feasibility and applicability of new technologies to help agen-
cies better evaluate their risks and benefits (Larry Brandt, NSF, ÒThe NSFDigital Government Research Program,Ó presentation to the committee,
June 14, 1999).Another attempt to strengthen linkages between researchers and end-user organizations is IBM CorporationÕs First-of-a-Kind (FOAK) program.19The FOAK program, initiated in 1995, links IBMÕs Research Division withits industry solution units (ISUs) to apply innovative technologies to real
customer problems.  The idea is to do research in the marketplace as well

as in IBMÕs laboratories so that customers can gain access to innovativetechnologies, researchers can get early marketplace feedback and insight
into the applications of new technologies, and the ISUs get solution assets
that could be reused to solve other, similar customer problems.  By choos-

ing the appropriate customer problem to work on, researchers hope they
can generate solutions that are general enough to solve other customer
problems not only in the same industry segment but also in other
segments.The FOAK projects are jointly funded, implemented, and adminis-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166MAKING IT BETTERtered by IBM Research and the ISUs.  Starting in 2000, IBM created a new
review board for the program that draws members from the Research
Division and IBMÕs Global Industries Division.  Managers have also
emphasized the need for a lead person who is responsible for driving the
resulting innovations into the marketplace.  Leaders in several divisions

(e.g., Global Services, Lotus, and Sofware) have championed proposals
and sponsored project teams in two of the divisions (Research and Global
Industries).  These teams work with ISUs and business partners, who

bring domain expertise and marketing experience to the effort.Roughly 25 percent of IBMÕs research budget is dedicated to the FOAKprogram.  Since the program started in late 1995, more than 80 projects

have been funded.  Of these, more than half have been successfully com-

pleted and their outcomes deployed in the marketplace (either as a prod-
uct or as part of a solution).  About 15 percent of the projects were termi-

nated, either because they could not get a customer commitment or failed
to achieve key project milestones.  As of April 2000, the program had

about nine active projects and was driving considerable patent activity.
Many researchers were skeptical in the beginning (ÒWhat do you mean,work on real customer problems?Ó), but most have come to view theprogram as valuable to their long-term research.  By engaging early on

with real customers in the marketplace, researchers have been able to gain
early insight into the value and application of their technology and into
future directions for their research.  Successfully deployed systems include

an Internet-based electronic ticketing system for Swiss Railway, a set of
sophisticated pattern-matching algorithms used to discover molecular
relationships in the process of new drug development, a continuous
speech recognition system for radiological transcriptions at Massachu-
setts General Hospital and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Insti-
tute, and a mail analyzer that allows customers to automatically queue
problem reports.Industry Internships and SabbaticalsAnother means of increasing the linkages between industry end usersand academic researchers is industry internships and sabbaticals.  Such

programs can help ensure that academic researchers develop an under-
standing of the challenges faced by end-user organizations (and vendors)
in designing, developing, deploying, and operating IT systems.  Of course,

many students who graduate with advanced degrees in IT go to work in
industry or government IT settings; in that sense, the university perspec-
tive is introduced into industry every time a student is hired.  Internships

in industry before students graduate could add real value, particularly if
students select thesis topics that focus on some aspect of a real-world ITMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS167problem or social application.  Work in the social applications of IT, in
particular, would benefit from greater cross-fertilization between indus-
try and academia, because it could provide academic researchers with
access to large-scale computing and communications artifacts (i.e., oper-
ating physical systems) and the individuals responsible for them.Similarly, exchange programs in which faculty members work in
industry or government for a year and industry or government IT profes-
sionals work at universities for a year would help build a cadre of experts
who are comfortable in both worlds.  Alumni of such exchange programs

could go on to play a valuable role in both research centers and inter-
disciplinary IT research groups.  Equally important, both they and the

veterans of student internships would form a core of individuals who
could apply new research findings by designing and operating improved
large-scale systems and social applications.A number of IT-related internship and exchange programs exist, butmost place students and faculty members in vendor organizations.  The

expansion of such programs to include end-user organizations might be
facilitated by federal incentives.  Because few end-user organizations (or

systems integrators) have large research operations, they do not have a
tradition of supporting interns in IT, nor do students view internships
with such organizations as furthering their research careers.  Seed fund-

ing for such a program through a federal agency such as NSF could
encourage such internships and, if the program is successful, could con-
vince industry to contribute funding as well.  Universities might need to

be persuaded that there is value in such programs, which would take
students away from their faculty advisors for some period of time and
could be viewed as delaying the completion of their studies.  At the same

time, however, such internships could give students valuable research
experience and help them to select dissertation projects (or thesis topics).
If successful, such internships and sabbaticals could also serve to demon-
strate the value of IT research to end-user organizations, prompting them
to support additional university-based research, benefiting both commu-
nities.Industry experts could also be brought into the university system.Many universities tap into the expertise in local industry by hiring indus-
try employees as adjunct faculty.  Although adjunct faculty members do

not typically participate in research projects, they could introduce new
ideas to students and other faculty members alike.  The Massachusetts

Institute of Technology (MIT) has begun to experiment with another type
of program to bring industry expertise into academia.  It has appointed a
small number of Òprofessors of the practice,Ó who teach and conduct
research full- or part-time.  These individuals are not expected to have

publication records as long as those of their academic counterparts butMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168MAKING IT BETTERare instead expected to have a significant record of accomplishments.  The
program is still new, and MIT has only a small number of such professors,
but they add breadth and experience to the schoolÕs engineering programs.Interdisciplinary Research in AcademiaIf research on the social applications of IT is to advance, then inter-disciplinary research will be needed that involves participants and exper-
tise from a wide range of academic disciplines.  The work needs to involve

not only computer scientists, engineers, and software experts but also
business professors and organizational theorists who understand the
relationship between IT and the organizational structures within which it
is embedded, the human side of complex technical systems, and the
market aspects of different social applications.  The research teams need

to include social scientists who can evaluate the impact of IT on indi-
viduals, families, organizations, and society and who understand the
human-centric nature of computing.  They could include specialists in

particular application areas such as health care, manufacturing, finance,
and e-commerce.Researchers in business, economics, and the social sciences have alreadymade numerous advances in understanding IT as it is used in a range of
social applications (Boxes 4.5 and 4.6).  Several opportunities exist for

stepping up the involvement of experts in business, economics, social
science, and law in research pertaining to IT.  Nontraditional research

mechanisms may be needed that will encourage the participation of end-
user organizations in research, broaden the outlook of IT researchers,
and/or overcome disciplinary boundaries in universities.  The manage-

ment of interdisciplinary research collaborations generates its own set of
issues:  technologists and social scientists have different vocabularies,

methodologies, time perspectives, standards of evidence, and so on.  Such

differences need to be bridged if collaborations are to be effective.Interdisciplinary research can be conducted in one of three ways.Individuals can broaden their own expertise: technologists can become
increasingly facile with the uses of the technologies and the larger system
(including sociotechnical system) contexts within which they are embed-
ded, and experts in sociotechnical system contexts become more facile
with technology.  Alternatively, experts in the system contexts can col-

laborate more extensively and effectively with technologists.  Or, new

professions can arise to mediate between IT and its uses: this occurred in
health care when the field of medical informatics emerged to help bridge
the gap between IT and medicine (Box 4.7) and, even earlier, in civil
engineering when an entire profession (building and landscape architec-
ture) was established to deal with application, societal, and aestheticMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS169BOX 4.5Examples of Business Research Related toInformation Technology¥Critical success factorsÑWork by Rockhart identified factors critical to thesuccess of information systems in business settings.  What information is critical to
the success of a business?  What questions would you want a database to answer?
How do you design information systems to support business objectives?¥Decision support systemsÑWork by Keane and Morton promulgated theidea of using information systems to support corporate decision making at a varietyof levels.¥Information technology and strategic advantageÑWork at the Harvard Busi-ness School recognized that information technology (IT) is not just for back-officeoperations but rather is an element of a firmÕs competitive advantage.  Companies
that deploy and employ IT systems more wisely than others can benefit in themarketplace.¥Computer-supported cooperative workÑThis research introduced the ideaof using information technology to allow people to work cooperatively within andacross organizations, to overcome differences in geography or time.¥ProductivityÑ Productivity gains from IT investments have been difficult to
measure, but BrynjolfssonÕs analysis of firm-level data (as opposed to industry-level data) indicates that there may be large payoffs, albeit with time lags.  This
work attempts to identify the factors that contribute to positive returns from IT
investments within firms.  What characteristics differentiate firms that do experi-
ence increased productivity from those that do not?¥Software development methodologiesÑResearch by Cusumano providedguidance on software development methodologies from a management point ofview.¥Process handbookÑThis repository of business process knowledge canfacilitate further research and help determine best practices for deploying IT.  Theclassification and structure of the database itself is a powerful tool.SOURCE:  Thomas Malone, Sloan School of Management, MIT, in a presentation at the
National Academy of Engineering workshop ÒHow Can Academic Research Best Contribute toNetwork Systems and Communications?Ó Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998.
issues.  Each of these approaches has its strengths and weaknesses.  The
first approach, for example, effectively creates visionaries and leaders in a
field but does not enable large-scale collaborations.  The second enables a

properly balanced team to be assembled but creates problems of coordi-
nation and management and makes it difficult to create a shared vision.
The third approach can be effective in establishing a long-term capabilityMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170MAKING IT BETTERBOX 4.6Examples of Economics and Other Social Science ResearchThat Has Contributed to Information Technology Development¥Role of regulationÑEconomics research by Alfred Kahn, Paul Joskow,Roger Noll, and Kip Viscusi redefined the role of regulations from one of protectingthe public interest to one of stepping in when markets do not drive prices to mar-ginal costs.  This redefinition spurred deregulation in a number of industries, includ-

ing communications.¥Network externalitiesÑWork by Hal Varian, Paul David, Brian Arthur, GarthSaloner, Michael Katz, Carl Shapiro, and Nicholas Economides showed that the
network industries and information industries are characterized by Ònetwork exter-nalities,Ó which make the value to a consumer of a particular product or service
increase as more people use it.  An example is an Internet connection, which is

more valuable if more information is available and larger numbers of people areconnected.  This insight leads to an emphasis on getting products and services
into the marketplace quickly, pricing them low at first to spur market growth and
then raising prices as more units are sold and their value grows.¥Internet economicsÑWork in this area by Lee McKnight, Joseph Bailey, HalVarian, and Jeffrey Mackie-Mason has implications for the pricing of Internet-based
resources and services, such as concepts for allocating resources based on thewillingness of users to pay.¥Group dynamics and decision makingÑResearch by Sara Kiesler, SuzanneIaconno, Wanda Orlikowski, and others (e.g., Siegel et al., 1986) on group dynamicsand decision making in small electronic groups informed the design of systemsthat support group decisions.¥Diffusion of applicationsÑResearch by M. Lynne Markus (1987) and otherson how critical mass predicts the diffusion of networked applications within organi-
zations and informs the deployment decisions for information technology (IT)applications.¥Distribution of the benefits of ITÑResearch by Tora Bikson, Lee Sproull,and others demonstrating that peripheral members of social systems benefit morefrom use of electronic communication than do central members (e.g., Sproull andKiesler, 1991) influenced policy decisions about subsidies for access to the
Internet.¥Information sharingÑResearch by Paul Attewell, Tora Bikson, Sara Kiesler,Robert Kraut, Lee Sproull, and others demonstrated how personal attributes and
organizational characteristics such as incentive systems influence peoplesÕ use of
IT for information sharing.  Research by Julian Orr (1990) and others demon-
strated that service technicians often have more useful technical expertise than do
system designers and share their knowledge in a community of practice.  This
work influenced the design of a community-based troubleshooting database atXerox Corporation that has resulted in significantly improved service performance
(Bell et al., 1997).SOURCES:  Marvin Sirbu, Carnegie Mellon University, presentation at the National Academyof Engineering workshop ÒHow Can Academic Research Best Contribute to Network Systemsand Communications,Ó Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998; Lee Sproull, New York University,
personal communications dated August 22, 1999, and April 11, 2000.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS171BOX 4.7Lessons from Medical InformaticsInsight into the challenges of interdisciplinary research related to informationtechnology (IT) can be drawn from the field of medical informatics, which deals
explicitly with linking the field of medicine and IT.  A handful of universities and
medical schools have established programs in medical informatics that combinetraining in both medicine and IT.1  Graduates of these programs can be found in
academic medical centers, health-related Internet start-ups, and other organiza-tions.  Some work in the IT departments of large health care centers.  The number
of health care organizations that have achieved a critical mass in this field is small.2All of these organizations employ physicians funded by IT payroll dollars who workwith mainstream IT to improve its application to the core domain of the organiza-tion (medicine), with a heavy emphasis on the academic aspects of the intersection
between IT and the user domain and an interest in experimentation, prototyping,and evaluation of impact.  Results are published in academic journals and forums.
Several factors have contributed to the success of these programs.  The first is
that academic medical centers have a tradition and culture of research.  The
National Library of Medicine (NLM) funds training and research, and this fundingcontinues over several years, leading to a measure of program stability.  The pro-
grams funded by the NLM reside in the same organization as the IT function does(the university medical center), so there is organizational colocation.  It is clear to
the organizations that many complex initiatives require a deep knowledge of med-
icine to be solved correctly.  The IT function (in particular, the chief information
officer) must be comfortable with the academic component and the complex med-ical domain discussion that medical informatics brings to the table.  Organizational
mechanisms have been established to assimilate the research functions, such asnew or revised pay grades, project approaches to involving researchers on teams,
and tactics to develop budgets.These factors are present in only one or two dozen out of a total of 5,000 healthcare organizations.  At times, the linkage between medical informatics and the IT

organization does not work very well.  For instance, medical informatics programs
do not solve all instances of IT staff failing to work well with end users.  Medical
informatics staff members are involved in a minority of a health care organizationÕsprojects; however, they are involved in the projects in which the domain (medicine)places the greatest design and operational stresses on implemented systems. Onesuch system is computerized medical records, which are exceptionally complex to
design and present numerous work-flow challenges.1 Examples of these programs can be found at Columbia University, Stanford University, and
the University of Utah.2 In 2000, no more than two dozen health care organizations had significant medical infor-
matics efforts.  These included Partners Healthcare System in Boston, Children
Õs Hospital inBoston, Vanderbilt University, Intermountain Healthcare in Salt Lake City, Columbia Presbyte-
rian Medical Center in New York, and the University of Michigan.SOURCE:  John Glaser, chief information officer, Partners Healthcare System, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, personal communication, July 13, 1999.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172MAKING IT BETTERin an interdisciplinary area, but these areas can become somewhat sepa-rated from their parent disciplines.  All three of these approaches com-

bined can make a significant difference.Interdisciplinary research related to IT is ramping up in universities,albeit slowly.  An increasing number of active researchers in the information

systems field list schools of management and business administration as
their primary affiliation.  Other important communities of researchers

that are often overlooked are those in departments of communication and
schools of education.  All of these groups include individuals working on

both fundamental and targeted research motivated by social applications
of IT.  In addition, an increasing number of faculty members with com-

puter science degrees are appearing in other departments across cam-
puses, particularly in information sciences and business.  They are involving

themselves in application areas such as digital libraries and e-commerce,
focusing on both the social and technical aspects and collaborating with
economists and legal specialists.  A movement in human-centered com-

puting, involving collaboration with disciplines such as sociology and
psychology, is flowering in academia, albeit at a slower pace than similar
efforts in the United Kingdom and Scandinavia.A major obstacle to any increase in interdisciplinary work is the strongdisciplinary orientation of many universities.  Academic research is typi-

cally reviewed from the perspective of a particular discipline, similar to
the way in which grant proposals are peer reviewed.  The reviewers tend
to be disciplinary experts and rarely reflect the interdisciplinary nature of
the research.  Efforts to establish interdisciplinary programs within disci-
plinary boundaries and to evaluate those programs often meet with criti-
cism because they are viewed through the lens of a single discipline.20  As
a result, faculty members are often discouraged from pursuing inter-
disciplinary research.  This is especially true early in a professional career,

when gaining tenure is a major goal and a faculty member feels particu-
larly vulnerable to peer pressure.  Unfortunately, early habits often per-

sist well into a career.Traditional disciplinary work is reinforced by traditional disciplinaryculture.  Computer science, like any other field, has its own sets of terms,
attitudes, norms, and customs with regard to what constitutes research
and how to conduct it.  Computer scientists have even found it difficult to

collaborate with electrical engineers, although in general they collaborate
more easily with researchers from engineering and the physical sciences
than with those from the social and life sciences. Reasons for the difficul-
ties in collaboration include factors such as project definition, laboratory
orientation, availability of physical infrastructure and professional staff,
teaching loads, amount of funding for a project, and so on.  More subtle

obstacles are attitudes about the relative merits of different fields, withMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS173each field manifesting its own flavor of chauvinism.  These difficult-to-
quantify realities complicate the establishment of collaborative relation-
ships and projects.21One solution to the problem has been the establishment of new schools,divisions, or departments (typically drawing on existing resources) within

universities to encourage interdisciplinary research and education related
to IT and its social, political, and economic contexts.  For example,

Carnegie Mellon University has long promoted interdisciplinary research
by establishing separate departments and programs to pursue them.  Its

Department of Engineering and Public PolicyÑand others like it at MIT,Washington University, and elsewhereÑhave examined issues raised bythe intersection of IT and public policy for several decades.22  Many fac-
ulty members have joint appointments in these organizations and tradi-
tional academic departments.  In recent years, a number of universities

have transformed schools of library science into broader institutions that
address issues linking IT and social applications (Table 4.1).  These schools

tend to draw faculty from a number of departments, including computer
science, economics, social sciences, law, and business, but they can hire
and promote faculty on the basis of their interdisciplinary work.  In such

an environment, a faculty can be built with backgrounds in a diversity of
core disciplines, and the evaluation process can relatively easily be appre-
ciative of contributions that cross disciplinary boundaries, in no small
part because faculty who join such units have the appropriate vision and
orientation.  Many of these schools are as yet untested in terms of their

abilities to sustain quality research of the type needed to make progress
on social applications.  They nevertheless exemplify the kinds of efforts

that will be needed to make progress in this area.  They also present more

new opportunities for educating students in interdisciplinary research
areas.  By creating institutions with permanently assigned faculty, these

schools and departments can develop curricula and teach classes more
effectively than is generally possible if faculty are scattered throughout
multiple academic departments.Limited funding is another obstacle to greater interdisciplinary workat universities on the social applications of IT.  Although there are many

notable examples of university researchers who followed a vision and
were able to sell their visions to potential funding sources, the much more
common model is to shape the research in the directions favored by exist-
ing funding sources.  Thus, as the funding goes, so (largely) goes the

research agenda.  The gross disparity between funding available for

research in social science and that in computer science today does not
bode well for prospects of new social-science-based activity.Federal support for university research on the social and economicaspects of IT (one component of the larger research agenda motivated byMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174MAKING IT BETTERTABLE 4.1  Recently Established or Expanded University Programs on
the Sociotechnical Aspects of Information TechnologySchool orUniversityDepartmentResearch Emphases
SyracuseSchool ofInformation behavior, information retrieval,
UniversityInformationinformation policy, information and change,
Studiesinformation management
University ofSchool ofInformation storage and retrieval, human factors,
California atInformationinformation policy (e.g., economics and
BerkeleyManagementintellectual property), management, networked
and Systemsinformation systems
University ofSchool ofInformation technology and institutional change,
California atEducation andtechnology and privacy, genre theory, linguistic

Los AngelesInformationaspects of computing, Internet culture,
Studiesinformation search and retrieval, social effects of
information technology, digital libraries,
information policy, user-centered designUniversity ofSchool ofCommunity architectures for networked
Illinois atLibrary andinformation systems, information retrieval,
Urbana-Informationcomputer-supported cooperative work, agents and
ChampaignSciencemultiagents, organization theory, information
technology (e.g., artificial intelligence, distributedsystems, groupware, human-computerinteraction), information policy and public policyUniversity ofSchool ofCommunity technology, information economy,
MichiganInformationelectronic work, digital libraries, archives and
record management, human-computer interaction,information economics, management, and policy,library and information sciencesocial applications) has come largely from NSF.  The Computer and Infor-
mation Science and Engineering (CISE) directorateÕs program in Compu-tation and Social Systems (CSS; formerly the Information Technology and
Organizations program) supports work in two related areas:  (1) the inte-
gration, sustainable use, and impacts of IT in groups, organizations, com-
munities, and societies and (2) theories and technologies for reasoning,
decision making, interaction, and collaboration in groups, organizations,
communities, and societies.  For many years, this program has been the

NSFÕs main source of support for truly interdisciplinary sociotechnical ITsystems research.23  Its awards have routinely gone to research groups
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS175that involve technical specialists from computer science or related scienceand engineering disciplines, as well as social scientists with deep interests
in the technology and its social implications.  When groups were made up

solely of social scientists, the proposals still had to be reviewed by people
with technical expertise.For the most part, these awards tend to be small, providing supportfor one or two researchers over the course of 3 years or so (Table 4.2), and
the total amount of annual funding has also been small, in the range of a
few million dollars.  As a result, only a small subset of the issues that need

to be addressed is represented in ongoing research projects, and the
technological aspects of the program are directed at component technolo-
gies (e.g., artificial intelligence and agents) rather than the large-scale
social applications.  More importantly, the smallness of the grants pre-

cludes the ability to bring together many experts from different disci-
plines (e.g., IT and the social sciences).  The CSS program is expected to

grow in the near future and fund a variety of work on social applications
of IT (Box 4.8), but it is not clear how quickly this will occur or how large
the projects will be or whether the program will begin to fund larger
teams of researchers.24TABLE 4.2  Recent Awards by the National Science Foundation
ÕsComputation and Social System ProgramApproximateEstimated SizeDuration
Project Titleof Grant ($)(years)
Studies of Decision Making in Complex,75,0003
Dynamic EnvironmentsAlgorithmic Issues in Collaborative Filtering326,2604
Coordination: Integrating Organizational Style441,1704
with Environmental CharacteristicsSeeing Is Believing: The Value of Video for499,4003
Remote Interpersonal ConnectionsThe Design of Reputation Systems362,3003
Decision-Making in the Context of Commitments250,5003
to Team ActivityDesign of Time Cognizant Electronic Brokerages295,4404
SOURCE:  National Science Foundation awards database.  Available online at
<www.nsf.gov>.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176MAKING IT BETTERBOX 4.8Representative Topics for Future Support by theNational Science FoundationÕs Computation andSocial Systems Program¥The relationship between information technology (IT) and social transfor-mationsÑHow can the relationship between IT and social transformation be bestconceptualized?  What new theories explain how information technologies diffuse

and become well integrated into social contexts?  How do social contexts influence
the design and deployment of IT?  What accounts for inequitable distributions of IT
across groups and nations?  What are the barriers to diffusion, acceptance, and

transformation?  What are the social and cultural divides that hinder access to, or
acceptance of, new information technologies?  How can these barriers and divides
be overcome?  How can human needs be best served?
¥Electronic interactions, relationships, and communitiesÑWhat are the com-municative practices of electronic groups and communities?  What are the socio-
technical foundations and implications of human interaction with intelligent agents?
What are the theories that describe electronic interaction and what it means to thepeople who engage in it on a routine basisÑfor communicating across bound-aries, working or learning at a distance, shopping, etc.?  How can information and
communications technologies be designed to enhance multiparty communicationsand the creation of knowledge?  How are social relationships, trust, identity, com-
mitment, and communities developed in electronic forums?  What are the particu-
lar risks and social vulnerabilities that may emerge?  How can conflict, crises,
fragmentation, and other negative outcomes be managed?  What is the relation-
ship between electronic groups or communities and their larger social and culturalcontexts?  How are coordination, collaboration, interdependence, negotiation,
learning, and knowledge creation achieved over distance and time?¥Social ecology and social institutionsÑHow is the landscape of Americachanging (its communities, highways, shopping malls, public marketplaces, firmsize and location, architecture, etc.)?  What are the transformations of work, house-

holds, medical centers, educational establishments, communities, commerce, themilitary, etc., that matter?  What new social and technical practices are emerging
in these institutions?  Who benefits and who loses through these processes?  How

do these changes affect family life, work opportunities, teaching and learning strat-egies and success, access to and quality of health care, and the distribution ofwealth and resources for people in different economic strata, job status, geographic
locations, etc.?  How do these changes affect information and consumer privacy?How are digital or virtual enterprises developed in these contexts, and what dothey mean for existing social institutions and the humans that participate in them?SOURCE:  National Science Foundation awards database.  Available online at <www.nsf.gov>.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS177On a larger scale, the NSF has attempted to address the social applica-tions of IT from an institutionwide (cross-directorate) perspective.  In

1997, it launched the Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence (KDI) ini-
tiative (see Box 4.9), a bold experiment in fostering cross-disciplinary
research inspired by social applications of IT that originated within the
CISE directorate and the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE)
directorate.  Its existence was brief, in part because of programmatic

uncertainty both within NSF and externally in the research community.
That uncertainty related to the goals and approaches associated with the
initiative and the intellectual and practical challenges of pursuing cross-
disciplinary research.BOX 4.9Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence[Knowledge and distributed intelligence (KDI)] activities aim to improve our abilityto discover, collect, represent, transmit, and apply information, thereby improving
the way we conduct research and education in science and engineering.  These

efforts promise to change how we learn and create, how we work, and how we live.
. . .The objective is to create networked systems that can make all kinds of knowl-

edge available to anyone, located anywhere, anytime.ÑNational Science Foundation KDI brochureThe evolution of KDI as a broad theme within the National Science Foundationreflects the integration of multiple streams of research and development drawingon many scientific and engineering disciplines.  The components are enormously

varied, including, for example, research in computational biology, computer net-works and communications, high-performance computing, database managementand information retrieval, mathematical modeling and simulation, artificial intelli-
gence, human learning and cognition, science, mathematics and engineering edu-cation, geospatial information systems, and science and engineering indicators.These components are combined into programs of varying scope and scale.The KDI activity aims at a new level of intellectual coalescence.  It recognizes
the progress made to date in developing and deploying information technologyacross science and engineering research, and it recognizes that challenges for the
future include assuring that such technological support can be used and is useful.It attempts to move beyond mere access to information and to develop methods tointelligently absorb, refine, and analyze information to glean useful knowledge.
Organizationally, KDI is a cross-directorate, cross-disciplinary effort with three corecomponents:¥Knowledge Networking is intended to advance understanding of the poten-tial of new information technologies for communication, coordination, and collabo-ration in science, engineering, education, and other applications.  The goals of
continuedMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178MAKING IT BETTERknowledge networking are (1) to develop an understanding of the fundamentalprocesses through which knowledge is created, communicated, validated, and
valued in distributed systems of information, both natural and engineered, and(2) to improve the technical, social, educational, and economic performance ofknowledge generation and use, collaborative computation, and remote interaction.¥Learning and Intelligent Systems is intended to advance understanding of
learning in both natural and artificial systems and of how that learning can besupported, harnessed, and used in creative ways.  This component also promotes

the use and development of technologies that support enhanced learning for chil-dren, workers, and the general public across different disciplines and fields.  The
activity encompasses both basic research and applied efforts to transfer learning
technologies to communities.¥New Challenges in Computation involves the development of methods andtools to discover, model, simulate, display, and understand complex systems and
complicated phenomena and to manipulate large volumes of distributed data inreal time.In addition to the core components, there are currently six KDI-related initia-tives in specific technological or content domains that are evolving in cooperationwith other federal agencies and private-sector organizations:  (1) universal access,

(2) digital libraries initiative, (3) Next Generation Internet, (4) integrated spatialinformation systems, (5) functional genomics, and (6) digital government.  These
initiatives expressly address issues of how to design and develop technologiesthat can be used more effectively and by more people.  They reflect experiences
with early information technology in a variety of contexts as well as ambitious
objectives for progress.SOURCE:  CSTB (1998b).
BOX 4.9 ContinuedThe NSFÕs support for work related to social applications of IT willprobably expand in coming years as IT is deployed more ubiquitously in
public life, as well as in homes and schools.  The President
Õs InformationTechnology Advisory Committee recommended increased federal fund-
ing for research on the social and economic impacts of IT (PITAC, 1999).
The NSFÕs Information Technology Research (ITR) initiative calls for research
in several areas of IT that could be relevant to the problems identified in
this chapter, including human-computer interfaces, information manage-
ment, and the social and economic implications of IT.25  Its budget for the
initiative was $90 million in FY00, to be used to support a mix of small
(about $150,000 per year), medium (about $1 million per year), and largeMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS179($2 million to $4 million per year) projects.  ITR could serve as a mecha-
nism for supporting larger-scale efforts related to social applications of
IT, perhaps even small centers.  In addition, CISE expects to allocate $30

million to new information technology centers in FY00 to support funda-
mental research that spans the field of IT and encompasses scientific
applications or addresses areas of social, ethical, and workforce issues
(NSF, 2000).  The challenge will be to find a suitable set of peers to review

the proposals, drawing from the IT, social science, and domain-specific
communities.Interdisciplinary Research in IndustryIndustry tends to be less wedded to a disciplinary research structurethan universities are, and it has made a modest investment in interdisci-
plinary research motivated by the social applications of IT.  Xerox Corpo-

ration, for example, has long kept social science researchers on the staff of
its Palo Alto Research Center to help understand how people interact
with IT systems in a variety of organizational settings.  The work of the

social scientists has been credited with improving the usability of Xerox
copiers and streamlining internal processes for disseminating the knowl-
edge of field service technicians (Bell et al., 1997).  AT&T employs a

number of economists to study the economics of the telecommunications
industry, and several computer manufacturers, Apple Computer among
them, have hired psychologists and cognitive scientists to inform their
work on human-computer interfaces.  In recent years, a number of Internet-

based companies have recognized the need to make their Web sites more
usable and have begun to hire employees with degrees in the social sci-
ences and humanities.26  These efforts tend to focus on issues closely
associated with product design and implementation and are diminutive
in comparison to research on the purely technical aspects of IT.As the market for IT-related services continues to grow, a number oftraditional vendors of IT products are becoming more deeply entwined in
the provision of large-scale IT systems and services.  This trend could lead

to greater investment in research on the social applications of IT.  AT&T

Labs, for example, recently announced a plan to fund research in the
computer science and business departments of universities participating
in the Internet 2 initiative, as a means of developing public key infrastruc-
ture for improving security across the Internet.  The collaboration will be

managed by a board of experts from industry, government, and academia
who will invite participation from other players in those domains.  In

addition, MIT and Microsoft Corporation announced a partnership to
develop educational technologies.  Microsoft is investing $25 million in

the venture over 5 years to pursue a range of projects, from online learn-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180MAKING IT BETTERing to new models for academic publishing.  The projects will be managed
by a steering committee consisting of members of Microsoft Research and
MIT (Robinson and Guernsey, 1999).IBM took such efforts a step further by establishing an Institute forAdvanced Commerce within its Research Division in January 1998.  The

institute is a forum for examining fundamental shifts in business and
trade in an information economy, with the goal of developing long-term,
replicable electronic commerce solutions to meet corporate needs.  It

explores emerging economic trends and technologies to better under-
stand the technical, business, and social processes that are shaping the
electronic marketplace, and it has a business research center that studies
the changing nature of work, industry structure, commerce, and technol-
ogy.  The institute began with an initial funding commitment of more

than $10 million and is home to more than 50 researchers with expertise in
IT, economics, and social science.  Its board of directors consists of recog-
nized IT researchers as well as IT executives from end-user industries
such as automobile manufacturing and retail trade.  Work is under way in

areas such as (1) the evolving marketplace, (2) privacy, (3) variable prices
and negotiated dealings, (4) managing the end customer, (5) the impact of
globalization, (6) high-performance computing for commerce, and (7) sys-
tem foundations (see Box 4.10 for a listing of recent projects in the insti-
tute).  As of early 2000, the institute had produced more than a dozen

reports on topics such as analyzing clickstream data to understand Web-
based merchandising, business-to-business e-commerce, Internet auctions,
and pricing in a free-market economy that contains software agents.  It

also has hosted several conferences on issues such as privacy in a net-
worked world, gathering data on the information economy, and Internet-
based negotiation technologies.Industry efforts to conduct interdisciplinary research on the socialapplications of IT will undoubtedly be linked to business interests.  Indeed,

IBM is establishing an internal organization to help move new technolo-
gies into the marketplace by engaging customers in research.  Of course, a

key issue will be the ability of these programs to maintain a long-term
outlook while producing more immediate results to suit ongoing busi-
ness development opportunities.  Time must pass before the program
Õseffectiveness can be more rigorously evaluated.Multidisciplinary Research CentersThe notion of interdisciplinary academic departments is realistic inthe sense that similar organizations already exist, in the form of multi-
disciplinary research centers that involve technologists, social scientists,
and end users.  These centers range from centralized research facilities
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS181BOX 4.10Examples of Projects Pursued by IBM CorporationÕsInstitute for Advanced CommerceThe IBM CorporationÕs Institute for Advanced Commerce has pursued projectsin the following areas, among others:¥Information economiesÑthe practice of analyzing and simulating the futureto understand long-term directions when billions of sellers, buyers, and agentsinteract in the electronic marketplace;¥Cyber auctionsÑstrategies to apply competitive bidding strategies for ordi-nary online business activity rather than as a special case;¥Internet EDIÑelectronic data interchange over the Internet to link suppliers,retailers, factories, warehouses, and assembly lines into one ring of networked
systems;¥MicropaymentsÑtechnologies to support very low cost purchases with lowtransaction costs and carefully controlled risks;¥E-checksÑthe equivalent of paper checks with the same financial propertiesas paper checks but with lower cost and greater ease of use; and¥E-couponsÑthe equivalent of paper coupons online, offering new possibil-ities for selective marketing and aggressive pricing.SOURCE:  IBM Corporation
Õs Institute for Advanced Commerce home page at  <http://
www.ibm.com/iac/>.that house researchers from many different disciplines under a single roofto virtual centers that enable interaction among researchers at different
institutions.  Their primary objective is to bring together researchers from

the needed disciplines to jointly tackle a related set of problems, creating
a critical mass of expertise to drive broad progress.  A previous report by
the National Academy of Sciences (1987) describes the benefits of the
center mode of research as follows:Centers contribute to science by enabling researchers to accomplish chal-lenging, longer term projects that they could not undertake at all or asefficiently as individual investigators because of the need for stable sup-
port, large facilities or support teams, or simply the need to bring togetherdiverse experiences and expertise.  By involving external parties as well
as students in their research activities, centers contribute to the more
rapid transfer of new knowledge and to the training of professionalswith an awareness of potential applications.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182MAKING IT BETTERExperience to date suggests several factors that are important to thesuccess of such centers:  (1) capable and enthusiastic center directors,

(2) high-quality investigators, (3) a mix of university and industry
researchers, (4) a research agenda approved by all of the main partici-
pants, (5) acceptable arrangements to handle intellectual property and
protect proprietary information, and (6) stable funding for long enough
(perhaps 10 years) to produce real results.In addition to those factors, multidisciplinary research centers for thesocial applications of IT might want to consider the following:¥FocusÑA center might need to focus on a particular applicationdomain or a particular set of generic problems, such as e-commerce, medi-
cal informatics, or privacy.¥Broad range of participantsÑTo ensure that the centers conductresearch motivated by social and economic needs as well as a desire for
fundamental advances, they may need to link researchers from universi-
ties with industry vendors and experts from user organizations, includ-
ing both companies and government agencies.¥Links to testbeds or operational facilitiesÑEach center would probablyneed to be linked to, and built on, large testbeds at one or more of the
participantsÕ sites so that researchers could have the sustained access to
actual or near-operational systems or applications that is required to gain
insight into real-world problems.  The concern, of course, is that the indi-
viduals who manage major IT activities do not want researchers tinkering
with their computers and software or taking up too much of their opera-
torsÕ time.  One option is to give researchers access to these systems so
they can observe but not alter them.  Another option is to work with

vendors and end-user organizations on new prototype systems and
applications.  A third option is to work on experimental testbeds that

simulate real-world needs and operations.Universities and industry have established a number of research cen-ters to pursue multidisciplinary research on IT topics.  The Information

Networking Institute at Carnegie Mellon University, for example, was
established in 1989 to examine the technologies, economics, and policies
of global communication networks.  The staff researchers have back-

grounds in computer science, social science, cognitive science, and eco-
nomics, and the institute has funding from both government and indus-
try sources.  The Media Lab at MIT, the Berkeley Wireless Research Center,

and the Georgia Center for Advanced Telecommunications Technology
(located at the Georgia Institute of Technology) also draw researchers
from different academic disciplines and seek support from a number of
industrial sponsors as well as from government.  The main challenge for
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS183such centersÑin addition to the challenges of peer review and promotionoutlined aboveÑis funding.  To support a staff of, say, 30 researchers plus
graduate students, a center needs several million dollars a year, which
tends to come from industry memberships or from project funding by
either government or industry.  Sustaining such funding can be a chal-

lenging taskÑespecially if funding is sought from organizations (such asend users of IT) without a tradition of funding IT research.At times, the government has helped establish research centers, eitherby concentrating research funding at particular universities (as DARPA
has done with MIT, Carnegie Mellon, Stanford, and the University of
California at Berkeley) or by establishing more formal programs that
accept competitive proposals for the establishment or sustenance of a
larger research center.  The NSF, for example, has established programs to

support science and technology centers (STCs) and engineering research
centers (ERCs), both of which have been extensively evaluated and pro-
vide valuable lessons that can inform the establishment of other types of
centers, such as those being considered under the NSFÕs ITR initiative(described above).  The STC program is described below. Information on

the ERCs is contained in Box 4.11.The STC program, initiated in 1989, funds 28 centers that conductinterdisciplinary research in various fields of science (five of the centers
conduct research directly applicable to IT).27  The STCs receive, on aver-
age, $2.3 million a year from NSF, plus funds from industry, the universi-
ties that host the centers, and other federal agencies.28  External reviews
of the STC program have been favorable and have recommended con-
tinuation of the program.  An assessment by the Committee on Science,

Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP) found that Òmost of the cen-ters have been conducting outstanding researchÓ and that 
Òthe STCs as awhole have done an excellent job of disseminating their results whether
they are applied to basic science . . . or more applied fieldsÓ (NAS-NAE-
IOM, 1996).29  Others have noted that the center mode of research is
necessary to conduct large-scale, complex, interdisciplinary research such
as that of an STC, and that the universities hosting STCs are removing
traditional barriers between academic disciplines and are combating the
biases against interdisciplinary work.Some concerns have been raised about such centers:  primarily the
amount of time and energy dedicated to nonresearch missions.  The NSF

requires the STCs to engage in outreach activities, such as educational
programs for grades K-12 in the communities in which they are located.
The scale and type of the outreach programs vary from center to center,
but their existence is a requirement for consideration for NSF funding
(NSF, 1998).  The COSEPUP report expressed concern that too much em-

phasis was being placed on community outreach and K-12 education atMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184MAKING IT BETTERBOX 4.11The Engineering Research Center ProgramThe National Science Foundation (NSF) began funding engineering researchcenters (ERCs) in 1985 to create stronger links between industry and academicengineering programs and improve both the competitiveness of U.S. manufactur-ing industries and the quality of engineering education by making undergraduate
and graduate training more relevant to industry needs.  Thirty-four ERCs have
been established.  Each receives funding from NSF for 5 years, after which the
funding can be renewed for another 5 years.1  Industrial participation is required.
Companies that participate in ERCs must do more than contribute money:  They
must contribute intellectually, as well, to encourage interaction between studentsand representatives of industry.  The ERCs average more than 30 industrial part-

ners apiece.Both an internal NSF review of the ERC program in 1997 and an externalreview by the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) in 1989 reported that ERCs
contributed significant benefits to the nation, both economically and educationally.2The NAE review concluded that the ERCs were responsible for novel research that
was fundamentally important, making previously impossible interdisciplinary work
feasible and providing experiences for students Òthat clearly excite them.Ó  The
NSF assessment reported that the ERCs discover new industry-relevant knowl-edge at the intersections of the traditional disciplines and transfer that knowledge
to industry, while preparing a new generation of engineering leaders capable ofleading in industry by engaging successfully in team-based, cross-disciplinaryengineering to advance technology.More than half of the firms involved in the ERCs that responded to an NSFsurvey reported that participation influenced the firmÕs research agenda, and two-thirds reported that ERC participation increased the firmÕs competitiveness.  A
majority of firms were able to improve products or processes, and 25 percent were
able to create new products or processes as a result of ERC research.  In addition,
firms that employed graduates of the ERCs reported that the employees wereÒmore productive and effective engineers than peers in the same firms.Ó  More than
80 percent of ERC graduatesÕ workforce supervisors reported that the graduates
were more prepared overall than their peers, contributed more technically, demon-strated a deeper technical understanding, were better at working in interdiscipli-
nary teams, and had a broader technical understanding.The NAE review questioned several aspects of NSF management of the pro-gram.  Primarily, it was concerned about the fact that the NSF had chosen to

reduce promised funding levels at ERCs to reduce costs per center.  The review
also reported that the ERC application process was too time consuming and thatthe selection process had been inconsistent over the years.  Concerns over com-

munity outreach were not a problem because ERCs are not expected to engageextensively in such activities.1The NSF funding averages about $3 million per center, which represents approximately one-third of the total funding for the centers, the balance coming largely from industry.2The NAE report concludes with the following comment:  ÒIf the federal government is to assistindustry in its fight to remain competitive, this is precisely the kind of program that it shouldsupport.  If universities are to help build a technology base on which industry can draw, this is
precisely the kind of role that they should play.  And if industry is to take a hand in shaping

policies that influence its long-term well-being, then here is precisely the way to becomeengaged.Ó  See NAE (1989).
SOURCES:  National Academy of Engineering (1989), National Science Foundation (1997).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS185the expense of research and recommended that the outreach continue butbe given a lower priority (NAS-NAE-IOM, 1996).30  Although they may
spend considerable time on center activities such as these, the scientists
involved report that they and their work benefit from the collegial inter-
actions and exposure to the community and industry.31  Also noted by
COSEPUP was the importance of leadership to the success of an STC.  If

the center was to be more effective than just a group of individual
researchers who happened to share a building and some equipment, its
projects needed to be well integrated and effectively managed.  Collabo-

ration is an integral part of the center mode of research, but it must be
nurtured, because most academic researchers are accustomed to working
individually or in small teams.32  Lack of suitable leadership can under-
mine the value of a center.Embedding Information Technology Research in Other DisciplinesAs computing and communications have become embedded in manysocial applications, the role of computing in some disciplines other than
computer science and engineering has changed and expanded.  Because

researchers in other disciplines are faced with designing systems in which
IT is an essential element, they need to understand basic IT in its modern
formÑsoftware applications distributed over a heterogeneous computerand network infrastructureÑmuch better than is typically the case.  They
need to appreciate both the opportunities and the limitations of IT.  An

important responsibility will be the conceptualization and analysis of
distributed information system requirements and specifications and the
acquisition of sophisticated software applications through internal devel-
opment, outsourcing, or purchase.Because IT is becoming such a fundamental and pervasive aspect ofmany fields, it is natural for many departments on a university campus to
become involved in research on the application of IT to their respective
fields.  It is becoming increasingly common for faculty and students in

these departments to be facile with IT, and not infrequently the depart-
ments hire faculty members with a computer science background or
degrees who have experience in the appropriate application areas.  This is

not a new phenomenonÑit has a long history in other core disciplinessuch as mathematics and economics.33  Initially, collaboration with out-
side experts is a sufficient solution, but eventually the subject becomes
important enough to deserve in-house expertise.Accordingly, it can be expected that research related to the applica-tions or implications of IT will be expanded in departments as diverse as
engineering (and the subspecialties thereof), business, the social sciences,
arts and performance, music, and others.  One or more new disciplines
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186MAKING IT BETTERmay arise out of these opportunities, much as computer science itselfarose out of the collaborative efforts of mathematicians, electrical engi-
neers, and physicists.  This is a natural process that needs to be encour-

aged.  Most likely some portion of the additional IT research funding

being made available under the IT2 initiative will be devoted to cross-disciplinary research of this kind.  Aside from setting up new programs

(as outlined above), a number of other initiatives could help to establish
interdisciplinary programs or to embed IT issues more firmly within other
disciplines.  For example,
¥Joint degree programs could be established between computerscience and engineering and other relevant disciplines, such as the sub-
specialties of engineering or business.¥Restrictions on graduate programs in computer science could berelaxed to encourage students with backgrounds in other disciplines to
pursue degrees.  Conversely, students with undergraduate degrees in

computer science and engineering could be recruited into the graduate
programs of other disciplines.¥Just as they have added expertise in mathematics and economics toother disciplines, universities could hire faculty members with strong
backgrounds in computing for other departments, in part so that they
could develop discipline-specific courses and teaching materials in the
application of IT.  Initially, many of these faculty members would probably

have computer science degrees and work experience in a particular appli-
cation domain; typical combinations might include business and trans-
portation IT, computing embedded in mechanical systems, and so on.¥Minors could be established in computer science and engineeringprograms and made available to students whose primary interests lie in
other relevant disciplines.¥Computing courses could be established for the benefit of a broadcross-section of students again modeled after mathematics and economics.
Such courses could provide a breadth of understanding not available
from more specialized courses.¥Postdoctoral training programs could be established for social sci-ence or computer science Ph.D.s who wish to develop skills in research on
IT in context.In addition to promoting additional research on social applications,the expansion of interdisciplinary programs would help to redress the
teaching and disciplinary imbalances that are likely to be created by
increased student interest in IT.  At the same time, this expansion would

provide a badly needed influx of graduates with strong backgrounds in
IT combined with domain-specific understanding.  Many computer sci-
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS187ence departments are today experiencing an enrollment surge similar tothat of the early 1980s.  Given current trends in technology, the wealth of
job opportunities, and the excitement surrounding IT, this enrollment
surge may be more permanent this time.  Unfortunately, such growth

often comes at the expense of other engineering disciplines, even though
many of those disciplines continue to be vibrant and challenging and
offer excellent job opportunities.EXPANDING THE SCOPE OF INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThe research programs described in this chapter are initial forays intothe social applications of IT.  In the process, many different models are

being created that will coexist and complement one another.  These

research efforts will have to be redoubled, always informed by an aware-
ness that multiple, complementary models of research exist.  Researchers
in traditional IT must broaden their outlook to encompass the social con-
text for the technology, thereby changing what is thought of as the core of
IT research.34  Conversely, researchers in other academic disciplines and
end users of IT systems must become more actively engaged in IT research.

To achieve the desired balance, new models for funding and conducting
research must be explored.  Only in this way will IT
Õs potential to servesociety be fully tapped.BIBLIOGRAPHYAbt Associates, Inc.  1996  
An Evaluation of the NSF Science and Technology Centers (STC)Program, Vol. I.  Abt Associates, Cambridge, Mass.
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), Special Interest Group on Human-ComputerInteraction.  1992.  
Curricula for Human-Computer Interaction.  ACM Press.  Available
online at <http://www.acm.org/sigchi/cdg/cdg2.html>.Bass, L., P. Clements, and R. Kazman.  1998.  
Software Architecture in Practice.  Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Mass.Bell, D.G., D.G. Bobrow, O. Raiman, M.H. Shirley.  1997.  
ÒDynamic Documents and SituatedProcesses: Building on Local Knowledge in Field Service,Ó pp. 261-276 in 
Informationand Process Integration in Enterprises: Rethinking Documents. T. Wakayama, S. Kannapan,
C.M. Khoong, S. Navathe, and J. Yates, eds.  Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell,

Mass.Benjamin, Matthew.  1999.  
ÒClunky Internet Sites Get Social Science Treatment,Ó InvestorÕsBusiness Daily, October 15, p. A6.Bennis, W., and P. Ward Biederman.  1998.  
ÒNone of Us Is As Smart As All of Us,Ó IEEEComputer 31(3):116-117.
Bernstein, P.A., and E. Newcomer.  1997.  
Principles of Transaction Processing.  Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco.Bijker, W.E., T.P. Hughes, and T. Pinch, eds.  1987.  
The Social Construction of TechnologicalSystems.  MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188MAKING IT BETTERBrown, John Seely, and Paul Duguid.  2000.  The Social Life of Information.  Harvard BusinessSchool Press, Boston.Cairncross, F.  1997.  
The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution Will ChangeOur Lives.  Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Clement, A.  1994.  
ÒComputing at Work:  Empowering Action by Low-Level Users,
Ó Com-munications of the ACM 37:52-65.
Cohen, W.M., and D.A. Levinthal.  1990.  
ÒAbsorptive Capacity:  A New Perspective on
Learning and Innovation,Ó Administrative Science Quarterly 35:128-152.
Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council.  1989.  
Scaling Up:  A
Research Agenda for Software Engineering.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1992.  Computing the Future:  A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering
.National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1994.  Information Technology in the Service Society:  A Twenty-First Century Lever
.  Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1996.  Computing and Communications in the Extreme.  National Academy Press, Wash-
ington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1997.  More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the NationÕs InformationInfrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1998a.  Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of Information Technology:Report of a Workshop.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1998b.  ÒAdvancing the Public Interest Through Knowledge and Distributed Intelli-gence,Ó Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999. Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis Management.National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.2000.  The Digital Dilemma:  Intellectual Property in the Information Age
.  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Davenport, T.H.  1993.  
Process Innovation: Reengineering Worth Through Information Tech-nology. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.Deck, Stewart.  1999.  
ÒHuman Side Key to Data Warehousing,Ó Computerworld (February
15):14.Diffie, W., and S. Landau.  1997.  
Privacy on the Line:  The Politics of Wiretapping and Encryp-
tion.  MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Gibbs, W.W.  1994.  
ÒSoftwareÕs Chronic Crisis,Ó Scientific American (September):86-95.
Grenier, R., and G. Metes.  1996.  
Going Virtual: Moving Your Organization into the 21stCentury.  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Grief, Irene, ed.  1988.  
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: A Book of Readings.  Morgan
Kaufman, San Mateo, Calif.Hutchins, E.  1991.  
ÒOrganizing Work by Adaptation,Ó Organization Science 2:14-39.
Iacono, S., and R. Kling.  1984.  
ÒOffice Routine: The Automated Pink Collar,Ó IEEE Spec-trum (June):73-76.
Jones, C.  1996.  
Applied Software Measurement.  McGraw-Hill, New York.
Keen, P.G.W., and C. Balance.  1997.  
On-Line Profits: A ManagerÕs Guide to Electronic Com-merce.  Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS189Kleinrock, L.  1974.  
ÒResearch Areas in Computer Communication,Ó Computer Communica-tion Review 25(1):33-35, July.Kling, R., and W. Scacchi.  1984.  ÒThe Web of Computing:  Computer Technology as SocialOrganization,Ó Advances in Computers 21:1-90.
Markus, M.L. 1987.  ÒToward a ÔCritical MassÕ Theory of Interactive Media:  Universal
Access, Interdependence, and Diffusion,Ó Communication Research 14:491-511.
McKnight, L.W., and J.P. Bailey.  1997a.  ÒInternet Economics: When Constituencies Collidein Cyberspace,Ó IEEE Internet Computing 1(6):30-37, December.
McKnight, L.W., and J.P. Bailey.  1997b.  
Internet Economics.  MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Messerschmitt, David G.  1999.  
Networked Applications:  A Guide to the New Computing
Infrastructure.  Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.
Mitchell, W.J.  1996.  City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infobahn.  MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.National Academy of Engineering (NAE).  1989.  
Assessment of the National Science Founda-tionÕs Engineering Research Centers Program.  National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA).  1995.  
National Science FoundationÕsScience and Technology Centers: Building an Interdisciplinary Research Paradigm.  NAPA,
Washington, D.C.National Academy of Sciences (NAS), Panel on Science and Technology Centers.  1987.
Science and Technology Centers: Principles and Guidelines.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.National Academy of Sciences-National Academy of Engineering-Institute of Medicine(NAS-NAE-IOM), Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy.  1996.  
AnAssessment of the National Science FoundationÕs Science and Technology Centers Program.National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.National Science Foundation (NSF).  1997.  
The Engineering Research Centers (ERC) Program:An Assessment of Benefits and Outcomes.  NSF, Arlington, Va.
National Science Foundation (NSF).  1998.  
Science and Technology Centers (STC): IntegrativePartnerships.  Program Solicitation NSF 98-13. Available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/
od/oia/stc/nsf9813.html>.National Science Foundation (NSF).  1999a.  
Digital Government.  Program Announcement
NSF 99-102, Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate. Arling-
ton, Va.National Science Foundation (NSF).  1999b.  
ÒNational Science Board Approves Five NewNSF Science and Technology Centers,Ó Press Release, July 29. Available online at
<http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/news/press/99/pr9945.htm>.National Science Foundation (NSF).  2000.  
FY2001 Budget Request to Congress.  Available
online at <http://www.nsf.gov/home/budget/start.htm>.OÕLeary, D.E.  1998.  
ÒEnterprise Knowledge Management,Ó IEEE Computer 31(3):54-61.
Orr, J.  1990.  
ÒSharing Knowledge, Celebrating Identity:  War Stories and Community
Memory in a Service Culture,Ó pp. 169-189 in 
Collective Remembering:  Memory in Society,
D.S. Middleton and D. Edwards, eds. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, Calif.PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  1999.  Information Tech-nology Research:  Investing in Our Future.  National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and Communications, Arlington, Va., February.  Available online at
<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.Resnick, P., and H. Varian, eds.  1997.  
ÒSpecial Section:  Recommender Systems,
Ó Communi-cations of the ACM 40(3):56-58.
Robinson, Sara, and Lisa Guernsey.  1999.  
ÒMicrosoft and MIT to Develop TechnologiesTogether,Ó New York Times Cybertimes, October 5. Available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/library/tech/99/10/biztech/articles/05soft.html>.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190MAKING IT BETTERRosenberg, R.S.  1997.  
The Social Impact of Computers, 2nd ed.  Academic Press, New York.
Schofield, J. W. 1995.  Computers, Classroom Culture, and Change.  Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.Shapiro, C., and H. Varian.  1998.  
Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy.Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, Mass.Siegel, J.L., V. Dubrovsky, S. Kiesler, and T. McGuire.  1986.  
ÒGroup Processes in Computer-Mediated Communication,Ó Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes37:157-187.Sproull, L.S., and S. Kiesler.  1991.  
Connections: New Ways of Working in the NetworkedOrganization.  MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Stonebraker, Michael.  1998.  
ÒAre We Working on the Right Problems?Ó SIGMOD Record(ACM Special Interest Group on Management of Data) 27(2):496.Stonebraker, M., P.M. Aoki, R. Devine, W. Litwin, and M. Olson.  1994.  
ÒMariposa: A NewArchitecture for Distributed Data,Ó pp. 54-67 in 
Proceedings of the 10th InternationalConference on Data Engineering, IEEE Computer Society Press, New York.Wald, Matthew L.  2000.  
ÒNew Systems for Controllers May Ease Air Traffic Woes,Ó New
York Times, March 23. Available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/library/tech/biztech/articles/23traffic.html>.Walton, R.E.  1989.  
Up and Running: Integrating Technology and the Organization.  Harvard
Business School Press, Cambridge, Mass.Washington Technology.  2000.  
ÒFederal Agency IT Expenditures,Ó January 10, p. 6.
Wulf, William.  1999.  
ÒA Call for Technological Literacy,Ó IEEE Computer Applications inPower 12(2):10.NOTES1.The President
Õs Information Technology Advisory Committee (1999) identified ninemajor transformations that IT will bring to society.2.Other examples can be found to further demonstrate the introduction of IT into an
existing application.  One example is remote conferencing, which is intended to reproduce
and improve on face-to-face meetings or voice-only teleconferencing as a means for group
interaction.  In business, enterprise resource planning applications are intended to improvestandard business processes such as human resources, finance, and sales, building on ahistory of more focused multifaceted systems for manufacturing resource planning.3.This topic was the subject of an earlier CSTB study.  See Chapter 4 of CSTB (1994).
4.For example, the acquisition and use of word-processing applications in organiza-
tions are affected by status hierarchies.  At one point managers bought word-processing

systems that were used by the word-processing pool.  The users, lower status clerical per-
sonnel, had no control over what was used or its conditions of use (Iacono and Kling, 1984).Suggestions for improvements in the application or its conditions of use that were made by
users were ignored because the users had low status (Clement, 1994).  As the function of
word-processing clerical personnel was taken over by white collar workers doing their ownword processing, those white-collar workers encountered hidden interdependencies.  For

example, people could not exchange documents with others who were using incompatiblesoftware.  Sociologists have been conducting analyses of the socially embedded nature of
(apparently) stand-alone systems since the early 1980s (e.g., Kling and Scacchi, 1984).  Also

see Bijker et al. (1987) for a more general example of the social construction of technologicalsystems.5.The challenges and opportunities for designing systems that support a larger and
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS191diverse population of users in a larger variety of applications, focusing on issues of usabil-ity, are outlined in CSTB (1997).6.It is fairly easy to understand the capabilities needed by a word processing program
or spreadsheet, although as collaborative authoring features have been added, these capa-bilities have become increasingly sophisticated and complex.  A scientific computation has
a relatively well-defined form and capability.  Even a business application such as trans-

action support or management of accounts receivables or payroll records are reasonablywell defined and understood from the outset.  Broader application concepts, epitomized bythe expansive term Òe-commerce,Ó inherently embrace numerous interactions among sys-
tems, organizations, and individuals at multiple levels.7.As used here, the term 
ÒeconomicÓ refers to a broad range of purposeful activity,
including not only activity associated with various goods- and services-producing indus-
tries but also that associated with research, learning, and government.8.ÒKnowledge managementÓ is a new term that has the disadvantage of being a man-
agement buzzword, with the attendant hype, but if the hype can be set aside, the concept
can be leveraged to set ambitious objectives for making better use of information throughtechnology.9.See Stonebraker (1998) and Stonebraker et al. (1994).
10.For a detailed discussion of the complexities of intellectual property protection in a
digital environment, see CSTB (2000).11.The core role of governments is affected by IT, particularly by the global nature of
networks.  The concept of sovereignty rests largely on the geographical separation of juris-
dictions, which is undermined on a global network.  The trend toward more international
governance mechanisms to deal with international issues is a natural response to globaliza-
tion, but the trend is accelerated by global computer networking and the applications itsupports.  Issues such as privacy, restricted access for children, and taxation demand not
only new governance mechanisms but also new technologies to support them.12.Here again, networking is a driver, building on historical improvements in transpor-
tation and telecommunications and resulting shifts in markets, organizational scope and
scale, and institutional relationships.  Business processes and relationships associated with
contemporary IT cannot be appreciated accurately without acknowledging that history.13.The CSTB developed a powerful illustration of the value of systematic study of a
specific application domain.  Asked to look at crisis management, the board intrigued a
group of computer scientists with no knowledge of that domain by exposing them to theproblems of people whose jobs revolve around planning for, and responding to, civilian
and military crises (CSTB, 1996).  The communication about the problems inherent in crisis
management, in turn, led to new computer science research.  Some of the problems and
solutions were common to those found elsewhere, but even some of those had domain-
specific requirements, as evidenced by a project participantÕs observation that some of crisismanagement technology was like Òdigital libraries with deadlines.Ó14.It must be emphasized that social applications research is about technology as well
as social, economic, and political systems.  Its goal is to make technological progress more
dependent on visionary attention to the uses and needs for that technology and not simplyon a near-term, incremental commercial and technical research agenda.  As IT is encum-

bered with few fundamental limits and is mostly what we make of it, the goal is to aimtechnological advances in directions that offer the most benefit to society.  This research is
not only about the impact of technology on society, as emphasized by the report of the
PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (1999), but also about the impactof society and humanity on the requirements of future technologies, with the aim of maxi-mizing the beneficial impact and minimizing the harmful ones.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192MAKING IT BETTER15.These figures are from the Office of Management and Budget as cited in 
WashingtonTechnology (2000).
16.The Digital Government program is administered by the Computer and Information
Sciences and Engineering (CISE) directorate at NSF but grew out of an effort by the FederalInformation Services and Applications Council (FISAC) of the Computing, Information,and Communications Research and Development (CIC R&D) Subcommittee of the National
Science and Technology Council.  FISAC was created to stimulate and foster the migration
of technology from the IT community to government application missions and informationservices communities and to identify challenges from applications to the IT R&D commu-
nity.  It has participants from across the federal government (including the Department of
Health and Human Services, the Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics andSpace Administration, the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Transportation,
and the Environmental Protection Agency).  It (1) promotes the early application of advanced
computing, information, and communications technologies and R&D capabilities to criticalfederal government missions, (2) supports multiagency leadership in efforts that demon-
strate, deploy, and implement advanced computer and information technologies that havethe potential to be widely applicable to federal agency missions, (3) encourages pilot projectsto assess the critical computing, information, and communications technologies (e.g., secu-
rity technologies) needed by applications, and (4) supports broad administration goals inthe international arena that eliminate barriers to applications.  It drew inspiration from
CSTB (1996).17.Additional information on requirements for the Digital Government program is
available in the program solicitation.  See NSF (1999a).
18.For example, the first solicitation, in September 1998, attracted 50 proposals (many of
them for planning grants) that involved, among others, the Bureau of the Census, the Bureauof Labor Statistics, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Coast Guard, theNational Cancer Institute, the Department of Justice, the National Oceanographic and Atmo-spheric Administration, the U.S. Geological Survey, the Department of Energy, the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development, the General Services Administration, the Federal
Reserve Bank, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the National SecurityAgency, the Office of Management and Budget, and the Environmental Protection Agency.19.Information on IBM
Õs FOAK program was provided by Armando Garcia, IBM Cor-poration, personal communication dated July 28, 1998, and by Carol Kovak, IBM Corpora-tion, personal communication dated April 20, 2000.20.As an example of this phenomenon, consider the case of the Computers, Organiza-
tions, Policy, and Society (CORPS) group within the Department of Information and Com-puter Science at the University of California at Irvine.  CORPS concerns itself with studies
of the organizational, economic, and social aspects of computing and has strengths in
human-computer interaction, computer-supported cooperative work, and informationretrieval.  When the department was reviewed in 1997 as part of a mandatory 5-year exter-
nal review of its research and graduate programs, the review committee (which consisted
primarily of respected computer scientists) recommended that CORPS be removed fromthe department and placed somewhere else in the university, not because the research wasweak (on the contrary, the review committee declared it to be excellent and important), but
because the researchers used perspectives informed by the social sciences and thereforecould not understand the engineering perspective at the heart of computer science.  The
department did not take the review committeeÕs advice (on this subject at least), but thecase demonstrates the challenges of rewarding interdisciplinary efforts in the framework ofhighly specialized disciplines.21.These and other attitudes and perceptions about barriers to cross-disciplinary col-
laboration were elicited by CSTB Director Marjory Blumenthal through conversations withMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH MOTIVATED BY SOCIAL APPLICATIONS193MIT faculty members in computer science, electrical engineering, and social sciences, aswell as administrators, in 1998.22.Historically, most civil engineering departments have been, by necessity, sociotechnical
systems departments.  Similar divisions have been tried at many universities.  In the 1960s
and 1970s, the Sloan Foundation funded a number of universities to create divisions of thistype.  Other examples include MIT
Õs Energy Laboratory and Carnegie Mellon UniversityÕsRobotics Institute, which go back 25 years or more.  Historically, these centers flourished
for a number of years and then either atrophied or faded as funding shifted to differentsociotechnical system areas or the faculty champions retired.23.The NSF has also supported some work on sociotechnical systems through its Direc-
torate on Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE), but most of that work has focusedon issues not directly associated with IT.  Some researchers at the nexus of computing and

the social sciences claim that SBE has not been supportive enough of the centrality of tech-nology in such research, but in recent years, the directorate has cosponsored work (with theCSS program) on research challenges related to the social and economic impacts of IT on
intellectual property protection in a digital environment.  See CSTB (1998a) and CSTB (2000).
24.A 
ÒDear ColleagueÓ letter posted on the CISE Web site in 1999 noted that increased
future funding was anticipated for the CSS program and called for proposals related to
traditional CSS interests and the broader issues of social and economic implications of IT.Proposals could request up to $300,000 in funding for 36 months.  The CSS expected to
make about 10 awards in FY99.  See National Science Foundation, Computing and Informa-

tion Science and Engineering Directorate.  Undated.  
ÒDear ColleagueÓ letter from Michael
Lesk, division director, Information and Intelligent Systems Division. Available online at<http://www.interact.nsf.gov/cise/html.nsf/html/css_dcl?OpenDocument>.25.Indeed, the purpose of NSF
Õs ITR program is to Òenhance the value of informationtechnology for everyone.Ó  The complete list of areas in which NSF is soliciting proposals
under the ITR program is as follows:  software, IT education and workforce, human-
computer interface, information management, advanced computational science, scalableinformation infrastructure, social and economic implications of IT, and revolutionary com-
puting.  Letters of intent for proposals exceeding $500,000 were due in November 1999;
those for smaller projects were not due until January 2000.  The NSF anticipated making
awards under the ITR program in September 2000.  See NSF (1999a).
26.Many Web designers do not understand user behavior, including why users often
leave sites soon after going to them.  In an attempt to understand a user
Õs experience of aWeb site, Modem Media uses the technique of role playing, in which employees pretend to
be users that fit a certain profile.  Modem Media intends to hire psychologists and anthro-
pologists to expand its efforts to understand user behavior.  Meanwhile, Sapient announced
plans to buy E-Lab because of E-LabÕs knowledge of Òpatterns of behavior that reveal anddrive the nature of experience.Ó  However, Web site usability expert Jakob Nielsen says
social scientists are not the answer, and that companies should focus instead on conductingusability tests with actual customers.  See Benjamin (1999).
27.The STC program was initiated in response to President Ronald Reagan
Õs 1987 Stateof the Union address, which proposed the establishment of federal centers to promote U.S.economic competitiveness.  Of the original 25 centers funded from the first two program

solicitations, 23 remain; 5 new centers were granted funding in July 1999.  See NSF (1999b).
28.Industrial support is not a requirement for the centers, but the STCs average eight
industrial partners per center.  See National Academy of Public Administration (1995).
29.A bibliometric analysis conducted by Abt Associates, Inc., found that the journal
publications of STC researchers were cited 1.69 times as often as the average U.S. academicpaper published and that the journals in which STC scientists published had greater influ-
ence than the average scientific journal.  In addition, papers from STC researchers are cited
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194MAKING IT BETTERtwo to four times as often in U.S. patents as the average academic research paper.  See Abt
Associates (1996).30.In most cases, outreach did not significantly interfere with the conduct of research,
but it did in the case of at least one STC.  The center was told after one NSF site visit that it
did not conduct enough outreach programs, so it began participating in so many outreachactivities that after another NSF site visit, the center was told that it did not conduct enough
research.  In response to the first site-visit report, almost all of the time of the postdoctoral
scientists and almost all the resources of the center in the summer months were devoted toK-12 outreach programs.31.Most of the time is spent by a center
Õs director and administration, and only a smallproportion of the time is spent by the actual researchers.32.The Abt Associates evaluation of the STC program was even more favorable than the
COSEPUP report.  Abt writes that 
Òindividual centers have produced significant researchachievements in fundamental knowledge and the development of research tools, and haveidentified a range of downstream impacts of this work.Ó  Abt found the centers to be
particularly flexible and effective in responding to scientific opportunities and reportedthat Òindustry partners consider their affiliations with the STCs to be immensely benefi-cial.Ó  In addition, the Abt report viewed the K-12 educational programs more favorably
than did the COSEPUP report.  See Abt Associates (1996).
33.As an analogy, consider the roles of mathematics and economics in other fields.  As
they became increasingly critical to a number of fieldsÑmathematics to physics and eco-nomics to business or agriculture, for exampleÑcollaboration as a way of addressing theresulting challenges soon became inadequate.  Rather, domain experts felt the need to be-
come sufficiently adept at mathematics or economics to contribute directly in these areas.
The situation is similar with IT, which is becoming an integral part of the sociotechnicalapplications within which it is embedded; that is, the artificial separation of application-specific and information technology expertise is no longer effective.  A solid grounding in
mathematics is considered essential to the natural sciences and engineering, and a solidgrounding in economics is considered essential to business, agriculture, and a number of
other fields.  Similarly, modern forms of IT should be considered normal and essential parts
of the background in a number of other fields.  These fields include particularly the educa-
tion of future engineers in fields as diverse as civil, mechanical, aerospace, electrical, and
nuclear engineering, and also the education of future business managers (many of whomspecialize in the social sciences and humanities as well as business).  A broad cross-section
of students in other natural and social science disciplines also need to take at least a founda-
tion course in these technologies, analogous to a first course in economics.34.This continual expansion of what is considered the core is healthy and needs to be
strongly encouraged.  Two fields that were once considered applications of computers are

computer graphics and database storage systems.  After computer science researchers began
to make progress on these topics and publish papers and the capabilities became a normalpart of many systems, they gradually came to be considered part of the core of the com-
puter science research community.  The technologies surrounding e-commerce are in the
process of making this transition.  Controversy surrounding the publication of the CSTB
report Computing the Future:  A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering
 in 1992
suggests that change is not always welcome or even understood.  See CSTB (1992).
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1955Expanding the Scale and Scope ofInformation Technology Research
The twenty-first century begins with unprecedented opportunitiesto use information technology (IT) to meet a growing number of
societal needs.  The payoff from investments in IT research initia-
tives launched a half a century ago have become manifest:  IT has moved
from the laboratory to the office, store, and home and has been incorpo-
rated into personal belongings of all types.  It is also transforming count-

less aspects of business, government, and social interaction from educa-
tion to health care to commerce, and as the potential of IT grows, so, too,
do usersÕ expectations for it.  More people want IT to do more things,

more easily, with more trustworthiness, and with more reach into society.
The IT research community has many ideas about the ways in which
computer science and engineering can be developed and applied to meet
those expectations and new ones that will emerge as further progress is
made.  Paradoxically, however, it looks as if it will be more difficult to

make practical progress.  The potential of IT and the challenges that must

be overcome to realize that potential are rising in tandem, boosting the
level of required investments.  Everyone can see the growth of markets

for IT goods and services, but the need for more research is less obvious.
Nevertheless, the range of emergent issues for IT research to address is
increasing, calling for an expanded research agenda.Many reports call for more funding for IT research.  Such pleas comein the face of  the misperception that companies that sell large amounts of

IT products and services and that generate large revenues or market valu-
ations are capable of the types of research needed.  Many reports also
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196MAKING IT BETTERpoint out that academic research, funded largely by the federal govern-ment, is essential for expanding the knowledge base.1   Building on that
work, this report also advocates a large research effort that fosters
advances in a number of important, specific areas of IT.  At the same time,

it goes beyond previous appeals by arguing that the metamorphosis of IT
from distinct devices (both hardware and software) into complex, large-
scale societal infrastructure calls for a shift in the emphases of IT research,
which in turn requires different approaches to the organization and con-
duct of IT research.  Traditional mechanisms for funding and conducting
IT research are not necessarily attuned to todayÕs research challenges, sonew mechanisms must be developed.  Attention to the ways in which

research is supported and conducted is more important than ever, given
the allure held by industry over the past few years for the talent that
historically filled the ranks of graduate students and faculty.  Today
Õsreality is that research competes with other activities, and research pro-
grams must emphasize compelling and important problems that will
attract and retain talented individuals.This chapter summarizes the study committeeÕs primary recommen-dations for ensuring the continued well-being of the nationÕs researchbase in IT.  The premise, based on the arguments put forth in the preced-

ing chapters, is that IT research can no longer focus almost exclusively on
the IT components that have been the hallmark of past initiatives but
must expand to include commensurate research efforts on the problems
of large-scale systems and the social applications that they support.  The

chapter recommends the continuation of ongoing and substantial fund-
ing and support for traditional areas of IT research, but it also calls for
new research that emphasizes large-scale systems and social applications.
It recommends both meaningful efforts to promote something that has
proven difficult to achieveÑinterdisciplinary researchÑand diversifica-tion in the modes of supporting and conducting such research.  If success-

ful, these research efforts could ultimately improve education in large-
scale systems and social applications, helping to create a workforce better
able to research, develop, and use IT systems.Implicit in the recommendations is a recognition that the IT researchcommunity is stepping into uncharted territory in which many new research
challenges are arising and even familiar problems can assume new forms.
The recommendations therefore seek to foster experimentation with a
variety of approaches to bringing together diverse communities with dif-
ferent sets of expertise and different perspectives on the issues of IT
researchÑcharacteristics that have contributed to the nationÕs history ofsuccess in IT (CSTB, 1999a).  They lay out the desired characteristics of

research mechanisms but recognize that multiple approaches may needMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH197to be tried, evaluated, and fitted to the particular characteristics of theinstitutions involved.The recommendations are organized according to the group of stake-holders, decision makers, and policy makers to which they are directed:
those in government, universities, and industry.  As the discussion notes,

however, these groups will have to interact to ensure that the set of
research programs put in place will meet societyÕs growing needs for ITand assure that this and future generations can safely depend on IT
systems.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GOVERNMENTThe federal government has an important role to play in helping toexpand the IT research agenda.  Government agencies have long been an

important source of funding for the IT research community as well as for
the other research communities that may need to become more closely
integrated into IT activities.  Although federal expenditures for IT research

are dwarfed by those of industry, they constitute the overwhelming major-
ity of research funds provided to universities and thus are critical in sup-

porting long-term fundamental research that can benefit a wide range of
companies, both established companies and start-ups.  Moreover, because

federal funding is so pervasive in academia, it can be used as a lever to
help direct academic research toward needed areas.  In doing so, it can lay

the groundwork for more subtle transformations of research and devel-
opment (R&D) in industry as well.  The committee makes four recom-

mendations to help guide this process.Recommendation 1.  The federal government should continue to boost
funding levels for fundamental information technology research,
commensurate with the growing range of research challenges.The first step in expanding the scope of IT research is to ensure theavailability of sufficient funding to address the growing range of research
problems that must be tackled.  The scope of inquiry for IT-related re-

search is clearly growing (as is the need for more creativity and flexibility
in how funds are allocated and spent).  The unprecedented growth in the
complexity, size, and social engagement of the IT systems now being
deployed calls for fundamentally new concepts, abstractions, and meth-
odologies to master and harness IT for the good of the society.  Attaining
those concepts, abstractions, and methodologies is the goal of fundamen-
tal research.  Hence, increased funding is needed not only to support

continued advances in the capabilities of IT components (e.g., increased
processing power, storage capacities, and communications bandwidth)Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198MAKING IT BETTERbut also to develop solutions to the problems posed by large-scale sys-tems and social applications of IT.  The committee views components,

systems, and applications as three equally important areas for research,
noting that they play roles in IT analogous to the roles of biomedical
research, physiology, and medicine in the health sciences.  Each area

informs work in the others, and fundamental scientific understanding is
needed in all three areas to ensure a properly functioning system.As noted above, the government is the primary vehicle for support offundamental IT research.  Although industry funds a considerable amount

of research (some of which is fundamental research) in its own laborato-
ries and in universities, intense competitive pressures and the need to
generate positive returns for investors force companies to direct more of
their R&D funding to projects with more certain results and more obvious
applicability to market needs.  The potential social return on investments
in research is enormous, but these investments will not be made without
the governmentÕs lead.It is not feasible to specify a precise dollar amount by which ITresearch funding should increase, but the increases recommended by the
PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC) andrequested by the Clinton Administration for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 are
representative of the magnitude of the annual increases needed for some
time to come (PITAC, 1999).  Government program managers report that

they receive far more high-quality research proposals than they can fund
(a situation that is common in other fields, too).  How the money is spent
is at least as important as the amount.  Researchers in the field observed,

in testimony to the committee and in other contexts, that the allocation of
federal funding shows less vision and more emphasis on process than it
did in the middle of the twentieth century.  The historic comparison is

important, because there is a correlation between the approach to funding
management and the yield.  Today
Õs circumstances demand a more vision-ary, 
less process-bound approach, as will be discussed below, because theneeds of large-scale systems and social applications can be met only with
innovative, revolutionary work.  The Defense Advanced Research Projects

Agency (DARPA), in particular, has a history of supporting revolutionary
work, and this orientation should be reinforced and encouraged.Recommendation 2.  The National Science Foundation and the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency should establish sig-
nificant programs of fundamental research in large-scale information
technology systems.Large-scale IT systems pose difficult technical (and nontechnical)problems that are manifested in a variety of ways:  delays in designing
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH199and deploying new IT systems, failures of operational systems, inabilityto add new functionality to existing systems, and unexpected behavior.
The direct cost of these failures is high.2  By some estimates, between 70
and 80 percent of all major system development efforts are never finished,
seriously overrun their cost and development time objectives, or fail to
provide the desired functionality.  Hundreds of millions
Ñeven billionsÑof dollars are spent on such failed efforts.  The indirect costs of fragile

systems are even greater because of the potential for widespread damage
from failures of critical IT infrastructures used for controlling the electric
power grid, communications systems, or financial transactions.Problems with large-scale systems are not new, but the steady push tobuild and use such systems means there is an imperative to address those
problems now.  System failures are not only the stuff of daily news, they

are also the stuff of congressional hearings and inquiries by regulatory
agencies.  Improved techniques for designing and implementing large-

scale systems will require fundamental research to build a stronger scien-
tific base for understanding such systems.  A stepped-up research program

should include not only case research that examines particular systems
also methodology research that seeks common architectures, techniques,
and tools that can influence a wide range of large-scale systems.  Two

elements are key to success:  the enabling resources (i.e., funding and the
talent it nurtures, infrastructure, access to appropriate artifacts) and the
cultivation of a motivated community of researchers.Although all federal agencies face problems with large-scale systems,DARPA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) are the best posi-
tioned to lead research efforts in this area because it needs fundamental
science and engineering and because they have the longest history of
managing related research and the closest contact with the appropriate
research communities.  Both DARPA and NSF have a number of pro-

grams in place that address elements of the large-scale systems problem,
but their programs have not been linked to form the larger thrust that
would give this problem area the high profile it deserves.  A stepped-up

program would help create the critical mass of researchers needed to
address large-scale systems issues and help form a research community
around this set of problems.  Strong federal leadership of the sort that

DARPA andÑto a lesser, but growing, extentÑNSF have demonstratedin the past could bring about a more comprehensive approach.The development of the fundamental Internet technology provides amodel:  effective program management led a dispersed group of researchers

to work on separate projects toward a shared goal.  A dynamic mix of

people and institutions participated in different ways and at different
times according to their interests and capabilities and the needs of the
project or program.  Both DARPA and the NSF should experiment with
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200MAKING IT BETTERprogram management to promote such leadership, creative research, andcommunity efforts to tackle todayÕs large-scale systems challengesÑwhich are, of course, similar to some of the early Internet challenges.
These agencies will need to ensure the quality of the research while allow-
ing researchers sufficient freedom to pursue fundamental, visionary work.The research conducted under a broad program on large-scale systemsshould pursue a diversity of problems and approaches.  As described in

greater detail in Chapter 3, it should do the following:¥Support both theoretical and experimental work;¥Provide small, medium-size, and large awards to support indi-vidual investigator research, small teams of researchers, and larger col-
laborative efforts;¥Pursue a range of approaches to large-scale systems problems, such
as improved software design methodologies, system architecture, reus-
able code, and biological and economic models;¥Attempt to address the full scope of large-scale systems issues,including scalability, heterogeneity, trustworthiness, flexibility, and
predictability;3and¥Provide academic researchers some form of access to large-scalesystems.Access to large-scale systems could be provided in any of the severalforms:  researchers could team with organizations that deploy or operate

such infrastructures; they could create separate experimental testbeds that
would allow them to develop, demonstrate, and test new techniques
without worrying about interfering with operational systems; or existing
systems (such as portions of the Internet) could be better instrumented to
provide researchers with the kinds of data they need for analysis.  Some

combination of these approaches will undoubtedly be needed.Given the broadening circle of agencies interested in and involvedwith IT research, DARPA and NSF should attempt to involve in this
research program other federal agencies that operate large-scale IT sys-
tems and that would benefit from advances in their design.  In other

words, participants should include not only other agencies with a history
of funding IT research (such as the Department of Energy, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Institutes of
Health) but also agencies that have not traditionally funded IT research
but have large budgets for developing and procuring IT systems (such asthe Internal Revenue Service, 
the Federal Aviation Administration, andthe Social Security Administration).  Doing so may help to ensure that

researchers have access to research facilities that would allow them toMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH201better understand the problems faced in large-scale system design, devel-opment, and operation.  Agencies such as the Deaprtment of Health and

Human Services and the National Institute of Standards and Technology
might be able to expand their support for fundamental research and sys-
tem problems, too.One approach for engaging a diverse set of agencies in an IT researcheffort would be to build a vigorous program within NSF to understand
the Internet and make it more robust.  This effort could build on ongoing
activities, such as the Next Generation Internet program, which involves
several federal agencies, including DARPA, NSF, NASA, DOE, and NIH
(via the National Library of Medicine).4  The idea would be to use the
Internet as the experimental testbed and build an institutional structure
that facilitates research on it.  In addition to generating useful technical

results, this Internet-as-testbed approach could evaluate whether the
approaches the committee suggests are effective in practice.Recommendation 3.  Federal agencies should increase support for
interdisciplinary work on social applications of information tech-
nology that draws on the expertise of researchers from IT and other
disciplines and includes end users of IT systems.People use IT.  That has long been the case.  What is different now and
for the future is that, as more people use IT, and in more ways, they are
less likely to be expert users or interested in how IT works (as opposed to
how well it works); furthermore, they want to make more and better use
of IT in ways that affect their lives more intimately and directly than the
early systems did in scientific and back-office business applications.  These

are issues with which the traditional IT research community has little
experience.  Successful work on the social applications of IT will require

new computer science and engineering as well as research that is coupled
more extensively and effectively to other perspectivesÑperspectives fromother intellectual disciplines and from the people who use the end results,
that is, the goods, services, and systems that are deployed.  For some time

now, the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB),
echoed by PITAC and the Clinton Administration, has been calling for
research on the societal impacts of IT; the present committee is emphasiz-
ing a complementary, technical sort of research that will result in IT with
fewer adverse and more positive impacts.The ongoing Information Technology for the Twenty-First Century(IT2) initiative, in particular the social, economic, and workforce compo-nent of the IT Research (ITR) program at the NSF, provides a basis for
addressing both the impacts of the systems and new approaches to them;
the committee, however,  envisions a more substantial effort that interacts
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202MAKING IT BETTERwith the rest of the IT research effort.  The bases for such work are already
evident within programs supported by DARPA, NSF, and other agencies.
The NSFÕs Computing and Social Sciences program and Digital Govern-ment program are important steps in the right direction, and they could
serve as models or launching points for more expansive efforts if they
prove successful in the long term, but at present, they are limited in size
and scope.  Broader programmatic support is needed, along with the

attendant nurturing of a research community.  The major expansion that

is warranted should have the following characteristics, which are dis-
cussed below:¥Research support provided through a variety of mechanisms;¥Explicit participation of end users and systems integrators in theresearch process;¥Participation of federal agencies that are major users of IT systems,not just the traditional funders of IT research;¥Access to operational systems and support for testbeds;¥Management and oversight provided by traditional funders of ITresearch; and¥Pursuit of fundamental knowledge of the interaction between ITand the context in which it is deployed.Research support mechanisms should range from small, single-investigator grants to medium-size collaborations among researchers from
different disciplines, to activities characteristic of research centers that
enable large numbers of researchers to interact for extended periods of
time and across multiple projects.  Significant progress will not be made

on social applications through single-investigator research alone; efforts
will be needed across the full range of program scales and scopes.  The

NSF has recognized this need in its solicitation for the ITR program, which

calls for grants of many sizes, including for the establishment of centers to
focus on social, economic, and workforce issues.  The Computing and

Information Science and Engineering (CISE) directorate has limited expe-
rience in managing such efforts, but it can build on NSFÕs experience withscience and technology centers, engineering technology centers, and
supercomputing centers.  It will need to ensure that centers maintain a

strong focus on research and produce high-quality results through periodic
evaluations.Another way to organize larger research programs would be to clusteractivities around a project rather than around a center per se, as DARPA
and, to a lesser extent, NSF have done in the past.  Program managers

could pick specific problems to work on (e.g., a design project, such as air
traffic control, control of the electric grid, or payment for health careMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH203services), establish research goals to be pursued, facilitate the relationshipbetween the research community and the system to be studied, and issue
a call for proposals to participateÑmuch as has been done with the DigitalLibraries Initiative.5  The life of such projects, unlike that of the center,
would not be fixed at 5 or 10 years but would be linked to the natural
cycle of study implied by the testbed artifact.  Such a project would be

more dynamic than a center, allowing a changing mix of researchers and
institutions to participate in different phases of the project as their inter-
ests and the needs of the project suggest as opposed to binding them
together for a set period of time.  Program managers at DARPA and NSF
would exercise leadership by establishing a common direction for all the
researchers, even if they were not all working under the same contract.  A

process of this kind would draw on a set of programmatic goals to moti-
vate research rather than emphasize a particular form of organizing
researchers.  It would more closely resemble the organization of early

research on the Internet rather than the organization of NSFÕs Science andTechnology Center program.Research programs motivated by social applications must engage endusers and system integrators in order to better understand the problems
that people and organizations are confronting with IT systems and the
range of potential solutions and to gain the inspiration for research.  It

may be unrealistic to expect end users and systems integrators to actually
conduct research, at least initially, but they should at least participate on
advisory boards or otherwise contribute actively to the research process.
Over time, they should play a more active role in funding research and
perhaps even in conducting it.  The differences between them and the

research community in culture and approach to the use of time and
resources may make it difficult to engage them, but once the benefits are
demonstrated, the committee expects that end users and system integra-
tors will become more supportive of such work.The participation of federal agencies that are major users of IT sys-tems is also important.  Government systems are, by definition, large-

scale artifacts of public interest; they are, by observation, artifacts that
present problems and opportunities that challenge the state of the art.6The difficulties experienced in getting these systems right show the limi-
tations of current technology and of the skill base in industry.  Govern-

ment agencies would save money and improve their productivity and
service quality if there were a better understanding of ways to reliably
and efficiently design, operate, maintain, and upgrade large-scale sys-
tems and social applications of IT.  Research based on government sys-

tems would undoubtedly improve the knowledge base for private-sector
systems as well.  Designing a program for agencies that lack the funding,
personnel, and orientation to research will be more difficult than design-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204MAKING IT BETTERing conventional research programs, but again, the Digital Governmentprogram, which has forged links between many agencies, should be
leveraged, at least to explore what is possible and to initiate experiments.
The coordinating structure of Digital Government, the Federal Informa-
tion Systems Advisory Committee (FISAC), is charged with building
bridges between the IT research community and government agencies,
and its activities should be encouraged and strengthened.  Experimenta-

tion will be necessary, because differences among agencies will demand
different mechanisms for research linkages.  Some activities under

FISACÕs purview (e.g., those associated with universal access) hold greatpotential for social applications research.An important element of efforts to better understand the social applica-tions of IT
Ñwhich are based on large-scale systemsÑis researcher accessto operational IT systems for purposes of observation, data collection, and
analysis.  Many research proposals should include plans for gaining such

access, which could come through the participation of end-user organiza-
tions, as described above.  Access to operational systems for testing and

demonstrating proposed solutions would also be desirable but may not
be feasible because of the need to keep many operational systems running
almost continuously and the uncertainties inherent in introducing new
elements into an existing system.  Accordingly, researchers will need to

develop plans for testing new research results in more limited testbed
systems, in which outcomes can be evaluated before the solutions are
deployed in operational systems.Although end users and systems integrators must be encouraged toparticipate in research on social applications, organizations more experi-
enced in managing IT research (such as DARPA and NSF within the
federal government) will need to oversee such programs, as is being done
in the Digital Government initiative.  In the committee
Õs judgment, theseorganizations are the best qualified to ensure that the research maintains
a focus on long-term, fundamental results rather than devolving into

applied research and development and targeting the needs of specific end
users.  Early experience with the Digital Government program demon-

strates that what end users perceive as research is often seen by the IT
research community as development.  A strong focus on fundamental

research is necessary if leading IT researchers are expected to participate
in the research program and if meaningful, broadly applicable insight is
to be gained.Finally, the work funded in this area should pursue a fundamentalknowledge of the interaction between IT and the context in which it is
deployed.  A central element of the overall program must be to inform IT

research as well as understand the social and economic implications of IT
applications.  One challenge will be to establish effective peer review
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH205mechanisms to ensure the quality of the research.  Because reviewers will
need to be drawn from the range of disciplines encompassed by an indi-
vidual proposal, programs in specific areas need to be announced before-
hand (such as digital libraries) so that appropriate sets of reviewers can be
assembled to evaluate groups of related proposals.Recommendation 4.  The Bureau of the Census should work with
the National Science Foundation to develop more effective proce-
dures for classifying data on federal and industry investments in
information technology R&D that better account for the dynamic
nature of the industry.Better data on industry investments in R&D would allow for better-informed policymaking about research support, especially levels of fund-
ing.  Such data are currently gathered for the NSF by the Census Bureau,

but they are highly inconsistent from one year to the next, owing largely
to frequent reclassifications of companies into, out of, and among the
industry sectors most closely allied with IT.7  Significant improvements
could probably made without increasing the cost of data collection by
simply aggregating the data in a more consistent way from one year to the
next.  Admittedly, the dynamic nature of the IT industry and waves of

mergers and acquisitions among major players can make company classi-
fication difficult, yet existing procedures for classification appear to give
priority to accurate reporting for a given year rather than across years.
Moreover, they tend to categorize a firm according to the industry classi-
fication that best describes the composition of its domestic payroll rather
than its main source of revenues.  As firms move production overseas or

change the workforce mix through mergers, acquisitions, spin-offs, and
outsourcing, their industry classifications can change dramatically, pro-
ducing equally dramatic changes in reported research.8  Large, diversi-
fied IT companies would appear to be most prone to reclassification
because their lines of business span several industry sectors.  They also

tend to have the largest R&D budgets, so reclassifications can have a large
effect on the reported, aggregate statistics.Efforts are under way to replace the Standard Industrial Classifica-tion codes with a set of North American Industrial Classification System
codes that will provide better coverage of the information and informa-
tion technology industries.9  This change is unlikely to have a significant
effect on the quality of industrial R&D data in the IT industries unless
improved methods are developed for classifying firms into the new cat-
egories and ensuring greater consistency in such classifications over time.
Attempts to improve the collection and reporting of IT R&D in industry
should include efforts to develop more robust procedures for classifica-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206MAKING IT BETTERtion that are less sensitive to small changes in company structure.  The
goal should be to facilitate the compilation and reporting of more consis-
tent sets of data series describing past, present, and future investments in
IT R&D.  These issues will become even more important as the nation

continues its course toward an information economy and IT becomes
more pervasive.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR UNIVERSITIESWhereas government and industry will be the primary sources offunding for an expanded IT research agenda, universities will be primary
sites for conducting that research.  They will also be the primary institu-

tions for educating the next generation of researchers, developers, and
users of large-scale systems and social applications.  Research is closely

tied to education, forming part of the educational process of graduate and
some undergraduate students and generating additional knowledge that
cannot be conveyed through more conventional course work.  Universities

have a long tradition of conducting fundamental research on IT that has
contributed to innovation in industry.  This tradition must be extended to

the problems of large-scale systems and social applications.  This will not

be an easy task in todayÕs environment.  Universities are not presently set
up to address these important areas, and they will need to change if they
are to help make IT better.  Many computer science and engineering

departments are caught up in Internet-related technologies, which will
make it hard to shift attention to issues of large-scale systems and social
applications when so much can be done using a traditional component-
oriented approach.  Nevertheless, there may be pockets of interest that

can be motivated in the near term.  In the longer term it may become more

apparent that many of the most successful Internet-based innovations are
those that pursue social applicationsÑwhich face the challenges of large-scale IT systems.  Several steps can be taken to shift attention to large-

scale systems and social applications.Recommendation 5.  Universities should take steps to increase theability of faculty members and students to participate in inter-
disciplinary research related to information technology and research
on large-scale systems.Given the tendency of faculty members and other researchers to ori-ent their research to conventional disciplinary pursuits, they will not be
able to pursue interdisciplinary research focused on social applications of
IT without additional incentives and the removalÑor relaxationÑof exist-ing barriers to interdepartmental collaboration.  Increases in the amount
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH207of research funding available for interdisciplinary work (as recommended
above) would be an important means of achieving both objectives, but
universities should also implement changes that will enable their facul-
ties to work at the intersection of multiple disciplines and help research
staffs to win interdisciplinary research funding.  The steps they take will

vary from one university to another, reflecting the relative strengths and
weakness of different departments and the relationships among them,
but several areas are ripe for examination and should be addressed, as
noted below.  Efforts to enable university research in large-scale systems

and the social applications of IT will also enrich educational opportuni-
ties in these areas, enhancing the nationÕs ability to conduct research on ITand make better use of it.Recommendation 5.1.  Universities should ensure that their hiring,
review, and tenure processes are aligned with the interdisciplinary
nature of the research that this report recommends.As noted in Chapter 4, one barrier to interdisciplinary research in
universities is the difficulty of hiring, promoting, and granting tenure to
faculty members who pursue interdisciplinary work.  Their work is often

viewed through a disciplinary lens that does not properly appreciate work
that crosses disciplinary boundaries.  Within the computer science com-

munity, work on applications is seldom seen as a valuable or respectable
target of research.  Any of a number of mechanisms could be used to

address this problem, depending on the university.  Some universities

have established interdisciplinary schools, divisions, or departments that
can hire and promote faculty members who specialize in multiple inter-
disciplinary areas, but this is not necessarily the only solution.  These

formalized structures also contribute to the universityÕs educational mis-sions that help train future generations of students and IT-related workers.
Other universities have found ways to establish tenure committees and
review processes that more accurately assess interdisciplinary research,
even if that research takes place within a traditional academic department.
Computer science departments or university administrators could also
promulgate policies stating that research in interdisciplinary or applications-
oriented areas will be given full consideration in the promotion and tenure
process.10  Any one of these approaches
Ñor a combination of themÑcould be appropriate.  The key is to ensure that disciplinary-based review

procedures do not disfavor work at the intersection of disciplines while
simultaneously ensuring the quality of research.  All interdisciplinary

research cannot be of high quality, and quality control is especially im-
portant in fields with growing budgets.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208MAKING IT BETTERRecommendation 5.2.  Universities should encourage closer ties
between faculty and student researchers and their counterparts in
industry, especially in companies with pressing needs to resolve
problems of large-scale systems and social applications of informa-
tion technology.The forging of stronger ties between universities and companiesengaged in building or operating large-scale systems or social applica-
tions of IT could help university researchers to gain (1) greater exposure
to, and insight into, the challenges faced by these types of organizations
and (2) access to some elements of the research infrastructure.  One way

to strengthen such ties is to appoint representatives from such companies
to departmental review committees and advisory boards.  Another mecha-

nism, which should be strongly encouraged, is to promote sabbaticals and

internships to facilitate direct interaction between university researchers and

industry.One of the most effective mechanisms for transferring knowledgeand expertise is to have people work together.  Indeed, a number of

leading researchers require all their Ph.D. students without industrial
experience to spend one summer or semester in industry to gain what
they consider invaluable experience.11  The problem with pursuing such
an approach in the areas of large-scale systems and social applications is
that few IT end-user companies have internship programs for IT researchers
(most IT companies with research labs have such programs).  University

administrators should work with such companies to establish trial intern-
ship programs that could be expanded if they prove successful.  Officials

will need to work with funding agencies and foundations to secure funds
for such programs, at least until the end-user organizations become con-
vinced of their value and provide additional support themselves.  Univer-

sity administrators should also promote interest in these programs among
faculty and students.  Some faculty members may be hesitant to encour-

age students to take time away from their university laboratory, espe-
cially if their absence would create staffing problems for critical research
projects.  But if the internship programs are designed to benefit the stu-

dents, and spending time in industry is important for students, then such
issues as time away from professors and staffing research projects should
be planned for in advance.  If the internships are as successful as this

committee envisions, their contribution to the quality and effectiveness of
IT research will quickly become apparent.Recommendation 6.  Senior faculty members should take the lead in
pioneering research on large-scale systems and social applications
of information technology.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH209Universities need to find ways in which junior faculty can work onimportant, interesting problems.  In most cases, junior faculty members

are at a disadvantage in pioneering new research in interdisciplinary
areas.  Concerns about gaining tenure within the existing disciplinary

structure of most universities can dissuade them from proposing revolu-
tionary research ideas early in their careers, as can the difficulties inherent
in securing federal funding for interdisciplinary research.  The recom-

mendations above are intended to alleviate some of these problems, but
they do not address them all.  The trend away from large grants to univer-

sity research labs and toward smaller grants to individual investigators
has further limited the ability of senior faculty to support innovative work
by junior faculty.  The expanded research programs outlined above on

large-scale IT systems and social applications of IT could address part of
this problem by making additional funding available, but the leadership
of senior faculty members will also be important in legitimizing new
research areas.  By building on the vision of research in large-scale sys-

tems and social applications that is laid out in this report and communi-
cating that vision to the research community and to funding agencies and
universities, senior faculty will help create more opportunities for junior
faculty to strike out in these new directions.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INDUSTRYIndustry is an important partner in any attempt to expand the scaleand scope of IT research.  It both funds and conducts IT research, and,

ultimately, it must harvest the fruits of research to develop new products,
processes, and services for clients.  In the eyes of some, industry is already

the leader in work on large-scale systems and social applications because
it is intimately involved in developing systems to support innovative
applications in commerce, publishing, health care, education, and many
other fields.  Yet, industry
Õs development activities may have exceeded itsresearch capacity, contributing to the deployment of systems that are not
well understood.  As noted in Chapter 2, most industry research is con-

centrated in the vendor communityÑthe companies that produce IT com-ponents (e.g., hardware, software, and devices).  These companies must

continue to invest in research that enables continued progress in IT, but
they and other organizations that use IT need to become more involved in
research that addresses large-scale systems and social applications.Recommendation 7.  Organizations that are significant end users of
information technology systems should actively seek opportunities
to engage in IT research.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210MAKING IT BETTERAs IT becomes increasingly intertwined in the operations of end-userorganizations in the public and private sectors, there is an increased need
to bring such organizations into the research process. These organizations
can contribute to the IT research base through any of a variety of mecha-
nisms, some of which were outlined above:  by funding research in other

organizations (such as universities), by conducting research themselves
(although most end users currently lack this capability), by forming indus-
try consortia, or by providing input into ongoing research initiatives to
ensure that the right problems are being addressed and that the solutions
are viable.  Participation in the IT research process will make them better-

informed consumers of IT goods and services and will help guide IT
research into areas that are well matched to particular end-user needs and
problems.  Incentives for such organizations to invest in IT research are

growing as they become increasingly dependent on IT systems to carry
out their missions, yet most such organizations lack the resources and
expertise needed to manage IT research programs conducted either inter-
nally or externally.The committee recognizes the difficulty of engaging end-user organi-zations in a productive way but believes that greater collaboration
between them and IT researchers is critical to ensuring that IT evolves in
a way that will meet real-world needs and address the problems faced by
organizations reliant on such systems.  The federally sponsored programs

recommended above are intended to help bridge the gap and introduce
end users to the processes of IT research, but these programs should not
be the only mechanisms through which end users engage IT researchers.
End users should consider other activities, such as supporting university
research that is applicable to their needs, serving on the advisory boards
of IT research groups in universities and industry, supporting internships
for students in IT-related academic programs, and forming external
research groups that monitor work in the IT research community and
serve as liaisons between companies and IT researchers.This process needs to be viewed as a long-term, evolutionary one thatcan grow into more active participation in research over time.  Eventu-

ally, end-user organizations may fund research or engage in research
programs with vendors and academic research groups.  Before this can

happen, end users need to become more familiar with the IT research
community.  Although the incentives for such activities may not be imme-

diately obvious, the committee believes that such engagement will ulti-
mately prove beneficial to end-user organizations in terms of an improved

ability to make IT systems perform the needed functions on time, within
budget, and with high reliability.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH211Recommendation 8.  Information technology companies with estab-
lished R&D organizations should develop mechanisms for engag-
ing end users more actively in the research process.Vendors need to be involved in any effort to expand the scale andscope of IT research.  They have an established tradition of conducting

problem-oriented research and have a better understanding of customer
needs than do most university researchers or government program man-
agers.  For the foreseeable future, vendors will remain the main funders of

IT-related R&D.  In recent years, industry research has become more

applied as companies attempt to link research efforts to more clearly
defined areas of corporate interest.  Work on large-scale systems and

social applications may give them an opportunity to increase the amount
of fundamental research conducted while maintainingÑor even increas-ingÑthe applicability of their research to user needs.  The better their
understanding of the fundamentals of large-scale IT systems and social
applications, the better they should be able to develop systems and appli-
cations for their clients.IT companies should explore a range of options for pursuing moreinterdisciplinary and systems-related research while continuing their
research on IT components.  Several mechanisms could be used.  Compa-

nies could establish programs similar to IBM CorporationÕs First-of-a Kindprogram to link their researchers more closely to cutting-edge end users
with interesting problems that call for research.  Doing so will not only

align research more closely with customer needs, making it more valu-
able in the long term, but will also create better-educated customers who
can interact more effectively with researchers.  Or they could fund joint

research with end users in universities or industry, as Microsoft Corpora-
tion is doing in its educational venture with the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT).12  Another approach is to increase company contacts
with, and support for, university researchers by allocating more resources

for students and faculty to spend time in industrial facilities and for indus-
trial researchers to visit university laboratories.  Money is a significant

obstacle to such interactions, as is the argument that staff members have
more compelling things to do.  Research managers and corporate execu-

tives must also provide leadership to ensure that these relationships are
established and to maintain a commitment to making them work.CONCLUSIONExpanding IT research in scale and scope will be essential to ensuringthat society captures the full benefits of the investments it has already
made in IT.  Continued progress is needed in the areas of research that
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212MAKING IT BETTERenabled the IT revolution unfolding today and that are the foundation forthe nationÕs transition to an information economy.  Additional work on
large-scale systems and the social applications of IT will allow society to
transform a range of interactions in all walks of life.  The recommendations

in this report emphasize putting in place the processes that will expand
the research agenda and bring the needed range of expertise to bear on
problems that have plagued large-scale systems and social applications.
They reflect the uncertainties surrounding the course that future IT devel-
opment and deployment will take, as well as the differences in the abilities
of the various stakeholders to participate productively in the process.
These initial, if tentative, steps need to be taken so that IT can better serve
societyÕs growing range of needs as it enters the twenty-first century.BIBLIOGRAPHYCommittee for Economic Development (CED).  1998
.  AmericaÕs Basic Research:  Prosperity
Through Discovery.  Committee for Economic Development, New York.
Computer Science and Technology Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1989.  
ScalingUp: A Research Agenda for Software Engineering.  National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1992.  Computing the Future:  A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering
.National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1995.  Evolving the High-Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Supportthe NationÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1996a.  Continued Review of the Tax Systems Modernization of the Internal Revenue Service.Final Report.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1996b.  Computing and Communications in the Extreme:  Research for Crisis Management
and Other Applications.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999a.  Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Research
.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.1999b.  Trust in Cyberspace.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Council on Competitiveness.  1996.  
Endless Frontier, Limited Resources:  U.S. R&D Policy for
Competitiveness.  Council on Competitiveness, Washington, D.C., April.
PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC).  1999.  Information Tech-nology Research:  Investing in Our Future.  National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and Communications, Arlington, Va., February.  Available online at
<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.NOTES1.See, for example CSTB (1992, 1995, 1999a), Council on Competitiveness (1996), and
CED (1998).Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPANDING THE SCALE AND SCOPE OF IT RESEARCH2132.Several of the more high-profile failures have resulted in hundreds of millions of
dollars being spent over several years.  For instance, the Federal Aviation Administration
has spent $42 billion to modernize the air traffic control system over the past two decades,
and the system has still not been completed (see Chapter 3).3.See Chapter 3 for a more in-depth discussion of these topics.
4.The Next Generation Internet program encompasses three related efforts:  research
on, and development of, new networking technologies; development of revolutionary appli-cations that take advantage of enhanced networking capabilities; and deployment of severaltestbed networks across which new technologies can be deployed and revolutionary appli-
cations can be run.  Additional information is available online at <www.ngi.gov>.
5.The Digital Libraries Initiative is a multiagency initiative that, in its second phase,
will pursue research related to the development of the next generation of digital libraries,
both to advance the use and usability of globally distributed, networked informationresources and to encourage existing and new communities to focus on innovative applica-tions areas.  The initiative attempts to stimulate the partnering arrangements needed to

create next-generation operational systems in areas such as education, engineering anddesign, Earth and space sciences, biosciences, geography, economics, and the arts andhumanities.  Its sponsors include the NSF, DARPA, the National Library of Medicine, the

Library of Congress, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.  The research centers
on topics such as human-centered computing, content, and systems, as well as on testbeds
and applications.  Support is provided for both individual investigator grants and multi-
disciplinary research groups.  Additional information about the program is available online
at <www.dli2.nsf.gov>.6.It is also true that federal agencies have had many successes in creating new com-
puter systems, successes that do not get as much publicity as the problems.  But these
successes are more a testimonial to the skill and perseverance of federal IT managers than areason to praise the available knowledge base.7.These sectors include those defined by the following Standard Industrial Classifica-
tion (SIC) codes:  357, office, computing, and accounting machines; 366, communications
equipment; 367, electronic components (including semiconductor devices); 737, computerand data processing services; and 48, communications (e.g., telephone and other communi-
cations services).8.Linda Cohen, a member of the study committee, and Jerry Sheehan, a member of the
CSTB staff, are examining this issue in greater detail.  They will produce a summary paper

on their findings late in the year 2000.9.On April 9, 1997, the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)
became the new standard code system to describe business establishments and industries,
replacing the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes. This new system will be usedby the U.S., Mexican, and Canadian governments to collect and distribute statistical infor-mation.10.Recommendation 5.1 echoes a recommendation from an earlier CSTB report that also
called for an expanded research agenda for computer science.  See CSTB (1992).
11.David Patterson, University of California at Berkeley, personal communication, April
6, 2000.12.As noted in Chapter 4, Microsoft announced a partnership with MIT in 1999 to
pursue educational technologies.  Microsoft is investing $25 million in the effort, and

projects will be managed by a steering committee consisting of equal numbers of membersfrom Microsoft Research and MIT.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.217Appendix ATwo Research Topics Involving
Social ApplicationsTo illustrate the kinds of research it envisions on the social applica-tions of information technology (IT), the committee looks briefly at
two research topics.  The first, deconstructing wireless, is the subject
of an ongoing collaborative effort to analyze the wireless communications
industry.  The second, network security, is well known and is being

pursued by researchers around the world.  It is touched on here to demon-

strate its interdisciplinary aspects.DECONSTRUCTING WIRELESSOne actual research project on the social applications of IT isÒdeconstructing wireless,Ó which is being conducted by researchers at the
University of California at Berkeley, Princeton University, and the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology at Lausanne.1  This collaboration of engi-neers and economists is taking a fresh look at the wireless communication
industry.  The researchers define deconstruction as a research paradigm

that takes a top-down, interdisciplinary view of a large-scale global sys-
tem, in this case wireless networking.  Deconstruction is necessitated by

the confluence of technology and economic, business, and policy consid-
erations in such systems.A system and market like wireless networking is heavily influencedby the rapid pace of technological advance as well as by policy (e.g.,
telecommunications regulation, privacy concerns, and universal service
requirements), law (e.g., intellectual property protection and competitiveMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218APPENDIX Aconstraints), economics (e.g., investments, network externalities, lock-in),business considerations (e.g., complementors and competitors, standard-
ization), and the needs and wishes of users (both individuals and organi-
zations).  In the past, researchers have addressed these influences one by

one.  This project recognizes that there are strong relationships between

these influences that can be exploited to create new opportunities.  Although

wireless technology can be shaped in many ways, the most effective
design for the technology needs to take into account economics, industry,
and policy issues.The methodology of deconstruction differs from standard systemsanalysis (see Figure A.1).  The first step is to decide which specific busi-

ness and societal goals will be the central focus.  For their work on wire-

less networking, the researchers chose two:¥Achieving a level of flexibility in the system architecture such thatnew terminal software can be quickly deployed and the barriers to entry
for new services and business models can be lowered and¥Maximizing the effectiveness of competition in the industry byremoving technological and other impediments to competitive offerings
and market entry.Once these goals had been set, the next step was to postulate anarchitecture for the system that seemed best able to achieve the goals.
Postulating an architecture is part of a Òdivide and conquerÓ strategy to
Business and societal goalsSystem architecture (unencumbered by the past)NewtechnologiesEconomicconstraintsViablebusinessmodelsRegulatoryissuesOther relevant research issuesFIGURE A.1 Deconstruction starts with identifying business and societal goalsand then postulating a system architecture.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A219FIGURE A.2  A classification of interdisciplinary work into three categories of
learning.break the research challenges into manageable pieces.  Of course, the
elements of the overall architecture are critically important in their own
right because they not only influence much of the research that will follow
but also ultimately determine the model that will be used for industry
structure and competition.Deconstruction deliberately ignores issues like legacy systems andthe practical need for incremental advances in the technology.  It does so

in order to create a mental experiment that, because it takes nothing for
granted, can yield real breakthroughs in insight.  If important opportuni-
ties are identified in this way, they can later influence real-world systems,
or perhaps even result in entirely new networks (just as the Internet once
did).Finally, many individual research issues must be addressed to realizethe business and societal goals in the context of the postulated architec-
ture.  In this project, the issues have been technological, economic, and

policy-related.  Two of the collaborators (Katz and Farrell) are economists

with experience in telecommunications regulation at the Federal Commu-
nications Commission and can address economic and policy issues.  The

other three researchers are technologists who can address technical is-
sues.One way to better understand the deconstruction process used in thewireless networking project is to examine the classification of interdisci-
plinary work shown in Figure A.2.  It divides disciplines into three cat-

egories:  (1) those that emphasize the foundations of knowledge (e.g., theEnd uses inbusiness and societyTechnical, social, andorganizational systemsCore understanding and technologyPhysicalsciencesSocialsciencesand lawLiberalartsBusinessEngineeringTechnicalSocialMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220APPENDIX Ahumanities, physical and biological sciences, communications devices,and electronics); (2) those that emphasize systems, which are assemblagesof elements that perform higher-level functions (e.g., chemistry and cos-
mology in the physical sciences, physiology and ecology in the biological
sciences, sociology, economics, and law in the social sciences, and power,
computing, and communications in engineering); and (3) those that inter-
act directly with  people, organizations, and society (e.g., business, music,

and the arts).  Of course, some disciplines incorporate work that would

fall into two or three of these categories, examples being engineering and
the health sciences.Deconstruction focuses on the systems level.  It recognizes that many
real-world systems, like wireless networks, are actually mixes of different
types of systems, especially technical and social, and it brings together
perspectives from different disciplines to address common challenges.
The deconstruction of wireless networks that is being performed must
have, at a minimum, contributions from engineering (communications
and computing), social sciences (economics and law), and business.The confluence and interdependence of technical and nontechnicalfactors become evident in this research.  There are many new technologies

(known or unknown but motivated by this application) that could be
applied to wireless networks.  With existing or new technologies, the

architecture of the network itself and the structure of the industries that
support it could be shaped in many ways.  The question becomes, What

way will come closest to achieving the business and societal goals set
forth at the beginning?  How can investment in new networking concepts

be stimulated, and how can users be induced to actually adopt the new
technologies? Will new networking concepts (better ideas) automatically
be adopted by a free marketplace, or is regulatory intervention required?
These questions can only be answered satisfactorily by considering a host
of economic and policy questions.  In turn, the forces at play in the market-

place and in the regulatory arena directly affect how the technology is
molded and positioned.A simple example will serve to illustrate this last point.  Mobile code
is a promising technology for dynamically downloading software to pro-
cessors internal to the network and to terminals.  Such processing has

been proposed, for example, for converting between different data repre-
sentations or for accommodating parts of a network with widely different
capabilities (like wireless access and fiber backbone).  This should con-

tribute to competition by allowing new application functionality to be
transparently deployed long after the infrastructure supporting it is pro-
visioned.  However, it raises a host of questions:  How is that software

licensed and paid for?    Who provides the necessary processing cycles,

and how are they paid for?  How is the allocation of these processing
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A221resources determined, since they are shared over multiple applicationsand users, coordinated in a way that achieves end-to-end objectives?  In

the presence of virulent competition, they are likely owed by different
economic entities, which raises questions that go beyond coordination to
include pricing and settlements of revenues.  These questions have stimu-

lated new research on the coordination of multiple resource allocations
using e-commerce mechanisms (such as some sort of auction).  This sug-

gests that existing e-commerce mechanisms such as credit card clearing-
houses, might be employed.  Because the revenues for each usage are

likely to be small, however, the technology has to be conceptualized to
result in very small transactions costs, which affects both the technology
design and the viable economic mechanisms it implements.  The best

combination of effectiveness and cost will be obtained by considering
mechanism and technology design as a whole.NETWORK SECURITYLarge public networks such as the Internet and the public switchedtelephone network represent a formidable management challenge.  Not

only are they large and complex systems, but they display the character-
istics of sociotechnical systems.  They must meet the needs of their sub-

scribers, and they involve many people in their operation and mainte-
nance. Their ownership is fragmented, so that operation and maintenance
must be effected across different service providers who often simulta-
neously complement one another (they provide end-to-end service) and
compete with one another (for customers).  Hands-off business relation-

ships must be maintained in negotiating arrangements for interconnection,
for determining pricing to customers, and for settlement of revenues.Generally three levels of management are recognized for such net-works.  Network management encompasses provisioning the network
Õsfacilities and operating them, including detection of and recovery from
faults.  Service management enables the opportunistic establishment of

end-to-end services in response to customer requests.  Business manage-

ment ensures that customers are monitored and billed for services and
that the resulting revenue is passed back to constituent service providers.It can be presumed that such a network is under continual assaultfrom many directions, from hackers and even terrorist organizations.
These assaults may be directed at users of the network or at the network
itself.  The perpetrators may have monetary gain, terrorist disruption, or

simple vandalism in mind.  Most existing approaches to security focus on

the users and uses directly, attempting to make them secure individually
under the assumption that the network environment itself is not secure.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222APPENDIX AIn addition, the network operator will take measures to protect the net-work itself.Efforts to monitor the Internet in an attempt to detect and foil crimi-nal or terrorist attempts will involve the network infrastructure taking a
much greater responsibility than heretofore for the security of users, on a
massive scale, and suggests an important, supplementary role for the
network and service management functions.  While it appears to be a

promising direction for research into what is undoubtedly a serious prob-
lem, many approaches could be taken.  Thus, it would be interesting to

mount an effort on greatly expanded security measures in networks, with
the goal of identifying approaches that are on the one hand affordable
and, on the other, effective at identifying and foiling attacks and protect-
ing sensitive data and bringing the perpetrators to justice.To a large extent, security is a technical challenge, as the questionsraised have significant technical components.  How can malicious behav-

ior be distinguished from normal innocuous network usage (the answer
may involve a kind of pattern matching at both micro and macro levels)?
How can security mechanisms be made scalable and affordable?  Once

such behavior is identified, how can it be verified with sufficient reliabil-
ity to allow corrective action, and what sorts of action might be mounted?
How can technical measures be put in place that will allow the perpetra-
tors to be identified and their behavior proven to the satisfaction of a
court?  Which aspects can be automated, and which necessarily involve

human intervention and judgment?Taken as a whole, the network, its legitimate users, its operators, andthe malicious agents constitute a sociotechnical system.  That is, many

issues of a nontechnical or only partly technical nature arise and must be
considered before a reasonable conclusion can be reached.  How can

legitimate usersÕ rights to privacy be preserved, and what are those rights?
What is the likely nature of attacks that may be mounted, and for what
purpose are they mounted?  What characteristics of such attacks may

allow them to be identified?  What are the range of potential security

breaches of the network and its users, and what would be their impact?
Considering these impacts, how much can be spent on countermeasures,
and how can the costs and risks to a business be analyzed?The proposed approaches would have to deal with some practicalrealities.  Network operators are businesses that must have revenue to

compensate for costs.  The willingness of users to pay for measures to

counter somewhat speculative or unknown risks must be assessed. There
must be some viable economic model to determine who pays for and who
benefits from these measures.  That such networks often have multiple

ownership, which means fragmented operational responsibility, must be
taken into account.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A223Experts and researchers in several disciplines could contribute to thisresearch, in addition to computer scientists on the technical aspects.  Risk

analysis and cost/benefit analysis would fall to economists, who would
set the parameters on the acceptable costs and cost recovery mechanisms.
The organizational structures that would most effectively realize the
security functionsÑincluding, for example, human interventionsÑcouldbe studied by business.  Motivations and scenarios for attack could be

provided by political scientists, allowing the range of possibilities to be
narrowed.  In the case of individual vandals and hackers, psychological

profiles and likely behavior patterns would be very useful input.NOTE1.The researchers are David Messerschmitt, Michael Katz, and Joseph Farrell from the
University of California at Berkeley, Sergio Verdu from Princeton, and Jean-Pierre Hubauxfrom the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224Appendix BBiographies of Committee MembersSAMUEL H. FULLER, Co-chair, is vice president for research and devel-opment at Analog Devices Corporation.  He was formerly vice president

for technical strategy and chief scientist at Digital Equipment Corpora-
tion, where he led the creation of the research laboratories for Digital
focused on distributed computing, high-performance computing,
Internetworking, and human-computer interfaces.  He also initiated work

that led to DigitalÕs Ethernet, workstations, Unix, and Internet products.
Before joining Digital in 1978, Dr. Fuller was an associate professor of
computer science and electrical engineering at Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, where he was involved in the performance evaluation and design of
several influential experimental multiprocessor computer systems.
Dr. Fuller received his B.S. from the University of Michigan in 1968 and
his M.S. (1969) and Ph.D. (1972) from Stanford University.  He is a member

of the National Academy of Engineering, the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, and the Association for Computing Machinery.
Dr. Fuller is a member of the National Research CouncilÕs Commission on
Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications and was a founding
member of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board  (1986-
1992).  He served on the steering committee for CSTBÕs Competitiveness

Colloquium on Systems Integration (1989-1991) and on the committee
that wrote the CSTB report CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the InformationSociety.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B225DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, Co-chair, is the Roger A. Strauch Profes-sor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the University of
California at Berkeley and from 1993 to 1996 was department chair.  Before

1977 Dr. Messerschmitt was at AT&T Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, New
Jersey.  His current research interests include issues overlapping signal

processing (especially video and graphics coding) and transport in broad-
band networks with wireless access, network services and protocols for
multimedia, wireless multimedia computing, and the economics of net-
works.  Dr. Messerschmitt has served as a consultant to a number of

companies and is a cofounder and director of TCSI Inc.  He is a fellow of

the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., a member of the
National Academy of Engineering, a member of the advisory committee
for the National Science FoundationÕs Computer and Information Scienceand Engineering directorate.  From 1993 to 1998, Dr. Messerschmitt was a

member of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the
National Research Council.  He won the 1999 Alexander Graham Bell

medal for exceptional contributions to the advancement of communica-
tion sciences and engineering.  He received a B.S. degree from the Univer-

sity of Colorado and an M.S. and Ph.D. from the University of Michigan.PAUL BARAN is generally regarded as the inventor of packet switching,
based on his work at RAND in the 1960s.  He is a founder of several

Silicon Valley companies, including Com21, Inc., a provider of broadband
cable modem technology for high-speed modem and data services, where
he is chairman of the board.  He also serves on the advisory board of

Geocast, a digital data broadcasting company.  Mr. Baran received the

B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Drexel University in 1949 and
the M.S. degree in engineering from UCLA in 1959. He was awarded an
honorary Doctor of Science in Engineering degree by Drexel University in
1997.  He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, a life

fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE),
an International Marconi Fellow, an American Association for the
Advancement of Science fellow, and a trustee of the IEEE History Center.LINDA COHEN is professor of economics and chair of the Department
of Economics at the University of California at Irvine.  Her research inter-

ests concern political economy, government regulation, government
policy for research and development, positive political theory, and law.
Dr. Cohen previously worked as a research associate at the Brookings
Institution in Washington, D.C.  She was a member of the Department of

Energy Program Review Committee on Airborne Nuclear Waste Manage-
ment, a member of the advisory panel in support of the congressional
Office of Technology AssessmentÕs study of magnetic fusion research andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226APPENDIX Bdevelopment, and a member of the Panel on the Study of Human FactorsResearch Needs in Nuclear Regulatory Research for the National Research
Council.  She is currently a member of the Public Interest Energy Research

Advisory Panel for the California Energy Commission.  Dr. Cohen is

coauthor of The Technology Pork Barrel (Brookings Institution, 1991) and is
a fellow of the California Council for Science and Technology.JOHN A. COPELAND is a professor in the school of electrical and com-
puter engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology.  He holds the

John H. Weitnauer Chair and is currently director of the Communications
Systems Center.  He was director of the Georgia Center for Advanced

Telecommunications Technology from June 1993 to November 1996.
Before joining Georgia Tech in March 1993, Dr. Copeland was vice presi-
dent of technology at Hayes Microcomputer Products (1985-1993), vice
president of engineering technology at Sangamo Weston, Inc. (1982-1985),
and a researcher at Bell Labs (1965-1982).  He began his career at Bell Labs

conducting research on semiconductor microwave and millimeter-wave
devices.  Later, he supervised a group that developed magnetic bubble

computer memories.  In 1974, he led a team that designed CMOS inte-

grated circuits, including Bell LabsÕ first microprocessor, the BELLMAC-8.
His last contributions at Bell Labs were in the area of lightwave communi-
cations and optical logic.  At Sangamo Weston he was responsible for

R&D groups at 10 divisions.  At Hayes he was responsible for the develop-

ment of modems with data compression and error control and for HayesÕrepresentation on CCITT and ANSI standards committees.  Dr. Copeland

received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in physics from the Georgia
Institute of Technology.  He has been awarded 37 patents and has pub-

lished over 50 technical articles.  In 1970 he was awarded IEEE
Õs Morris N.Liebmann Award for his work on gallium arsenide microwave devices.
He is a fellow of the IEEE and has served as editor of the IEEE Transactions
on Electron Devices.  He also served on the Board of Trustees for the Georgia
Tech Research Corporation (1983-1993).ALBERT M. ERISMAN is director of Mathematics and Computing Tech-
nology for the Phantom Works within the Boeing Company.  He leads a

staff of 250 computer scientists, mathematicians, statisticians, and engi-
neers who provide leadership for Boeing in all areas of information tech-
nology and mathematics.  Dr. Erisman has been with Boeing since 1969.

His work has been in mathematical algorithms, mathematical software,
and the application of these technical areas to the improvement of Boeing
engineering and analysis codes.  More recently he addressed the broader

area of the application of advanced information technology to the trans-
formation of business processes.  Management focus has included the
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B227linking of research and development with business requirements, thedelivery of technology for business benefit, and the management of an
innovative environment.  Dr. Erisman has published two books and more

than 20 technical papers.  In December 1989, he was named one of 11

inaugural technical fellows of the Boeing Company.  The technical fellow-

ship was established to recognize professional excellence among engi-
neers and scientists who have made significant technical contributions to
Boeing.  He was a member of the National Research Council
Õs Committeeon Supercomputing, a member of a National Science Foundation panel to
assess the state of mathematics education and research, and has held
various offices in the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Dr. Erisman earned a B.A. in mathematics from Northern Illinois Univer-
sity in 1962 and both his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in applied mathematics
from Iowa State University in 1967 and 1969, respectively.DANIEL T. LING is vice president of Microsoft Research, Redmond.  He
joined Microsoft Research in March 1992 as a senior researcher in the area
of user interfaces and computer graphics. He has been particularly inter-
ested in the design of agent-based user interfaces, user interface architec-
tures, intelligent and adaptive interfaces, and virtual worlds.  He was

later named director of research.  Before to joining Microsoft, Dr. Ling

was a senior manager at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center.  He
initially worked on special-purpose VLSI chips for displays and was a
coinventor of the video-RAM dynamic memory.  He subsequently man-

aged departments that conducted research on advanced microsystems
based on 370 and RISC architectures and the associated systems and VLSI
design tools.  One of these departments initiated work on a novel machine

architecture, organization, and design known as America, which led to
the IBM RS/6000 workstations.  He subsequently managed the Veridical

User Environments department that engaged in research into innovative
user interfaces including multimodal interfaces, virtual worlds technol-
ogy, and 3D visualization.  Dr. Ling also served on the staff of the director

of development in the General Technology Division overseeing the devel-
opment of CMOS chip technologies and on special assignment to the vice
president of systems research.  He received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.

degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford University.  He was also a

Fannie and John Hertz Foundation fellow.  Dr. Ling holds seven patents

and is the author of a variety of publications in solid state physics, sys-
tems, user interfaces, and holography.  He was awarded an IBM Out-

standing Innovation Award in 1986 for his coinvention of the video-RAM.
He is a member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the
American Physical Society, and the Association for Computing Machin-Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228APPENDIX Bery.  He also serves on advisory committees for the University of Wash-
ington and the University of California at Berkeley.ROBERT L. MARTIN is the chief technology officer for Lucent Technolo-
gies.  His expertise has been at Bell Laboratories and Bellcore, where he

held a variety of positions related to systems development.  He has been

responsible for Unix, network management systems, intelligent network
systems, packet switching, and broadband access systems developments.
Dr. Martin received his B.S. in electrical engineering from Brown Univer-
sity in 1964 and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and
computer science from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in
1965 and 1967, respectively.  In 1985, he attended the MIT Alfred P. Sloan

School Senior Executive Program.  A fellow of the Institute of Electrical

and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Dr. Martin was a member and the first
chair of the IEEEÕs Software Industrial Advisory Board.  He has served on
the National Research CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board and is now a member of the Federal Communication
CommissionÕs Technological Advisory Board.JOEL MOSES is institute professor, professor of engineering systems,
and professor of computer science and engineering at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT).  He was previously head of the Electrical

Engineering and Computer Science Department, dean of engineering, and
provost of MIT.  He led the development of the MACSYMA system, a

forerunner of the major formula manipulation systems available today.
He is a co-originator of the concept of knowledge-based systems.  His

current interests include the organization of large complex systems.
Dr. Moses is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers, Inc., and of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science and is a member of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE)
and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.  He is a former member

of the academic advisory committee for SEMATECH, a former member of
the White House Office of Science and Technology PolicyÕs committee onHigh Performance Computing and Communications, a member of NAEÕsCommittee on Engineering Education, a member of the National Research
CouncilÕs Committee on Workforce Needs in Information Technology,and a former member of its Manufacturing Studies Board and its Board
on Telecommunications and Computer Applications.  He is a member of

the advisory boards of the engineering schools at Columbia University
and the University of Michigan.  He received a B.A. (1962) and an M.A.

(1963) from Columbia University and a Ph.D. (mathematics, 1967) from
MIT.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B229NORINE E. NOONAN is assistant administrator for research and devel-opment at the Environmental Protection Agency.  She was formerly vice

president for research and dean of the graduate school at Florida Institute
of Technology and, before that, branch chief for science and space at the
Office of Management and Budget.  Dr. Noonan also held faculty appoint-

ments at the University of Florida and Georgetown University.  From

1982 to 1983, she served as an American Chemical Society Congressional
Science Fellow.  Her areas of expertise are in research management, fed-

eral budgetary processes, and science and technology policy.  She is a

member of Phi Beta Kappa and Sigma Xi, a fellow of the American Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Science, and a member of the American
Society for Cell Biology.  She has served on several other National

Research Council committees, notably the Committee on Antarctic Policy
and Science, the Task Force on Alternative Organizations for the Future of
Space Science, and the Committee on Building an Environmental Man-
agement Science Program.  Dr. Noonan received her B.A. in zoology

summa cum laude from the University of Vermont and her M.A. and
Ph.D. in cell biology from Princeton University.DAVID A. PATTERSON holds the E.H. and M.E. Pardee Chair of Com-
puter Science at the University of California at Berkeley and has taught
computer architecture since joining the universityÕs faculty in 1977.  At
Berkeley, he led the design and implementation of RISC I, probably the
first VLSI Reduced Instruction Set Computer.  This research became the

foundation of the SPARC architecture currently used by Fujitsu and Sun
Microsystems.  As part of the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary

of the microprocessor in 1996, Microprocessor Report and COMDEX named
SPARC one of the most significant microprocessors.  Professor Patterson

was also a leader of the Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks project,
which led to high-performance storage systems from many companies.
He was also involved in the Network of Workstations project, which led
to cluster technology used by Internet companies such as Inktomi.  These

projects led to three distinguished dissertation awards from the Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM). His current research interests are in

building novel microprocessors using intelligent DRAM (IRAM) for use
in portable multimedia devices and in creating intelligent storage (ISTORE)

to provide computers for Internet services that are highly available and
easily maintained and that can be gracefully evolved.  Dr. Patterson was a

chair of the computer science division in the Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science Department at the University of California at Berkeley,
the ACM Special Interest Group in Computer Architecture, and the Com-
puting Research Association.  He has consulted for many companies,

including Digital Equipment Corporation, Hewlett Packard, Intel, andMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230APPENDIX BSun Microsystems, and is also the coauthor of five books.  He is a member
of the National Academy of Engineering, a fellow of the Computer Soci-
ety of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and a
fellow of the ACM.  He is also a member of the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council.  His teach-

ing has been honored by the ACM with the Karl V. Karlstrom Outstand-
ing Educator Award, by IEEE with the Undergraduate Teaching Award
and the James H. Mulligan, Jr., Education Medal, and by the University of
California with the Distinguished Teaching Award and the Diane S.
McEntyre Award for Excellence in Teaching.  He received the inaugural

Outstanding Alumnus Award of the UCLA Computer Science Depart-
ment as part of its twenty-fifth anniversary and has received the IEEE
Technical Achievement Award, the IEEE Reynold B. Johnson Information
Storage Award, and the IEEE John von Neumann Medal.STEWART PERSONICK is the E. Warren Colehower Chair Professor of
Telecommunications at Drexel University and director of the Center for
Telecommunications and Information Networking, also at Drexel.  Until

1998, he was vice president of information networking at Bellcore.  He

began his career at Bell Laboratories in 1967 and spent 18 years as an
individual researcher and an R&D manager focusing on fiber-optics
technology and applications.  Between 1985 and 1998, he managed orga-

nizations focusing on emerging telecommunications technology, systems,
services, and applications and was heavily involved in industry and gov-
ernment activities related to the emerging national information infra-
structure.  Dr. Personick received his B.S. from City College of New York
and his Sc.D. degree from MIT.  He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical

and Electronics Engineers, Inc., a fellow of the Optical Society of America,
and a member of the National Academy of Engineering.  He was a

member and former chair of the U.S. Federal Networking Council Advi-
sory Committee, is a frequent lecturer on the national information infra-
structure and related telecommunications subjects, and is the author of
several books and numerous articles on telecommunications technology
and applications.ROBERT SPROULL is vice president and fellow at Sun Microsystems
Laboratories and leads its Application Technologies Center.  Since his

undergraduate days, he has been building hardware and software for
computer graphics, such as clipping hardware, an early device-independent
graphics package, page description languages, laser printing software,
and window systems.  He has also been involved in VLSI design, espe-

cially of asynchronous circuits and systems.  Before joining Sun, he was a

principal with Sutherland, Sproull & Associates, an associate professor atMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B231Carnegie Mellon University, and a member of the Xerox Palo AltoResearch Center.  He is a coauthor with William Newman of the early

textbook Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics and author of the book
Logical Effort, which deals with designing fast CMOS circuits.  He is a
member of the National Academy of Engineering and the U.S. Air Force
Scientific Advisory Board.MARK WEISER (deceased) was the chief technologist at the Xerox Palo
Alto Research Center (PARC).  He joined Xerox PARC as a member of the

technical staff in 1987 and later headed the Computer Science Laboratory.
From 1979 to 1987, Dr. Weiser was assistant and associate professor and
associate chair in the Computer Science Department at the University of
Maryland.  He started three companies, and his 75 plus technical publica-

tions are in such areas as the psychology of programming, program slic-
ing, operating systems, programming environments, garbage collection,
and technological ethics.  Dr. Weiser
Õs work since 1988 focused on ubiqui-tous computing, a program he initiated that envisions personal computers
being replaced with invisible computers embedded in everyday objects.
He believed that this would lead to an era of calm technology in which
technology, rather than causing users to panic, would help them focus on
what is really important.  Weiser was also the drummer with the rock

band Severe Tire Damage, the first live band on the Internet.  Dr. Weiser

had no bachelorÕs degree; his Ph.D. was in Computer and Communica-tions Sciences from the University of Michigan (1979).PATRICK WINDHAM is a consultant on science and technology policy
issues.  He operates his own firm, Windham Consulting, and also serves

as a senior  associate with R. Wayne Sayer and Associates, a government

relations company.  In addition, he is a lecturer in the public policy pro-

gram at Stanford University.  From 1984 until 1997, Mr. Windham served

as a senior professional staff member for the Subcommittee on Science,
Technology, and Space of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation of the U.S. Senate.  He helped senators oversee and draft

legislation for several large civilian science and technology agencies and
focused on issues of science, technology, and U.S. industrial competitive-
ness.  From 1976 to 1978 he worked as a congressional fellow with the

Senate Commerce Committee, and from 1982 to 1984 he served as a legis-
lative aide in the personal office of Sen. Ernest Hollings.  Mr. Windham

received an A.B. from Stanford University and a MasterÕs of Public Policyfrom the University of California at Berkeley.IRVING WLADAWSKY-BERGER is vice president of technology and
strategy for the IBM enterprise systems group.  He was formerly general
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232APPENDIX Bmanager of the Internet Division at IBM, where he was responsible forIBMÕs Internet and e-business strategy and for coordinating its imple-mentation across the company.  He joined IBM
Õs Thomas J. WatsonResearch Center in 1970, where he focused on organizing technology
transfer programs to move the innovations of computer science from
IBMÕs research labs into its product divisions.  After joining IBM
Õs prod-uct development organization in 1985, Dr. Wladawsky-Berger continued
his efforts to bring advanced technologies to the marketplace, leading
IBMÕs initiatives in supercomputing and parallel computing,  including
the transformation of its large systems through the incorporation of paral-
lel computing architectures.  He has managed a number of IBM
Õs busi-nesses, including the UNIX-based RS/6000 Division.  Dr. Wladawsky-

Berger is co-chair of the PresidentÕs Information Technology AdvisoryCommittee.  He was a founding member of the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council and a mem-
ber of the NRCÕs Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, andApplications.  Dr. Wladawsky-Berger received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees

in physics from the University of Chicago.Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.233IndexAa2b music, 73AAS. See Advanced Automation SystemAbilene network, 132Abstraction, 120Abt Associates, Inc., 193-194
Academic networks, 133Academic researchgaps in, 90-91
interdisciplinary, 168-179Accelerated Strategic Computing Initiative(ASCI), 61, 96Acceptable Use Policies (AUPs), 133Additions to systems, unintended andunanticipated consequences of, 5Administrative challenges, 154associated with large-scale systems, 118Advanced Automation System (AAS), 105
Advanced computational science, researchin, 62Advanced Research Projects Agency(ARPA), 46Aetna, 83-84Agenda. See Research agenda
Air traffic control (ATC) system, 149modernizing, 105, 213Airport Surface Detection Equipment, 105
Akamai Technologies, Inc., 92Alto computer, 21, 97Always-up systems, goal for informationtechnology research, 24Amazon.com, 83-84, 86, 97, 117America Online Inc., 81
AMRIS, 104Andersen Consulting, 8, 79-80, 97Apple Computer, 30, 179Macintosh, 21Appliances, information, 107Applications, 32. See also Group
applications; Social applicationsresearchdiffusion of, 170Applications research, 157Applied research, defining, x, 28-29ÒAppropriabilityÓ problem, 74-75
Architectural approachesdefining, 138design of research programs for, 126-127ARPANET, 96, 131historical perspective on, 21, 140Artifacts, 140ASCI. See Accelerated Strategic Computing
InitiativeAssociation of University TechnologyManagers (AUTM), 91-92ATC. See Air traffic control system
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234INDEXAT&T Corporation, 179expenditures on R&D, 64, 77-78historical structuring of, 81
patents held by, 84recent trends in research by, 30-31redirection of research at, 72-73
work on speech recognition, 21AUPs. See Acceptable Use Policies
AUTM. See Association of University
Technology ManagersAutomata theory, 139Automatic programmer capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24Availability issues, 116-118BBAAs. See Broad agency announcements
BankBoston, 92Basic research, defining, x, 26Bell Atlantic, 102
Bell Communications ResearchCorporation (Bellcore), 77Bell Laboratories, 72, 76-77
Benchmarks, 139Berkeley Wireless Research Center, 182Billing fraud, detecting, 76Boeing Company, 66, 80, 83, 97Brahe, Tycho, 26
Broad agency announcements (BAAs), 62-63Brooks, Fred, 139Brooks-Sutherland report, 121
Bugs, 116testing for, 112Bureau of Land Management, troubledsystems at, 102Bureau of the Census, 49, 64, 66, 96need for the National Science Foundationto work with, 13, 205-206Business process challenges, 154Business research, related to informationtechnology, 169Business system context, embedding large-scale systems within larger, 6Business Week Online, 35
CC programming language, 23CAD. See Computer-aided design
California Department of Motor Vehicles,troubled systems at, 102-103California Institute of Technology,Computational Facility forSimulating the Dynamic Responseof Materials, 96Carnegie Mellon University, 17, 29, 62, 90,92, 163Department of Engineering and PublicPolicy, 173Information Networking Institute, 182Software Engineering Institute, 158-159CASE. See Computer-aided software
engineering toolsCase research, 124, 156
CBO. See Congressional Budget Office
CCIC. See Committee on Computing,
Information and CommunicationsCensus Bureau. See Bureau of the Census
Center for Astrophysical ThermonuclearFlashes, 96Center for Integrated TurbulenceSimulation, 96Center for Simulation of Accidental Firesand Explosions, 96Center for Simulation of AdvancedRockets, 96Central research laboratories, countertrendin, 76-79Challenges. See Research challenges
Changes to systems, unintended andunanticipated consequences of, 5Changing needs of users, 5Chronicle of Higher Education, 137
CIAO. See Critical Infrastructure Assurance
OfficeCIC. See Committee on Information and
CommunicationsCisco Systems, 81, 86, 92expenditures on R&D, 70, 78CISE. See Computing and Information
Science and Engineering directorateCiticorp, 83-84Civil engineering applications, 158
Clickstream data, analyzing, 180Clinton, President William, 47Clinton Administration, xii, 3, 10, 62, 198, 201
Cohen, Wes, 163Collaborationapplications involving, 106
challenges in, 153Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX235encouragement of interdepartmental byuniversities, 206-207Columbia University, programs in medicalinformatics, 171Commerce, electronic, 7Commercial equipment and suppliesindustry sector, 64, 68Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)technology, 110Commercializationchallenge of in social applications ofinformation technology, 151-152of university research, 91-93Committee on Computing, Informationand Communications (CCIC), 120Committee on Information andCommunications (CIC), 121Committee on Information TechnologyResearch in a Competitive World,xiv, 2Committee on Science, Engineering, andPublic Policy (COSEPUP), 183, 185,194Committee to Assess the Scope andDirection of Computer Science andTechnology, 39-40Communications, influx from researchers,62-63Communications equipment industrysector, 64-65, 68Communications services industry sector,64-65, 68expenditures on R&D, 67Communities, electronic, 7Community challenges, 153
Companies. See Information technology
companies; individual companiesCompaq Computer, 70, 81
Competitiveness, 43maximizing effectiveness of, 218Complexity challengesassociated with large-scale systems, 5,108-110in social applications research, 7Component software, 129-130Component vendors, expenditures onR&D, 65Components, 32dealing with large numbers of, 5deep interactions among, 5
independently designed, 5untrustworthy, 110Components industry sector, 64-65, 68Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty,complying with, 61Computation and Social Systems (CSS)program, 174-176Computational Facility for Simulating theDynamic Response of Materials, 96Computer-aided design (CAD), 83
Computer-aided software engineering(CASE) tools, 104Computer and data processing servicesindustry sector, 64-65, 68expenditures on R&D, 65, 67Computer graphics, historical perspectiveon, 21Computer science, 4, 6, 13, 17, 26, 30, 49,52, 55-57, 60-61, 83, 88-89, 93, 118,
126, 133, 144, 147, 150-151, 154, 159,172, 175, 179, 182, 185-186, 195, 201,206-207federal obligations for research in, 55Computer science and engineering (CS&E),39-40Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard (CSTB), ix, 2, 19-20, 38, 51, 79,98, 140, 144, 161Brooks-Sutherland report, 121Committee to Assess the Scope andDirection of Computer Science andTechnology, 39-40Computing the Future, 39-40
Computer Sciences Corporation, 79Computer simulations, 96Computer-supported cooperative work, 169
Computersassemblers of personal, 67, 76based on quantum mechanics, 76
development of mouse for, 21support and repair of, 65Computers, Organizations, Policy, andSociety (CORPS) group, 192Computing, scientific, 46Computing and Information Science andEngineering (CISE) directorate, 59,174, 179, 202Computing and Social System program, 12,203Computing industry sector, 64-65, 68Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda forComputer Science and Engineering, 39-
40, 194Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236INDEXConducting research on social applications,155-160new research teams, 157-160
a plausible approach, 155-157Conferencing, remote, 190CONFIRM hotel reservation system, 102,104Congressional Budget Office (CBO), 31, 85Consequences, of changes or additions tosystems, 5Consortia, 163Constituencies supporting informationtechnology research, 20Construction industry, social applicationsof technology in, 158Control Data Corporation, 30Control of social applications ofinformation technology, 152-153Coordinationof expertise, 153of social applications of informationtechnology, 152-153Copyrights, limitations of, 75Corporate espionage, 115
Corporate investment in research anddevelopment, disincentives to, 70-76Corporation for National ResearchInitiatives, 132CORPS. See Computers, Organizations,
Policy, and Society groupCOSEPUP. See Committee on Science,
Engineering, and Public PolicyCOTS. See Commercial off-the-shelf
technologyCray Research, 30
Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office(CIAO), 47Critical infrastructures, 7, 156defining, 101Critical success factors, 169CS&E. See Computer science and
engineeringCSS. See Computation and Social Systems
programCSTB. See Computer Science and
Telecommunications BoardCustom programming, 65
Customer support, gaining for innovation,76Customization, 139Òmass,Ó 111
Customized consulting, 79Cyber auctions, 181DDARPA. See Defense Advanced Research
Projects AgencyDecision making, group dynamics and, 170Decision support systems, 169
Decomposition, hierarchical, 112Deconstructing wireless, 217-221Defense Advanced Research ProjectsAgency (DARPA), 31, 56, 58-59, 62-63, 164, 166historical perspective on, 21
Information Assurance andSurvivability program, 122involvement in Next GenerationInternet program, 123, 201recommendations for new programs at,11, 198-201Very Large Scale Integrated CircuitProgram, 21, 96Defense contractors, 79-80
Defense Information Systems Agency(DISA), 115Dell Computer Corporation, 67, 76Deloitte & Touche, 117Denver International Airport, troubledsystems at, 102Department of Commerce, involvement inNext Generation Internet program,
123Department of Defense (DOD), 36, 51, 54,56-59, 61-62, 161, 166attacks on computers of, 115Department of Energy (DOE), 51, 56-58, 61-62, 161, 200involvement in Next GenerationInternet program, 123, 201Department of Health and Human Services(DHHS), 11, 57-59, 201involvement in Next GenerationInternet program, 123Design of large-scale systems, 118-133large numbers of individuals involvedin, 5-6Design of research programs, 126-133architectural approaches, 126-127ecological and economic systems asmodels for, 128Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX237extensions of existing approaches, 129-130inspiration from natural and socialsystems, 127software development processes, 127, 129support for research infrastructure, 131-133theoretical approaches, 126Developmentdisincentives to corporate investmentin, 70-76methodologies for, 154DHHS. See Department of Health and
Human ServicesDiffusion of applications, 170Digital Equipment Corporation, 30expenditures on R&D, 68, 70Digital Government program, 12, 57-58,141, 192, 202, 204Digital Libraries Initiative (DLI), 12, 59-60,203, 213DISA. See Defense Information Systems
AgencyDisciplinary research. See alsoInterdisciplinary research; Other
disciplinesanalogies to, 41Discovery. See Knowledge discovery
Discussion forums, 150Disincentives, to corporate investment inresearch and development, 70-76Display System Replacement program, 105Distance education, technology supporting,106Distributed operation and administrationchallenges, associated with large-
scale systems, 118Distributed systems, electronic commerceapplications as, 119Diversity, in the research base, 49-51DLI. See Digital Libraries Initiative
DOD. See Department of Defense
DOE. See Department of Energy
EE-checks, 181E-commerce applications, 119, 191redefining the business process, 152E-coupons, 181E-Lab, 193
E-mail, 150Early-stage financing, 87eBay, 86, 117Ecological systems, as models for thedesign of research programs, 128Economic growth, information technologycompaniesÕ contribution to, 18
Economic implications of computing andcommunications, research in, 62Economic structures, novel activities andshifts in, 7Economic systems, as models for thedesign of research programs, 128Economics of investment, in informationtechnology research, 75Economics research, contributing toinformation technologydevelopment, 170EDI (electronic data interchange), Internet,181Edison, Thomas Alva, 26EDS. See Electronic Data Services
Education, technology supporting distance,106Electrical engineering, 13, 17, 30, 49, 52-55,57, 88, 93, 150Electronic commerce applications, 7, 149as distributed systems, 119Electronic communities, 7Electronic components industry sector, 64-65, 68Electronic data interchange. See EDI
Electronic Data Services (EDS), 8, 79-80
Embedding information technologyresearch in other disciplines, 185-187Embedding large-scale systems, withinlarger social and business systemcontext, 6Emergent behaviors of systems, 5, 109
Employment, information technologycompaniesÕ contribution to, 18
Encryption, 115processing requirements for, 106End-user organizationsexpenditures on R&D, 65
participation of, 160-166research by, 15, 82-85, 209-211End-usersconstantly changing needs of, 5large numbers of, 6need for companies to involve in theirresearch, 15-16, 211Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238INDEXneed for federal agencies to increasesupport for programs including, 12-13, 201-205understanding behaviors of, 193Endeavor expedition, 62Engineering research centers (ERCs), 98,183-184ERCs. See Engineering research centers
Ernst & Young, 79
E*Trade Securities, 83, 117Evolving the High Performance Computingand Communications Initiative to
Support the NationÕs InformationInfrastructure, 121
Expanded systems, difficulties with, 113
Expanding the scale and scope ofinformation technology research,195-213recommendations for government, 197-206recommendations for industry, 209-211
recommendations for universities, 206-209Expanding the systems research agenda,124-126Expansion financing, 87Expeditions into the 21st Century, 63, 96Extensions of existing approaches, in thedesign of research programs, 129-130FFAA. See Federal Aviation Administration
Facultyencouraging participation of ininterdisciplinary research, 13-14,206-208needing to pioneer informationtechnology research, 14-15, 208-209Failurescomplexity of, 112
hardware, 116Farrell, Joseph, 223Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),11-12, 35, 57, 200attacks on computers of, 115troubled systems at, 102-103, 105, 213Federal Communications Commission, 219Federal Information Services andApplications Council (FISAC), 192Federal Information Systems AdvisoryCommittee (FISAC), 204Federal information technology researchprograms, xi, 60-63Federal Reserve, 18Federal support for information technologyresearch, 51-63levels of, 20need for classifying data on, 13, 205-206
need for increased, 9-11, 197-198role of, ixsources of, 56-58
styles of, 58-60trends in, 52-56in universities, 89Fidelity Investments Institutional ServicesCompany, Inc., 138Fingerprint-authentication technology, 73
First-of-a-Kind (FOAK) program (IBM),165-166, 192, 211FISAC. See Federal Information Services
and Applications Council andFederal Information SystemsAdvisory CommitteeFlexibility challenges associated with large-scale systems, 111-114, 218Florida fingerprint system, troubledsystems at, 102Focus Centers, 90, 98
Formalism, 139Fundamental research, 66, 75defining, x
need for NSA and DARPA to establishprograms for, 11, 198-201Funding. See Investment in information
technology researchGGAO. See General Accounting Office
Gapsin academic research, 90-91in the research base, 79-81Gateway, Inc., 67, 76
General Accounting Office (GAO), 105, 137General Motors Corporation, 66Generic research, 156
Genetic materials, information processingcapabilities of, 76Georgia Center for AdvancedTelecommunications Technology, 182Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX239Georgia Institute of Technology, FocusCenter at, 98Global Industries Division (IBM), 166
Global Positioning System AugmentationProgram, 105Global Services Division (IBM), 79
Government Performance and Results Actof 1993, 46, 56Government researchneed for Bureau of the Census to workwith the NSF on classifying dataabout, 13, 205-206need for increased federal support for,9-11, 197-198need for increased support forinterdisciplinary, 12-13, 201-205need for NSA and DARPA to establishfundamental research programs, 11,
198-201recommendations for expanding thescale and scope of, 9-13, 197-206Government services, delivery of, 149Graphical User Interfaces, historicalperspective on, 21Gray, Jim, 24Group applications, of informationtechnology, 149-150Group dynamics, and decision making, 170Gupta, Anoop, 98HHackers, damage done by, 115Hardware failure, 116Harvard Business School, 169
Hershey Foods, Inc., 102-103Heterogeneity issues, 139challenges associated with large-scalesystems, 110-111Hewlett-Packardreliability claims by, 138
systems integration services from, 79Hidden Markov Models, 21Hierarchical decomposition, 112
Hierarchies, status, 190High-level programming languages, 23High Performance Computing andCommunications Act of 1991, xiiHigh Performance Computing andCommunications (HPCC) program,
19, 39, 45, 51, 62, 121Historical perspective on informationtechnology research, 21Horn, Paul, 72
HPCC program. See High Performance
Computing and CommunicationsprogramHPCCI. See High Performance Computing
and Communications programHubaux, Jean-Pierre, 223
Human-computer interaction (HCI), 147research in, 62Human error, 114, 116IIBM Corporation, 8, 17, 211expenditures on R&D, 66, 68, 70, 81First-of-a-Kind (FOAK) program, 165-166, 192, 211Global Industries Division, 166Global Services Division, 79
historical structuring of, 81industry solution units (ISUs), 165Institute for Advanced Commerce, 180-181patents held by, 84recent trends in research by, 30-31redirection of research at, 72relational database research by, 21
Research Division, 81, 180systems integration services from, 79work on speech recognition, 21Identity challenges, 153ÒImitation game,Ó 24
Implementation of large-scale systems,improving, 118-133Improving the design and implementationof large-scale systems, 118-133designing a research program, 126-133expanding the systems research agenda,124-126limitations of past research, 119-123Independent requirements, large numberof, 6Independently designed components, 5Individuals involved in design andoperation, large numbers of, 5-6Industry researchchanging structure of, 30-32federal statistics concerning, 64-65
and gaps in the research base, 79-81Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240INDEXinterdisciplinary, 179-180need for closer ties with universityresearch, 208need for companies to involve endusers in, 15-16, 211recommendations for expanding thescale and scope of, 15-16, 209-211systems integration, 79-81Industry sectors, 64-65, 68
Industry solution units (ISUs), 165Industry support for informationtechnology research, xi, 64-87countertrend in central researchlaboratories, 76-79disincentives to corporate investment,70-76internships and sabbaticals, 166-168need for classifying data on, 13, 205-206
and research by end-user organizations,82-85trends in, 66-70
venture capital support for innovation,85-87Information Age, 20
Information appliances, 107Information Assurance and Survivabilityprogram, 122Information economies, 181Information management, research in, 62
Information Networking Institute, 182Information sharing, 14, 170Information technology (IT)business research related to, andstrategic advantage, 169expanding applications of, ix, 33-37
focus on, 20-23future of, 1-2, 50national debate about, ix
need for leadership in, xprogress in, 20, 25-26retrospective assessments of, 28
social applications of, 144-148Information technology companiescontribution to economic growth, 18
contribution to employment, 18expenditures on R&D, 69, 71need to involve end-users in theirresearch, 15-16, 211Information technology developmentsimplications for the research enterprise,42-43implications of information technologyresearch for, 37-42Information technology education andworkforce, research in, 62Information Technology for the Twenty-first Century (IT2) initiative, xii, 19,61-63, 121, 186Information technology industries, 64-65supply chains in, 67Information technology research, 23-37changing environment for, 29-37and changing industrial structure, 30-32
classification of, 26-29constituencies supporting, 20embedding in other disciplines, 185-187
and expanding applications ofinformation technology, 33-37expanding the scale and scope of, 187,195-213facets of, 23-29federal support for, 12-13, 30-31, 51-63,201-205goals for, 24-25historical perspective on, 21
implications of information technologydevelopments for, 37-42importance of, ixindustry support for, 64-87mechanisms for strengthening, xi
mechanisms for supporting, 20national debate about, ixresearch goals for, 24
resources for, 48-98scope of, x-xi, 20trends in, x
varieties of, 23-26Information Technology Research (ITR)initiative, xii, 60, 62, 121, 178-179,
193, 201-202Information Week magazine, 82-83
Informix, relational database research by, 21
Infrastructure programs, limitations of,132-133Infrastructurescritical, 7, 101, 156existing, 132-133underlying, 34Innovationcustomer support for, 76venture capital support for, 85-87Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX241Inspiration from natural and socialsystems, in the design of researchprograms, 127Institute for Advanced Commerce (IBM),180-181Integrated circuits. See also Systems
integrationfunding research in, 78Integrated Terminal Weather System, 105
Intel Corporation, 3, 81, 86expenditures on R&D, 67, 70Intel microprocessor architecture, 74
Intel Pentium microprocessors, 138Intellectual property protectionarrangements, 140Intelligent systems, learning and, 178Interactions among components, deep, 5Interdepartmental collaboration,encouragement of by universities,206-207Interdisciplinary researchin academia, 168-179in industry, 179-180need for federal agencies to increasesupport for, 12-13, 201-205need for universities to encouragefaculty and students in, 13-14, 206-208Interfaces. See also Graphical User
Interfacesefforts to develop intuitive, 79research in human-computer, 62Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 12, 35, 57,200troubled systems at, 102-103International competitiveness issues, xInternetdata on, 141
economics of, 170future problems facing, 74, 76, 160global dimensions of, 113
growth of, x, 4, 22, 30, 131historical perspective on, 21IPv4 protocol of, 74
IPv6 protocol of, 74making more robust, 140, 201search engines on, 92Internet 2, 132-133Internet EDI, 181Internet service providers (ISPs), 133data on, 141ÒInternet time,Ó 28
Internships and sabbaticals, 166-168Intrico consortium, 104
Intuitive interfaces, efforts to develop, 79Investment in information technologyresearch. See also Corporate
investment in research anddevelopment; Federal support forinformation technology research;
Private-industry sector support forresearcheconomics of, 75
inadequacy of current, 4IPv4 protocol, 74IPv6 protocol, high cost of implementing,74IRS. See Internal Revenue Service
ISPs. See Internet service providers
ISUs. See Industry solution units
IT. See Information technology
IT2. See Information Technology for the
Twenty-first CenturyJJava programming language, 23
JavaBeans, 130Junior faculty, encouraging innovativework by, 209KKatz, Michael, 223KDI. See Knowledge and Distributed
Intelligence initiativeKepler, Johannes, 26Kleinrock, Leonard, 46, 145Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence(KDI) initiative, 177-178Knowledge content challenges, 153-154Knowledge discovery, 106
Knowledge managementdefining, 191in social applications of informationtechnology, 150-151Knowledge networking, 177-178KPMG, 79Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242INDEXLLaboratories. See Research laboratories
Lampson, Butler, 47ÒLarge-enoughÓ-scale network systems,131Large numbersof independent requirements, 6
of individuals involved in design andoperation, 5-6of users, 6Large-scale-image databases, efforts todevelop, 79Large-scale systemsdefining, 3, 108ecological and economic systems asmodels for, 128examples of troubled, 102faculty needing to pioneer research in,14-15, 208-209failure rate in development of, 99-100improving the design andimplementation of, 118-133need for research into, 3operational failures experienced by, 100performance prediction in, 109problems with, 5-6, 100-107research on, 99-141
technical challenges associated with,107-118testing, 112Layering, 120Learning, and intelligent systems, 178Leveson, Nancy, 90
Limitations, of past research, 119-123Linux, 97ÒLock-in,Ó 36
Lockheed Martin, 8, 80-81Long-term research, 70, 74Lucent Digital Radio, 73
Lucent Technologies, 8, 81expenditures on R&D, 66, 76-78redirection of research at, 72-73LYCOS, 92MMacintosh, 21
Managementinformation, 62, 106knowledge, 150-151problems with, 103-104, 221Òsupply-chain,Ó 106
Manhattan Project, 26
Manufacturing design, 149Marketplace factors, 76Markov models, hidden, 21
ÒMass customization,Ó 111
Massachusetts Institute of Technology(MIT), 17, 90, 92, 211educational venture with Microsoft,179-180, 211, 213Media Lab, 182
Òprofessors of the practiceÓ at, 167-168
Project Oxygen, 62, 96Sloan School of Management, 84MCC. See Microelectronics and Computer
Technology CorporationMCI Corporation, expenditures on R&D,64, 78Mechanisms for social applicationsresearch, 160-187embedding information technologyresearch in other disciplines, 185-187industry internships and sabbaticals,166-168interdisciplinary research in academia,168-179interdisciplinary research in industry,179-180multidisciplinary research centers, 180-185participation of end-user organizations,160-166Mechanisms for strengthening informationtechnology research, xiMechanisms for supporting informationtechnology research, 20Media Lab, 182
Medical informatics, 163, 168lessons from, 163, 171Memex capability, goal for informationtechnology research, 24MEMS. See Microelectromechanical systems
Merrill Lynch, 66, 83-84, 97Trusted Global Advisor system, 97Metcalfe, Robert, 97MetcalfeÕs law, 97Methodology research, 124Metrorail, troubled systems at, 117Microdrive device, 72
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),advances in, 106, 137Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX243Microelectronics and ComputerTechnology Corporation (MCC),163-164Micropayments, 181Microprocessors, complexity of, 137Microsoft Corporation, 3, 8, 81, 86, 179-180educational venture with MIT, 179-180,211, 213expenditures on R&D, 65-67, 70, 81
recent trends in research by, 30Microsoft Office, grammar checker in, 97Microsoft Research, 78-79
Microsoft Windows standard, 74Middleware, 138MIT. See Massachusetts Institute of
TechnologyMobile code, 220Modem Media, 193
Modularity, 120Modules, reusable, 129-130MooreÕs law, 22, 31, 108, 110Motorola, Inc., 3, 97Motorola Labs, 78Mouse, development of, 21
Multidisciplinary researchcenters for, 180-185difficulties with, 143NNanoscale devices, advances in, 106
National Academy of Engineering, 184
National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration (NASA), 58-62, 161,166, 200involvement in Next GenerationInternet program, 123, 201National Institute of Standards andTechnology, 200National Institutes of Health (NIH), 62, 200involvement in Next GenerationInternet program, 201National Library of Medicine (NLM), 59,171, 201National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration (NOAA), 62National Science and Technology Council,Committee on Computing,Information and Communications,120National Science Foundation (NSF), x, 18,21, 31, 49, 56-62, 161, 165Computation and Social Systemsprogram, 174-176Engineering Directorate, 122Engineering research centers, 98, 183-184Information Technology Research (ITR)initiative, xii, 60, 62, 121, 178-179,
193, 201-202Knowledge and Distributed Intelligenceinitiative, 177-178need for Bureau of the Census to workwith, 13, 205-206programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology promotedby, 173-174recommendations for new programs at,11, 198-201Scalable Enterprise Systems, 122-123science and technology centers, 183,185, 193National Weather Service, troubledsystems at, 102Natural systems, inspiration for the designof research programs, 127NEC Corporation, recent trends in researchby, 30Network Control Protocol, 140
Network effect, 74Network externalities, 170Network security, 221-223
Network systemsacademic, 133Òlarge-enoughÓ-scale, 131very high speed, 132New York Stock Exchange, 102Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative,59, 61-62, 108, 123, 201, 213NGI. See Next Generation Internet
initiativeNIH. See National Institutes of Health
NLM. See National Library of Medicine
NOAA. See National Oceanic and
Atmospheric AdministrationNomadicity, 110Nortel, expenditures on R&D, 78
North American Industrial ClassificationSystem codes, efforts to implement,96, 205, 213NSF. See National Science Foundation
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244INDEXNSFnet, commercialization of, 98Numbers of components, dealing withlarge, 5NYNEX, expenditures on R&D, 77O1 Gbps network systems, 132
Office, computing, and accountingmachines industry sector, 64-65, 68Open Market, Inc., 92Operation Desert Storm, transport to, 29
Operation of large-scale systems, largenumbers of individuals involved in,5-6Operational challenges, 154associated with large-scale systems, 118Operational facilities, linking tomultidisciplinary research centers,182Oracle, 8expenditures on R&D, 81relational database research by, 21Organizations. See also End-user
organizationsnovel activities and shifts in structures, 7PPACI. See Partnerships for Advanced
Computational InfrastructurePacket switching, historical perspective on,21, 109Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), 63, 179redirection of research at, 73PARC. See Palo Alto Research Center
Partnerships for Advanced ComputationalInfrastructure (PACI), 59-60Pasteur, Louis, 26Pasteur-style research, 27-29Patents, limitations of, 74-75
ÒPath-dependent effects,Ó 36
Pentium Pro microprocessor, 137PeopleSoft, 8
Performance prediction, in large-scalesystems, 109Personal computers, assemblers of, 67, 76
Personal memex capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24Personal privacy challenges, 153Persystant Technologies, 73PITAC. See President
Õs InformationTechnology Advisory CommitteePortolano/Workscape, 62Postel, Jonathan, 131Prediction. See Performance prediction
Prepackaged software, development of, 65,81President of the United States, 18
Presidential Decision Directive 63, 47PresidentÕs Information TechnologyAdvisory Committee (PITAC), xii,
10, 19, 46-47, 62, 178, 190-191, 198PricewaterhouseCoopers, 79, 98Princeton University, deconstructingwireless, 217Privacy, 153Private-industry sector support forresearch, xi, 64-87levels of, 20Process handbook, 169
Processing, transaction, 139Productivity issues, 169Professional and commercial equipmentand supplies industry sector, 64, 68ÒProfessors of the practice,Ó 167-168
Programmingcustom, 65efficiency of, 140Programming languages. See alsoAutomatic programmer capabilityhigh-level, 23
new designs for, 28Programs. See Federal information
technology research programs;
Research programsProject Oxygen, 62, 96Project Whirlwind, 21
Public goods, 75QQuantum mechanics, computers based on,76RR&D. See Research and development
RBOCs. See Regional Bell operating
companiesMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX245Recommendations, for expanding the scaleand scope of information technologyresearch, 9-16, 197-211Reduced-instruction-set computing (RISC)historical perspective on, 21microprocessors employing, 27Reengineering applications, 146Regional Bell operating companies (RBOCs),expenditures on R&D, 64, 77-78Regulation, role of, 170Reinventing applications, 146Relational databases, historical perspectiveon, 21Reliability issues, 116-118, 153Remote conferencing, 190
Repairs, computer, 65Representation and Analysis for Modeling,Specification, Design, Prediction,
Control and Assurance of Large Scale,Complex Systems, 139
Requirements, large numbers ofindependent, 6Research. See also Academic research;
University researchcase, 124, 156countertrend in central laboratories, 76-79defining, x, 17economics, 170by end-user organizations, 82-85
fundamental, 11, 66, 75, 198-201generic, 156goals for information technologyresearch, 24implications of information technologydevelopments for, 42-44limitations of past, 119-123methodology, 124multidisciplinary centers for, 180-185
need for, 4quadrant model of, 27quality of, 95
social science, 170support for infrastructure, 131-133targeted, 65-66, 70
telecommunications, 77-78Research agenda, expanding, 3-4, 6, 8-9, 62,124-126Research and development (R&D), 1, 3, 61-62, 64-71, 80-83, 85disincentives to corporate investmentin, 70-76need for companies to involve endusers in, 15-16, 211need for NSF and Bureau of the Censusto classify data on investments in,13, 205-206Research basedegree of consensus regarding, xiidiversity in, 49-51gaps in, 79-81Research challenges in social applicationsof information technology, 148-155commerce, 151-152
common, 153-154coordination and control, 152-153group applications, 149-150
knowledge management, 150-151in system-specific research, 154-155Research Division (IBM), 81, 180
Research motivated by social applicationsof information technology, 142-194challenges in, 148-155
conducting, 155-160defining, 144-148expanding the scope of, 187
mechanisms for, 160-187Research on large-scale systems, 99-141improving the design andimplementation of, 118-133moving forward, 133-134
problems with, 100-107technical challenges associated with,107-118Research programsdesign of, 126-133designing, 126-133Research teams, for conducting research onsocial applications, 157-160Research topics involving socialapplications, 217-223Researchers, influx of communicationsfrom, 62-63Resources for information technologyresearch, 48-98. See also End-user
organizationsand diversity in the research base, 49-51federal support for, 51-63industry support for, 64-87
university research, 87-93Retrospective assessments, of informationtechnology, 28Reusable modules, 129-130Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246INDEXRevolutionary computing, research in, 62RISC. See Reduced-instruction-set
computingRSA Data Security, 92SSabbaticals, 166-168
Sabre Group, 83-84
Safety, software, 90SAGE defense system, 21SAP, 8expenditures on R&D, 81Saudi Arabia, mobilizing war materiel to,36Scalability issues, 139goal for information technologyresearch, 24, 137problems with, 100Scalable Enterprise Systems, 122-123Scalable information infrastructure,research in, 62Scaling Up: A Research Agenda for SoftwareEngineering, 162
Science and technology centers (STCs), 183,185, 193, 203Scientific computing, 46Scope, of information technology research,x-xi, 20Seagate Technologies, 67Secure systems, 115-116goal for information technologyresearch, 24Securities and Exchange Commission(SEC), corporate filings to, 66-67Security challenges, 154network, 221-223SEMATECH, 163-164
Semiconductor Research Corporation(SRC), 90, 163-164Senior faculty, needing to pioneerinformation technology research, 14-15, 208-209Sloan Foundation, 193
Sloan School of Management, 84ÒSmart matter,Ó 73
Social applications of informationtechnology, 144-148. See also Group
applicationsdefining, 3, 142
examples and features of, 149need for federal agencies to increasesupport for, 12-13, 201-205Social applications research, 7, 142-194challenges in, 148-155citizens, 156critical infrastructure, 156
faculty needing to pioneer, 14-15, 208-209groups, 155
mechanisms for, 160-187organizations, 156topics involving, 217-223Social implications of computing andcommunications, 155research in, 62Social science research, 157-158contributing to information technologydevelopment, 170Social Security Administration, 12, 57, 200Social structures, novel activities and shiftsin, 7Social systemsembedding large-scale systems withinlarger contexts, 6providing inspiration for the design ofresearch programs, 127Social trust challenges, 153Sociotechnical systems, 3, 138, 142Software. See also Middleware
component, 129-130development of prepackaged, 65, 81research in, 62Software bugs, 116testing for, 112Software developers, expenditures onR&D, 65Software developmentmethodologies for, 169
processes in the design of researchprograms, 127, 129Software Engineering Institute, 158-159
Software engineering research, 157, 162Software safety, 90Speech-recognition, 72historical perspective on, 21Speech-to-text capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24ÒSpin-insÓ and 
Òspin-outs,Ó 73
Sprint Corporation, expenditures on R&D,64, 78SRC. See Semiconductor Research
CorporationMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX247Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)codes, 17, 213efforts to replace, 96, 205
expansions of, 66Standard Terminal AutomationReplacement System, 105Standish Group, 137-138Stanford University, 90, 92Center for Integrated TurbulenceSimulation, 96programs in medical informatics, 171Stateless Architecture, 83
Status hierarchies, 190STCs. See Science and technology centers
Stokes, Donald, 26
StokesÕ quadrant model of research, 27
Strategic advantage, informationtechnology and, 169Strengthening information technologyresearch, mechanisms for, xiStudents, encouraging participation of ininterdisciplinary research, 13-14,206-208Styles of federal support, 58-60
Sun Microsystems, 92Supplies industry sector, 64, 68ÒSupply-chainÓ management, 106
Support for research infrastructure. See alsoInvestment in information
technology researchcomputer, 65in the design of research programs, 131-133Swiss Federal Institute of Technology atLausanne, deconstructing wireless,
217Sybase, relational database research by, 21Syracuse University, programs insociotechnical aspects of informationtechnology, 174System-specific research challenges, insocial applications of informationtechnology, 154-155Systems, 32always-up, 24consequences of changes or additionsto, 5deconstructing, 220difficulties with upgrades, 113emergent behaviors of, 5
secure, 24sociotechnical, 138trouble-free, 24Systems integration, 65challenge of, 79-81
expenditures on R&D in, 80Systems research agenda, expanding, 124-126T3Com Inc., 97Tablet computer, efforts to develop, 79Tacoma Narrows bridge collapse, 34, 47
Targeted research, 65-66, 70TCP/IP standard, 74Technical challenges associated with large-scale systems, 107-118complexity, 108-110distributed operation andadministration, 118flexibility, 111-114heterogeneity, 110-111
large scale challenges, 108trustworthiness, 114-118Telecommunications research, changes in,77-78Telepresence, 24Testbed networks, 131Testbeds, linking to multidisciplinaryresearch centers, 182Testing large-scale systems, 112Text-to-speech capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24Theoretical approaches, to the design ofresearch programs, 126Transaction processing, 139
Transforming applications, 146Trendsin federal funding, 52-56
in industrial support, 66-70in support for university research, 88-90Trouble-free systems, goal for informationtechnology research, 24Trusted Global Advisor system, 97Trustworthiness challengesassociated with large-scale systems, 110,114-118, 153availability issues, 116-118
reliability issues, 116-118security issues, 115-116Turing Award, 24
Turing test, 24Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society's NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248INDEXUU S WEST, expenditures on R&D, 77Unintended and unanticipatedconsequences, of changes or
additions to systems, 5Unit testing, 112University of California at Berkeley, 17, 90,92-93deconstructing wireless, 217Endeavor expedition, 62
Focus Center at, 98programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology, 174relational database research at, 21University of California at Irvine, 192University of California at Los Angeles,programs in sociotechnical aspectsof information technology, 174University of Chicago, Center forAstrophysical ThermonuclearFlashes, 96University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignCenter for Simulation of AdvancedRockets, 96programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology, 174University of Michigan, 17programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology, 174University of Utah, 21Center for Simulation of AccidentalFires and Explosions, 96programs in medical informatics, 171University of Washington, 92Portolano/Workscape, 62University research, 87-93commercialization of, 91-93faculty needing to pioneer informationtechnology research, 14-15, 208-209gaps in, 90-91need for closer ties with industryresearch, 208need for faculty and students toparticipate in interdisciplinaryresearch, 13-14, 206-208recommendations for expanding thescale and scope of, 13-15, 206-209trends in support for, 88-90Untrustworthy components, creatingtrustworthy systems from, 110Upgrades, difficulties with, 113US Air Force, SAGE defense system, 21Usability issues, within large-scale systems,6Users. See End-users
VVC. See Venture capital
Venture capital (VC), support forinnovation, 31, 85-87Venture One Corporation, 98Veridical, Inc., 73
Very high speed network systems, 132Very Large Scale Integrated CircuitProgram, 21, 96ViaVoice product, 72Visual Insights, 72Visualization, 96
von Hippel, Eric, 84WWashington, DC, Metrorail, 117
Willamette microprocessor, 137
Wireless, deconstructing, 217-221Work, changing nature of, 146Workscape, 62World memex capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24World Wide Web, 150capturing information from, 106needs of, 25
recent growth of, 22XXerox Corporation, 17, 179. See also Palo
Alto Research CenterAlto computer, 21, 97expenditures on R&D, 66, 70patents held by, 84
redirection of research at, 73YYahoo, 86