DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9952Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services Research208 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-07187-1 | DOI 10.17226/9952Committee on the Role of Institutional Review Boards in Health Services ResearchData Privacy Protection, Division of Health Care ServicesProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Data Privacyin Health ServicesResearchCommittee on the Role of Institutional Review Boards in
Health Services Research Data Privacy Protection
Division of Health Care Services
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, D.C.iProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 
 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, DC 20418
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
Support for this study was provided by The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and
the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, both of the Department of Health

and Human Services (Contract No.282-99-0045, Task Order No.1).
International Standard Book No. 0-309-07187-9
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services Research 
is available for sale from the National
Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Box 285, Washington, DC 20055; call (800)

624-6242 or (202) 334-3938 (in the Washington metropolitan area), or visit the NAP's on-line book-

store at 
www.nap.edu
.The full text of this report is available on line at 
www.nap.edu
.For more information about the Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page at 
www.iom.edu.Copyright 2000 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all cultures
and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The image adopted as a logo-type by the Insti-

tute of Medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient Greece, now held by the Staatliche

Musseen in Berlin.
iiProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁKnowing is not enough; we must apply.
Willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ
ŠGoetheINSTITUTE OF MEDICINE
Shaping the Future for Health
iiiProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering 

research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their 

use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by 

the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise 

the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. 

Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the 
charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of 

outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the 

selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the 

responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of 

Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national 

needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 

achievements of engineers. Dr. William. A. Wulf is president of the National 

Academy of Engineering. The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy   
of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate 
professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of 
the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National 

Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the 

federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical 
care, research, and education. Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the 

Institute of Medicine. The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and 

technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and 

advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general 
policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal 
operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National 

Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, 
and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. 
Alberts and Dr. William. A. Wulf are chairman and vice chairman, 

respectively, of the National Research Council. 
www.national-academies.org
ivProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARDS IN HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH
DATA PRIVACY PROTECTION
BERNARD LO
 (Chair), Professor of Medicine, Director of Programs in
Medical Ethics University of California San Francisco
ELIZABETH ANDREWS,
 Director, World Wide Epidemiology, Glaxo
WellcomeJOHN COLMERS,
 Executive Director, Maryland Health Care Commission
GEORGE DUNCAN,
 Professor of Statistics, Heinz School of Public Policy and
Management, Carnegie Mellon University
JANLORI GOLDMAN,
 Director, Health Privacy Project, Georgetown
University, Institute for Health Care Research and Policy
CRAIG W. HENDRIX,
 Associate Professor of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University
MARK C. HORNBROOK,
 Associate Director, Center for Health Research,
Kaiser Permanente Northwest
LISA IEZZONI,
 Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Division of General Medicine and Primary Care
DONALD KORNFELD,
 Associate Dean Faculty of Medicine, Chairman,
Institutional Review Board, Professor of Psychiatry, Columbia University

College of Physicans and Surgeons, Presbyterian University
ELLIOT STONE,
 Executive Director and CEO, Massachusetts Health Data
Consortium, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS,
 Professor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
ADELE WALLER, Partner, Bell, Boyd & Lloyd, Chicago
ConsultantsBARTHA-MARIA KNOPPERS,
 Professor, Faculty of Law, Senior
Researcher, C.R.D.P., Legal Counsel, McMaster Gervais, University of

MontrealROSS A. THOMPSON,
 Professor, Department of Psychology, University of
NebraskaStaffLEE ZWANZIGER,
 Senior Program Officer
RITA GASKINS,
 Senior Project Assistant
vProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOARD ON HEALTH CARE SERVICES
DON E. DETMER
 (Chair), Professor of Medical Education in Health
Evaluation Sciences, University of Virginia
BARBARA J. MCNEIL
 (Vice Chair
), Ridley Watts Professor, Department of
Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School
LINDA AIKEN,
 Director, Center for Health Outcomes and Policy Research, and
the Claire M. Fagin Leadership Professor of Nursing and Professor of

Sociology, University of Pennsylvania
STUART H. ALTMAN,
 Sol C. Chaikin Professor of National Health Policy, the
Florence Heller Graduate School for Social Policy, Brandeis University
HARRIS BERMAN, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Tufts Health Plan
BRIAN BILES,
 Chair and Professor, Department of Health Services
Management and Policy, School of Public Health and Health Services, the

George Washington University
CHRISTINE CASSEL,
 Chairman, Henry L. Schwarz Department of Geriatrics
and Adult Development, and Professor of Geriatrics and Internal Medicine,

Mount Sinai Medical CenterPAUL D. CLAYTON,
 Medical Informaticist, Intermountain Health Care, Salt
Lake City, Utah
PAUL F. GRINER,
 Vice President and Director, Center for the Assessment and
Management of Change in Academic Medicine, Association of American

Medical CollegesRUBY P. HEARN, Senior Vice President, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
PETER BARTON HUTT,
 Partner, Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.
ROBERT L. JOHNSON,
 Professor of Pediatrics and Clinical Psychiatry, and
Director, Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine, University of Medicine and

Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical School
JACQUELINE KOSECOFF,
 President and Co-Chief Executive Officer,
ProtocareSHEILA T. LEATHERMAN,
 Executive Vice President, United Healthcare
Corporation, Center for Health Care Policy and Evaluation, Minneapolis
UWE E. REINHARDT,
 James Madison Professor of Political Economy and
Professor of Economics and Public Affairs, Princeton University
SHOSHANNA SOFAER,
 Robert P. Luciano Professor of Health Care Policy,
School of Public Affairs, Baruch College
GAIL L. WARDEN,
 President and Chief Executive Officer, Henry Ford Health
System
JANET M. CORRIGAN,
 Director, Board on Health Care Services, Institute of
MedicineviProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceHealth services research (HSR) exemplifies some of the greatest hopes and
greatest fears for collecting and analyzing computerized personal health
information. Information routinely collected in the course of providing and
paying for health care can be used by researchers to investigate the relative

effectiveness of alternative clinical interventions, of alternative methods of

organizing, delivering, and paying for health care, and of a variety of health care

policies. Such research may improve the effectiveness and efficiency of health

care. For example, HSR has identified significant variation in outcomes of care

for a specific health problem according to the specialty of the clinician, type of

insurance or reimbursement, and gender or ethnicity of the patient. At the same

time, using personal health information for such research raises concerns about

privacy (whether participants should provide the data) and confidentiality (how

the data may be used later). Such concerns are intensified because of public

concerns that confidentiality is being eroded for many types of computerized

personal information, ranging from credit card purchases to addresses on drivers'
licenses. Concerns about maintaining confidentiality of medical information are
particularly important because patients disclose sensitive information to

physicians that they may not tell close relatives and friends, such as information

about their mental health, alcohol and substance abuse, and sexual practices.

Confidentiality of medical information used in HSR is particularly important

because information on many individuals may be analyzed by researchers

without their knowledge or consent. The very power of HSR, to juxtapose

patient-level data from a variety of sources on a large number of patients, also

raises the largest concerns
PREFACEviiProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.about confidentiality. It is often not feasible to obtain consent from every patient
in a large population to be studied. Even if consent were possible to obtain, the

requirement of consent would likely lead to bias and invalid findings, because

those who opt out might differ systematically from those giving consent. Thus,

for important HSR to proceed, it is important that the privacy and confidentiality

of subjects be adequately protected.
IRBs play a key role in protecting the subjects of research. This IOM
committee was charged with identifing current and best practices of IRBs that

review HSR, both HSR that is subject to federal regulation and research that falls

outside it. Within restrictions of the scope and time, the committee found a

number of examples of IRBs that had put into place thoughtful, effective

measures for reviewing HSR. There appears to be considerable variation in how
IRBs deal with such difficult questions as how to distinguish HSR from such
activities as quality improvement, how to determine whether a HSR project is

exempt from IRB review, and how to determine whether informed consent can be

waived for a HSR project. If IRBs adopted the best practices more widely, the

quality of HSR could be improved, and the public could be more assured that

privacy and confidentiality were being properly safeguarded in HSR.
Identifying best practices for protecting privacy and confidentiality in HSR
is a promising approach that needs to be further developed. Identifying best

practices is a quality improvement technique that builds on the achievements of

HSR investigators and IRBs on the leading edge of their fields. It stimulates an

explicit discussion of ethical concerns about HSR and potential solutions. Best

practices give IRBs the flexibility to respond to the particular issues raised by
different HSR projects; a technique that effectively safeguards confidentiality in
one HSR project may be inappropriate in another. Finally, the approach of best

practices not only helps to bring everyone up to a higher level, but also raises the

best level higher as improved methods, such as informational technologies,

develop and spread.At the same time, the effectiveness of IRBs in reviewing HSR will depend
on organizational factors. First, authors of GAO reports and in the popular press

have noted that IRBs often do not have sufficient resources to carry out their

charges. The committee found that IRBs will need additional resources and

training to oversee HSR better, since HSR differs in important ways from clinical

research involving new drugs or invasive medical interventions. Second,

protecting the confidentiality of personal health information in HSR is easier if
health care organizations effectively protect confidentiality of electronic personal
health information, whether used for clinical or administrative purposes. Finally,

the committee found that many IRBs play an important role in educating

investigators about the protection of human subjects in HSR. In the long run, such

educational programs will enhance the quality of HSR proposals submitted for

IRB review.I was privileged to work with a committee that was so thoughtful,
committed, and embodied with good sense. We were grateful to the IRB chairs

and administrators, health services researchers, and leaders of health care

organizationsPREFACEviiiProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.who shared with us their wisdom, experience, and commitment protecting human
subjects. The IOM staff was extremely helpful in keeping us on track on a tight

schedule. Lee Zwanziger was excellent in pulling together information and ideas

from many sources into a coherent, readable report.
PREFACEixProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AcknowledgmentsThe workshop speakers, listed in the appendix, all were very helpful and
generous with their time in preparing, attending, and participating in the
workshop. The committee very much appreciates the information and insight they
provided both in the workshop and in comments and suggestions afterwards.
Many individuals assisted with helpful advice and suggestions throughout
this project. The committee particularly thanks Paul Clayton of Intermountain
Health Care, Nancy Donovan of the U.S. General Accounting Office, Gary Ellis

and Tom Puglisi of the (former) OPRR, Molly Greene of UTHSCSA, Erica Heath

of IRC, Steve Heinig of AAMC, Jon Merz of University of Pennsylvania, Eric

Meslin and Margorie Speers of the National Biothics Advisory Commission,

Andy Nelson of HealthPartners Research Foundation, Erica Rose of SmithKline

Beecham, Joan Rachlin of PRIM&R, Patricia Scannell of Washington University

in St. Louis, Ada Sue Selwitz of ARENA, Alvan Zarate of the National Center

for Health Statistics, and many others.
The committee appreciates the support provided by the sponsors of the
project, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and the office

of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), both of the

Department of Health and Human Services. The individual representatives of the

sponsoring agencies, Michael Fitzmaurice (AHRQ) and John Fanning (ASPE)

were very helpful throughout the planning and execution of the workshop.
At the Institute of Medicine, the study director greatly appreciated the
assistance of Sue Barron, Jennifer Cangco, Claudia Carl, Mike Edington, Rita

Gaskins, Linda Kilroy, Janice Mehler, Jennifer Otten, Sally Stanfield, and Vanee

Vines, among others. Florence Poillon helped in copy editing the report.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSxi
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REVIEWERSThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their
diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures

approved by the National Research Council's Report Review Committee. The

purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments

that will assist the Institute of Medicine in making the published report as sound
as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review

comments and the draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of

the deliberative process.
Ruth S. Bulger, Ph.D., 
Former President, Henry Jackson Foundation for
Advancement of Military Medicine
Donna Chen, M.D., 
Assistant Director and Research Scientist, Southeastern
Rural Mental Health Research Center, University of Virginia Health System
Helen McGough, 
IRB Director, Human Subjects Division, University of
WashingtonJoan Porter, D.P.A., M.P.H., 
Office of Research Compliance and
Assurance, Office of Veterans Affairs
Patricia Scannell, 
IRB Director, Human Studies Committee, Washington
University
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or

recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.

The review of this report was overseen by Hugh H. Tilson, M.D., Dr.P.H., Senior

Advisor to the Dean, University of North Carolina School Public Health, also of

Glaxo Wellcome Company, appointed by the Institute of Medicine, who was

responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was

carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review

comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this

report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSxii
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION 20  Privacy and Research 
21  Health Services Research 
25  Benefits of HSR 
27  Risks of Harm from HSR 
29  Background and Policy Context 
34  Project and Scope 
37  Outline of Report 
392 HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND
HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FED-
ERAL REGULATIONS
 40  IRBs and Human Subjects Protection 
40  Previous Studies of IRBs 
47  Human Subjects Protection in HSR 
48  Principles and Practices 
493 BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF
HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUB-

JECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
 514 BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER
REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF
HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH NOT
NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL

REGULATIONS
 71CONTENTSxiiiProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS
 78  REFERENCES 93  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
 99  APPENDIXES  A Study Activities 
101B Institutional Review Boards and Health Services
Research Data Privacy: A Workshop Summary
 106  Executive Summary 
106  Introduction 
111  Workshop Summary 
119  References 
151Addendum AŠ Workshop Speakers 
155Addendum BŠ Workshop Participants 
157C Protecting the Health Services Research Data of
Minors,
Ross A. Thompson
 159D Confidentiality of Health Information: Interna-
tional Comparative Approaches,

Bartha Maria Knoppers
 173E Biographical Sketches 
187CONTENTSxivProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services
Research xv
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive Summary
Our medical system is changing, with choices to be made by consumers,
providers, insurers, purchasers, and policy makers at every level of government.
The need for quality improvement and for cost saving are driving both individual
choices and health system dynamics. However, no one at any level can make

these choices wisely without research showing the pros and cons of alternatives in

health services. This information comes from data on the outcomes that

individuals or organizations experienced with a particular inputŠthe selection of

a health plan, drug, or health care delivery model. Yet these same data are

information (often personally identifiable health information) about individuals.

Most individuals value their privacy and, when they have chosen to share

personal information with a health care provider, are then justifiably concerned

about possible breaches in the confidential handling of that information. The

health services research that we need to support informed choices depends on

access to data, but at the same time, individual privacy and patientŒhealth care

provider confidentiality must be protected.
HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
OR IMPROVEMENTHealth services research (HSR) is the study of the effects of using different
modes of organization, delivery and financing for health care services. More
precisely, a recent Institute of Medicine (IOM) publication explained, ﬁHealth
services research is a multidisciplinary field of inquiry, both basic and applied,

that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery, organization,

financing,EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and outcomes of health care services to increase knowledge and understanding of
the structure, processes, and effects of health services for individuals and

populationsﬂ (IOM, 1995). HSR includes studies of the effectiveness of health

care interventions in real-world settings, as contrasted with studies of the efficacy
1of interventions (e.g., new drugs) under controlled settings such as a clinical trial.
As an applied field of study, HSR is closely related to nonresearch
investigations that are directed toward assessing and improving the quality of

operations in healthcare organizations. Indeed, HSR and health care operations

form two ends of a continuous spectrum. Some HSR projects are clear examples

of research; applying scientific methods to test hypotheses and produce new,

generalizable






((
"#$
"#$

((



˚




˚




1The term ﬁefficacyﬂ refers to how reliably an intervention brings about a given result
under ideal, controlled conditions. The term ﬁeffectivenessﬂ refers to how an intervention
performs in the complex and variable context of real-world use and practice.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.knowledge. Other projects are certainly clear examples of internal exercises to
assess the quality of the operations of the specific organization with no intention

of producing generalizable knowledge. Many of these quality assessment or

quality improvement (QA or QI) exercises are never intended to have any

application beyond the specific unit within the organization that carries out the

operation. In fact, many projects may start out as operations assessment and then
become more like research, and many research projects involve doing very much
what would be done in an internal operations assessment. As a result, for many

projects, it is difficult to decide whether they are more like research, or more like

QA or QI.
The benefits to society of HSR studies include increased understanding of
the results of policy changes and other systemic effects of health care delivery

systems. The major risks to subjects in HSR are not physical risks, such as

unknown side effects of new drugs or invasive medical procedures, but

psychosocial and financial risks resulting from improper disclosure of personally
identifiable health information from the databases. That is, the potential for harm
comes about through possible breaches of confidentiality in handling private and

identifiable health information. Examples of the kinds of psychosocial or

financial risks that may occur include potential denial of health insurance

coverage, difficulty obtaining employment, embarrassment, loss of reputation,

legal liability, or anxiety about what the recipient of an unauthorized disclosure

of information might do with it.
The protection of privacy is a fundamental value in our culture. Research
leading to improvements in the delivery and outcomes of health care, however,

may be possible only with analysis of databases containing personally identifiable

health information. Privacy can be protected by limiting access to data, or

properly de-identifying the data, and by establishing other strong safeguards to
ensure confidentiality. HSR can be only conducted if researchers have access to
data, so it is important to concentrate on de-identification and other safeguards.

We must protect both individual privacy and the societal benefits of research in

order to achieve the appropriate balance. This report aims to highlight some

practices that protect privacy while allowing research access to data.
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
The involvement of living human beings in research as subjects is governed
by federal regulations when the research is federally supported or otherwise
subject to federal oversight. The body of federal regulations about human
subjects protection is called the 
Common Rule
, since it has been adopted ﬁin
commonﬂ by many federal departments and agencies that conduct, support, or

regulate research with human subjects. Each department or agency has codified

the Common Rule in its own specific regulations; this report mainly uses the

regulations for the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) are

located at title 45 CFR part 46, subpart A, for example.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The main mechanism for protecting research subjects and for assessing the
balance of risks and benefits of research is the 
institutional review board, or IRB
(specified in 45 CFR 46). An IRB is a standing committee composed of

scientists, physicians, and others not directly involved with the proposal being

reviewed (The IRB's membership and function are defined in the regulations to

ensure that it has sufficient expertise and diversity to provide appropriate review.
Diversity should include gender, race, culture, and profession. In addition to
scientists, the IRB must include at least one person who is not otherwise

connected with the institution and at least one non-scientist.). IRBs review

proposals for research on humans to make sure that risks to subjects are

minimized, that the potential benefits of the research outweigh the risks to

subjects, and that the subjects will be respected as persons and not just used as

research subjects. Under federal regulations, IRBs are required to ensure that

subjects first be fully informed of the risks and benefits of the research and then

have an opportunity to consent or decline to participate in the research unless the

IRB decides that consent can be waived.
When an institution receives federal funds to conduct research involving
human subjects, the institution must promise the government that it will operate

an IRB according to federal research regulations for that research. Privately

funded research that will be submitted to federal regulatory agencies, such as the

Food and Drug Administration (FDA), must also be approved by an IRB that
complies with federal regulations for the protection of human subjects. These
regulations specify that in order to approve research, the IRB must be satisfied

that among other requirements (45 CFR 46.111),
  risks to subjects are minimized and are reasonable in relation to anticipated
benefits, subjects is equitable,

 consent is obtained to the extent required, and

  provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the
confidentiality of data are adequate.
IRBs face complicated decisions when reviewing HSR and deciding
whether such research is eligible for a waiver of informed consent. HSR

protocols often have characteristics, such as the absence of any physical risk to

subjects, that may make them eligible for a waiver of the informed consent

requirement or even for exemption from IRB review. Because many HSR

projects depend on secondary analysis of databases of records previously

collected for another purpose, the investigator may not have the ability to contact

the original subjects, and even if locating them is theoretically possible, the
number of individuals in question may be far too large to make contacting them
practicable. Indeed, many HSR projects could not be carried out if consent were

required. In such situations, an IRB may grant the investigator a waiver of

informed consent. Yet, when the IRB reviews HSR, it must make sure that

confidentiality risks are
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not overlooked. Finally, private organizations do their own HSR or have
programs such as quality improvement that use similar data and methods; this

research may not be covered by the federal regulations and these organizations

sometimes do not have IRBs.
The committee supports the review of all HSR proposals by knowledgeable
individuals who are independent of the researchers. Although not all HSR is

subject to federal regulations, the committee also concluded that the review of

HSR ought to follow the principles of these regulations. Such a review body

might be designated by any of several titles. The term ﬁIRBﬂ is defined in federal
regulations and therefore has implications of the extension of federal oversight in a
new area. The term ﬁprivacy boardﬂ has been used in a rule that, as this report

was being written, had been proposed but not finalized, and it may mean

different things to different people. Throughout the report the committee has used

the term ﬁIRBﬂ to refer to formally chartered review bodies that are required to

follow the Common Rule and other federal regulations. The term ﬁIRB or other

review boardﬂ is used to refer to bodies that review research but are not

necessarily required to follow these federal regulations, although the committee

urges them to follow voluntarily the ethical principles underlying the regulations.
GOOD PRACTICES
The objective of this project was to collect, to the extent possible, from
workshop participants and other contributors, current best practices that IRBs and

other review bodies employ to review research proposals and to ensure that

privacy and confidentiality will be maintained within a balance between risk and
benefit. Good IRB practices should apply the principles of ethical human subjects
research and also be feasible for the type of research and the type of organization

in question. That is to say, if we agree that we want to support HSR and obtain

the societal benefits of research, then we must identify and implement practices

that are feasible but that adequately protect the subjects. The committee hopes

that the practices highlighted in the following chapters will facilitate HSR with

appropriate and feasible mechanisms for the protection of human subjects, and

will stimulate the development and dissemination of more advanced practices in

the future.In highlighting the empirical collection of practices, the committee
recognized that good principles are already codified in the federal regulations on

human subjects protection, but that no amount of codification can provide
adequate direction for the day-to-day, study-by-study, work of an IRB. In short,
regulations and guidelines are important to provide norms, but they must still be

implemented with the judgment and practical experience of individuals closest to

the situation. This is what the local IRB system is designed to do. The sense of

the committee is that the local IRB system is strong and fully capable of

reviewing HSR for privacy and confidentiality issues. Any IRB or other review

body that reviews HSR will, however, have to understand the special problems
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of HSR and how to apply the principles embodied in the federal regulations. The
aim of sharing best practices is to support review bodies by compiling the good

ideas that have already been developed by IRBs and put into practice. One

challenge of the future will be to find the best means of disseminating these good

ideas.PROJECT AND SCOPE
The IOM Committee on the Role of Institutional Review Boards in Health
Services Research Data Privacy Protection was formed in December 1999 to

gather data on the current and best practices of IRBs in protecting privacy

(complete charge is given below). Two DHHS agencies, the Agency for

Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), sponsored the project.
To address these tasks, the IOM assembled a 12-member committee with
expertise in medical ethics, HSR, IRB function, statistics, computer science, law,

and database management. The committee met by telephone conference in

January 2000. The committee and the IOM then convened a public workshop in

March 2000. The committee invited testimony from IRB chairs and
administrators, health services researchers, and other officers of academia,
government, and private industry (see 
Appendix B
). The workshop also featured
presentations of the drafts of two commissioned papers, one addressing special

considerations of HSR and confidentiality when the data pertain to minors (see

Appendix C
) and the other presenting an international comparison of health
information privacy standards (see 
Appendix D
). In addition to the workshop, the
committee posted an invitation on a list serve and on the National Academies'

website to IRBs to contribute information (see 
Appendix A
). The committee
collected further information informally by e-mail and telephone. Although the

committee received just a few responses to the posted call for information, those

received were very informative. The committee noted that all the providers of

information, including respondents to the call for information, those who briefed
the staff by telephone, and participants in the workshop, are a self-selected group
of professionals committed to the IRB process. Information collection was thus

not systematic and random, but particularly targeted. The committee deliberated

by telephone and e-mail, and in closed meetings in April and May 2000, about

the practices described to it. Finally, the committee has summarized in this report

the practices it heard that seemed to be most effective. The committee addresses

privacy and confidentiality pertaining to data used for HSR conducted through

analyses of preexisting databases. There are many other aspects of the privacy of

electronic medical records that were beyond the charge of the committee. The

information in this report howeverŠits findings and recommendationsŠapplies

as well both to data previously collected for another purpose and now being

secondarily analyzed and to data derived in other ways. The committee chose to

focus its work on studies involving analyses of data already collected for other
purposes because such studies pose the most difficult
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY6
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ethical issues regarding HSR. Although HSR that utilizes surveys and interviews

also raises ethical issues, the contact between researchers and subjects allows the

subjects to learn about the research and decline to participate if they so choose.

The committee recognized the strong connections between these related matters

and the question of protecting data privacy in HSR using existing data. The

committee therefore asks readers to bear in mind that such related matters were

not in its charge and the committee did not address them.
The purpose of this project was to provide information and advice to the
sponsors on the current and best practices of IRBs in protecting privacy in health

services research. The charge to the committee was given in three parts as shown

below.1. To gather information on the current practices and principles followed by
institutional review boards to safeguard the confidentiality of personally

identifiable health information used for health services research purposes,

in particular, to identify those IRB practices that are superior in protecting

the privacy, confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable health

information.2. To gather information on the current practices and principles employed in
privately funded health services research studies (that are generally not

subject to IRB approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personally

identifiable health information, and to consider whether and how IRB

best practices in this regard might be applied to such privately sponsored

studies.3. If appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding the
confidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might be

voluntarily applied to health services research projects by IRBs and

private sponsors.
RECOMMENDATIONSThis section presents the committee's recommendations and findings based
on the available information from IRBs working under federal regulations,

discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 3
, as well as recommendations from 
Chapter 4,on public and private health care companies that may not have IRBs or be subject

to federal regulation. 
Chapter 5 suggests some directions for further work.
Best Practices for IRB Review of HSR Subject to Federal
Regulations (Chapter 3)Recommendation 3-1. Organizations should work with their IRBs to

develop specific guidance and examples on how to interpret key terms in the

federal regulations pertinent to the use in HSR of data previously collected

for other purposes. Such terms include 
generalizable knowledge, identifiable
information, minimal risk
, and privacy and confidentiality
. Organizations and
their IRBs should then 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

((



ˆ˙#˝
,*,%˝
((
ˆ˙#˝

ˆ˙#




,*/%˝
((
ˆ˙#



((ˆ˙#˚"#$



((




((
ˆ˙#˚

(("#$





((





((
"#$


((
ˆ˙#˚
((



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY8
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

((




ˆ˙#









((




ˆ˙#





˚

ˆ˙#
((







((


ˆ˙#


make such guidance and examples available to all investigators submitting
proposals for review.
The committee found that several topics cause considerable worry to
investigators and IRBs because federal regulations are open to varying
interpretations, with divergent implications.
  The first of these topics is what activities are considered research and what
criteria are used to operationalize the distinction between research and other
activities. A key feature of the federal definition of research is whether the
activity contributes to generalizable knowledge. In trying to distinguish

research from activities such as quality improvement that use similar

techniques to analyze personally identifiable health information in databases,

however, both the federal regulations and the interpretations of these

regulations by the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP, formerly

the Office for Protection from Research Risks, or OPRR) contain

insufficient practical guidance for investigators and IRBs.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  A second important issue is what constitutes identifiable information as
defined in the federal regulations. Should data be considered unidentifiable if

linked to codes in such a way that the investigator would have great difficulty

reestablishing the identity of subjects?
  A third issue is what constitutes minimal risk in HSR research and, in
particular, what steps to protect confidentiality of data in HSR suffice to

allow the project to be considered as minimal risk. The issues of identifiable

information and minimal risk have important implications for whether a

project may be exempt from IRB review or receive expedited review or
whether informed consent of research participants may be waived. The
committee felt that it would be desirable that all such research proposals

receive some outside review.
On all of these issues, IRBs should communicate more directly with
investigators and give examples more specific than the guidance currently

available in federal regulations and clarifications by OHRP. Clearer guidance

would make IRB review more efficient as well as enhance the protection of

subjects by helping to ensure that HSR projects incorporate confidentiality

protections that the reviewers find important.
Recommendation 3-2. IRBs should develop and disseminate principles,
policies, and best practices for investigators regarding privacy and
confidentiality issues in HSR that makes use of personal health data
previously collected for other uses.
Confidentiality in handling health information is important for its own sake
and for the enhancement of public trust in research. The committee heard several

innovative and feasible ways to facilitate the maintenance of confidentiality. The
committee found, however, that the possible identifiability of data in HSR is a
continuum, such that absolute guarantees of confidentiality are impossible.
Many techniques work together to increase the safety of confidential data,
including protecting the data from unauthorized access by tracking who reviews

the file, storing identifying information or codes separately from the rest of the

data, and protecting the data from being physically lost, stolen, or surreptitiously
copied.Recommendation 3-3. IRBs should redesign applications and forms (paper
and electronic) tailored to HSR that analyzes data originally collected for
other purposes and then distribute them widely (e.g., post them on-line) to
assist investigators in writing the human subjects sections of their HSR
proposals and in preparing applications for IRB review. IRBs should be

knowledgeable about the differences between HSR and clinical research,
and any forms developed should reflect these differences.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY10
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A checklist or logical series of questions lays out the criteria that the
institution has adopted to determine, for example, what constitutes research.

These instruments are useful in several ways: they call the attention of

investigators to ethical issues arising in HSR, and they help investigators to think

through systematically the specific issues regarding IRB review, patient consent,

and protection confidentiality. Here, for example, is one approach to classifying a
project along the HSR to QAŒQI spectrum:
The following are characteristics of projects using HSR methods that are
research, not QA or QI:
explores previously unknown phenomena.
  It collects information beyond that routinely collected for the patient care in
question.compares alternative treatments, interventions, or processes.

manipulates a current process.

 results are expected to be published for general societal benefit.
Recommendation 3-4. IRBs should have expertise available (either on the
committee or through consultants) to evaluate the risks to confidentiality
and security in HSR involving data previously collected for some other
purpose, including the risks of identification of individuals and the physical
and electronic security of data.
Many of the techniques mentioned can be highly technical and are evolving
rapidly. In order to confirm that confidentiality will be protected in a protocol, the

reviewers will have to have access either to members or to consultants who can

advise them on whether the proposal includes feasible technical measures to

protect the data or whether the proposal has overlooked some potential

confidentiality risks. This training should include cross-cultural issues related to

definitions of privacy of personal, family and group information, depending on

the specifics of how such cross-cultural questions arise in the local situation.
Recommendation 3-5. Institutions that carry out HSR and train health
services researchers should require that trainees, investigators, and IRB
members receive education, with updates as technology changes, regarding
the protection of privacy and confidentiality when using data previously
collected for another use.
Education is critical not only for IRB members, but also for researchers,
technicians, and any other employees who may come into contact with personally

identifiable health information. Better education about how to protect

confidentiality and possible sources of risk will help investigators design better
confidentiality protection for their proposed studies from the start. Better
educationEXECUTIVE SUMMARY11
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of all employees who may come in contact with the data will help raise the level

of understanding and alertness throughout the organization.
Recommendation 3-6. Health care or other organizations that disclose or

use personally identifiable health information for any purpose including

research or other activities using HSR methods should have comprehensive

policies, procedures and other structures to protect the confidentiality of

health information and should have in place appropriate strong and

enforceable sanctions against breaches of health information

confidentiality.Access to specific expertise and enhanced general education are important,
but the committee also observed that the human element of the research

enterprise necessarily includes human potential for error and even malfeasance.

Therefore organizations should complement and support the proactive strategies

of expertise and education for better confidentiality protection with deterrents to

wrongdoing. Such sanctions should be graded according to the offense (e.g.,

whether the incident was a simple mistake or intentional violation) and should

apply not only to researchers but to all employees of the organization.
Best Practices for Review of HSR Not Necessarily Subject to
Federal Regulation (Chapter 4)A good deal of health services research is carried out by organizations that
do not receive federal funds for research and are not subject to federal

regulations. These same organizations are dedicated to delivering health care

services and products, so they also engage in quality assessment and quality

improvement projects. These activities may involve very similar methods and

uses of data, but they may not be classified as research.
The committee was impressed with the commitment to privacy and
confidentiality that the representatives of several private companies presented at

the workshop. Companies appear to be at different stages of developing internal

privacy or confidentiality policies regarding HSR and should be encouraged to

continue to develop these organizational policies and procedures.
Recommendation 4-1. Researchers should have all HSR reviewed by an IRB

or other review board regardless of the source of support or whether the

research is subject to pertinent federal regulations.

Recommendation 4-2. IRBs and other boards that review HSR that is not

subject to federal regulation should assess their practices in comparison

with the best practices of IRBs working under pertinent federal regulations

and, when the latter offer improvements, adopt them. Alternatively, when

their own practices are superior though
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY12
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not subject to federal regulation, they should share them with IRBs
applying the Common Rule.
IRBs offer a review of research projects by knowledgeable persons not
directly associated with the project. This independent review protects subjects of

research because independent reviewers may identify concerns and suggest ways

to minimize risks that were not apparent to investigators. The committee heard

several examples of protocols that were or could have been substantially

improved with respect to confidentiality by relatively simple modifications, for

example, omitting identifying data in the record, such as a Social Security

number, that was not actually necessary for the research. Research subjects, who

undergo risks for the benefit of science and society as a whole, should have the

protections of such independent review as a matter of ethical best practice,
regardless of funding source. There is little ethical justification for making a
distinction between the level of protection afforded subjects in federally funded

projects and that given subjects in projects funded by private sources if the risks

to these subjects are comparable.
As in Recommendation 3-2, IRBs or other review bodies should develop
lists of points to consider on protecting privacy and confidentiality in HSR for use

by investigators. As noted in Recommendation 3-3, the committee suggests that

the development and on-line posting of applications and review forms specifically

designed for HSR would improve the quality of review of HSR projects. IRBs

and other review bodies in any setting should inform themselves about the

differences between HSR and clinical research, and any forms developed should

reflect these differences. As mentioned in Recommendation 3-4, IRBs or similar

review bodies should have available expertise (either on the committee or through

consultants) to evaluate the risks to confidentiality and security in HSR, including

the risks of identification of individuals and the physical security of data. Also, as
stated in Recommendation 3-5, organizations should require that researchers and
other employees who come in contact with confidential health information

receive education in the handling of this information to maintain confidentiality.
Recommendation 4-3. Health care organizations that conduct projects
applying the methods of HSR to personally identifiable health information
for purposes such as QA or QI, disease management, and core business
functions as well as for research should have comprehensive policies,
procedures, and other structures to protect health privacy when personally
identifiable health information is used for research or other purposes.
Recommendation 4-4. Health care or other organizations that disclose or
use personally identifiable health information for any purpose including QA
or QI, disease management, and core business functions as well as for
research should have in place appropriate,
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.strong, and enforceable sanctions against breaches of the confidentiality of

health information.
The members of the committee agreed that previous experience provides
ample evidence that, although most investigators and staff are upstanding, there

will always be a few who are subject to the temptation to misuse access to

confidential information or who maintain records in an insecure manner. In fact,

the committee felt that this aspect of human subjects protection may have been

neglected and therefore recommends consideration of deterrent policies both for

organizations working with IRBs under the Common Rule and for those that do

not.Large health care organizations reported that most violations ofconfidentiality occurred outside the research arena, in such areas as clinical care

and business activities. This distribution is not surprising because most uses of

personally identifiable health information are in these nonresearch areas. From

the viewpoint of the patient, it does not matter whether a violation of

confidentiality occurs in a research project or other activity because the risks of

being harmed or wronged may be the same.
Recommendations for Next Steps (Chapter 5)ﬁThe end of this study will not be the end of studying [the issue of privacy
and confidentiality in health services research],ﬂ said Dr. Michael Fitzmaurice of

AHRQ, one of the sponsoring agencies, during the committee's workshop. The

committee appreciated that the charge of this particular study was focused and

accordingly endeavored to stay strictly within the charge. In the course of the

study, however, the committee found many important questions that would seem

to be answerable in practical terms, although doing so would be far beyond the

scope of this report. The present project has, however, brought these other issues

into a new sharper focus. The committee's suggestions for further work and future

steps may communicate this vision to others.
Recommendation 5-1. Institutions whose IRBs or other review boards

review HSR should ensure adequate administrative support and funding

for review bodies and should incorporate improving review operations into

overall institutional strategic planning, and organizations that sponsor HSR

should also support designating adequate funds for such review.
The committee corroborated previous reports that questioned whether IRBs
have the resources to carry out their mission. The committee noted especially the

April 2000 update report of the DHHS Office of the Inspector General (OIG).

This report, 
Protecting Human Research Subjects: Status of Recommendations
,concluded that the resource problems identified in the OIG's 1998 report,

Institutional Review Boards: A Time for Reform
, still exist. The committee
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY14
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.heard that many IRBs already have a heavy workload of proposals for review,
and that most members serve in a voluntary capacity. In addition, the practices

that the committee heard and believes can be positive facilitators of IRB quality

and efficiency in the review of HSR will require investment on the part of the

IRB's institutional home in computer equipment, applications development, and

expertise to support these programs and advise the organization.
Recommendation 5-2. The DHHS and other federal departments and
private organizations such as the Association of American Medical
Colleges, the Association for Health Services Research (now the Academy
for Health Services Research and Health Policy), the American College of
Epidemiology, the International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology, Public

Responsibility in Medicine and Research, the Applied Research Ethics
National Association, and others should continue or expand educational
efforts regarding the protection of the confidentiality of personally
identifiable health information in research.
While these recommendations highlight DHHS as the sponsor of this study
and a major sponsor of relevant research, the recommendations should be applied

by other Common Rule signatory departments and agencies as well. The

committee believes that the approach of identifying best practices for IRB

oversight of HSR is a fruitful one that should to be further developed.

Recommendations of best practices will provide more specific guidance to

investigators and IRB members than is currently available, and IRBs will

continue to devise additional good practices. This approach draws its strength
from the commitment both of IRB members and administrators and of
researchers to protecting the rights and welfare of the subjects of HSR. Both

IRBs and scientists have developed useful practices that, if more widely adopted,

could lead to improved protection of confidentiality and privacy, without creating

undue burdens.
Recommendation 5-3. Organizations that furnish health services
researchers with personally identifiable health information should ensure
that the data are prepared in a manner that protects confidentiality
adequately.The committee heard several instances reported at the workshop where HSR
investigators requested de-identified data from federal agencies but received data

that had not been de-identified because the agency in question lacked the
resources to do so.
As large holders of personally identifiable data, federal agencies should not
be in the situation of having to choose between providing data that have not been
de-identified, or simply refusing to provide data for research at all. Organizations
holding personally identifiable health data should develop and/or implement
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.lists of points to consider in reviewing data requests with respect to protecting
privacy and confidentiality in HSR.
Recommendation 5-4. The funders of HSR should be willing to cover the
cost of preparing personally identifiable health information that is collected
in clinical care, billing, or payment so that confidentiality can be adequately
protected in HSR.
Recommendation 5-5. The DHHS should continue and expand efforts to
encourage holders of personally identifiable health information to make this
information available to researchers as public use files after suitable
application of techniques to minimize the risks of identifiability.
If an organization holding health data has made a dataset publicly available
without restriction, as is done with the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS),

then projects using only such data can be considered minimal risk and eligible for

exemption per 45 CFR 46.101(b)(5). In order to promote HSR, dataholding

organizations should consider making as much data available in the public

domain as is safely possible. The committee notes that the Interagency

Confidentiality and Data Access Group (affiliated with the Federal Committee on

Statistical Methodology) has developed a checklist for use in considering

whether data may be released, which helps holders of data develop such public

use files.2Recommendation 5-6. The AHRQ should consider supporting a feasibility
study on developing procedures for facilitating linkage of separate data files
containing sensitive data from different sources to create analytical files
such that it would be possible for researchers to create linkages that are

reliable and informative, and at the same time, to protect the confidentiality
of the original data disclosure through de-identification and other
protective measures so as to save the subject from being placed at risk of
harm or wrong through improper re-identification.
Much of the value of retrospective, database-oriented research comes from
the ability to draw inferences from data derived from different sources. The
committee urges interested parties, including DHHS agencies, to encourage

research on linkage and anonymization with a view toward two goals: first, it

should be possible for researchers to create linkages that are reliable and

informative, and second, we should approach as closely as possible the goal of
2Confidentiality and Data Access Committee, Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology. Checklist on Disclosure Potential of Proposed Data Releases (July 1999):
http://www.fcsm.gov/spwptbco.html
.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY16
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.anonymized data. Ideally then, the various sources of data would have their
records indexed by the same set of identifiers, but ones that are not easily

reassociated with the actual patient's identity. There are several possible ways to

address this problem. One suggestion exploits developing cryptographic and

authentication technology to create flexible health information identification

systems (as explored in a pilot study of Kohane et al., 1998). Another type of
linkage system would depend on trusted third parties with no interest in either
data collection or the research project to be responsible for linking the separate

data files. These entities could hold the keys linking individuals to the data. After

merging datasets, this entity would then strip off the identifiers, check that

identification cannot be (reasonably) inferred,
3 and take any needed steps to
protect the data. There are positive and negative aspects to either approach, so the

feasibility of both should be further tested.
Recommendation 5-7. DHHS (AHRQ and/or the NIH) should consider
developing and supporting a research agenda concerning IRB protection of
subjects from nonphysical harms such as risks to privacy and
confidentiality in human subjects research (including cultural meanings of
privacy and confidentiality).
A systematic study of nonphysical risk assessment was beyond the charge
given to this IOM committee, and the committee would in any case have found

itself unable to accomplish it due to time limitations and rules of the Office of

Management and Budget requiring additional clearance for extensive surveys.

The committee found, however, that such information would be of great use both

as a baseline and, if updated periodically, as a basis of continuous policy

evaluation. Such a research agenda would likely include current IRB practice as

well as new procedures and policies to provide better human subjects protection

and also would include monitoring of IRB practices. The findings would be of
use to IRBs, researchers, regulators, and any other parties interested in privacy
and confidentiality.
Recommendation 5-8. The OHRP should review the possibility of proposing
a change to the regulations with respect to HSR to replace the terms
ﬁexemptﬂ and ﬁexpediteﬂ with ﬁadministrative review.ﬂ
The committee is recommending this only with respect to HSR, not having
investigated possible consequences for other types of research. The committee

heard several reports that well-intentioned and conscientious researchers may

judge a study to be exempt from review under the current regulatory language and

therefore never bring it to the attention of a review board. Since the committee
3The committee recognizes that the question of how difficult identifiability by inference
must be in order to make data safe for release will continue to be a matter of debate and
notes that the standard should be expected to change as technology changes.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.has concluded that all HSR should receive some review by a board that is
independent of the research project, the committee suggests that this possibly

misleading terminology be avoided. The committee recognizes, however, that a

change to the Common Rule involves coordination among many agencies. The

committee further recognizes that others may have other suggestions for a new

term. The committee's goal in this matter was to offer a term that recognized that
some studies do not need full IRB review but does not seem to suggest that the
investigator should decide what level of IRB review is needed.
Recommendation 5-9. Health services researchers, and institutions that
participate in and benefit from HSR, should voluntarily adopt best
practices for IRB review of HSR.
The committee found that some nations have adopted laws or regulations
that allow individuals to exclude their personally identifiable health information

from databases, that require written consent from patients for use of health

records for research, and that require the anonymization of data for use in any

secondary data analysis. Such measures were enacted to protect privacy and the

confidentiality of computerized personally identifiable health information.
If patients and members of the public in general do not find that they can
trust that confidential information will be protected throughout research, they may

seek further measures to protect confidentiality that could be detrimental to HSR.

The committee therefore urges investigators, data users, and data holders and

publishers voluntarily to adopt and continually upgrade the best practices of IRBs

and other review boards in ensuring the protection of data privacy and

confidentiality in HSR.
Recommendation 5-10. All stakeholders in HSR should support strategies to
improve the protection of privacy and confidentiality without impeding
research.The committee found it necessary to at least contemplate additional areas for
study. Although there was not time in this project to explore wider-ranging ideas,

the committee suggests several as potential starting points in a multifaceted

strategy to improve the awareness of privacy issues and improve confidentiality

protection practices.  Federal departments including the DHHS could sponsor a conference to
include HSR journal editors and editorial boards to consider special issues

devoted to data privacy and adoption or strengthening of policies against

publishing research without evidence of prior assessment by an IRB or other

review board.  DHHS and other federal departments and agencies, as well as foundations
and state and local granting agencies, could consider possible changes in

proceEXECUTIVE SUMMARY18
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.dure including revising grant application guidelines and contract proposals to
include a section on confidentiality protection and to include privacy experts

on peer review panels.
  Funders of HSR including DHHS or other federal departments, foundations,
accrediting agencies, health maintenance organizations and private

companies could consider supporting research on data protection methods.
  Organizations interested in data privacy and high-quality HSR could sponsor
a prize competition for best practices in protecting privacy and

confidentiality.
The methods of HSR, applied to data previously collected for other
purposes, have been useful in discovering and demonstrating systemic effects and

population-level trends in the organization and delivery of health services. It is

important that we, as a society, continue to have access to such research in order

to inform policy making in both private and governmental arenas. At the same

time, it is important that we, as a society, protect the privacy of individuals and of

vulnerable groups, and the confidentiality of information that patients share with
health care providers. As a result of the present study, the committee has
concluded that it is possible both to carry out valuable HSR and to protect

confidentiality. However, to do so will require adequate funding. Resources are

needed to support dedicated, trained IRB members and staff, to establish

organizational confidentiality policies and electronic security practices, to educate

researchers, and to provide statistical and computer expertise. The true test of our

commitment to the twin values of advancing useful knowledge and protecting

confidentiality is whether we are willing to make the needed investments to

achieve both goals.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY19
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1IntroductionHealth services research (HSR), through the analysis of large databases of
health information, offers the potential to improve the quality of health care
delivery and the effectiveness of health care policies. At the same time, the
analysis of personally identifiable health information from many individuals

raises concerns about privacy and confidentiality. We need to protect the

individual subjects of study (where participation in the study may, but will not

necessarily, benefit these subjects) by taking measures that are reliable, but are

also compatible with good research that can benefit society as a whole. Ensuring

both values is particularly important at this time because of policy debates about

health privacy and the confidentiality of computerized health information, and

recent criticisms about the effectiveness of institutional review boards (IRBs) in

protecting research subjects, although much of the recent criticism has actually

focused on clinical trials.1This project charged the Institute of Medicine (IOM) with gathering
information on current practices and principles followed by IRBs that review
HSR, both under the federal regulations and in privately sponsored studies. In

addition, the IOM was asked to recommend, if appropriate, best practices for

safeguarding the confidentiality of personally identifiable health information in

HSR.This introductory chapter summarizes the context of the issue of privacy and
confidentiality in health services research, including the background of the
1Regarding policy and confidentiality, see for example Applebaum, 2000; IOM, 1994;
NRC 1997; Etzioni, 1999; Gostin and Hadley, 1998; Hanken, 1996; GHPP, 1999;
Goldman, 1998. Regarding IRB effectiveness, see for example Brown (OIG), 1998b,
2000; Brainard, 2000; GAO, 1996; Edger and Rothman, 1995.
INTRODUCTION20
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.study, IRBs, HSR and privacy, and the scope and limitations of the current
project. This chapter closes with an overview of the remaining chapters of the

report. The remaining chapters describe some current and best practices that the

committee learned of pertaining to the protection of confidentiality through the

application of technology, implementation of informed policies, and training and

support of personnel. Finally, the report suggests further steps that would lead to
additional improvements in protection of the confidentiality of HSR, while at the
time making oversight by IRBs (or other review boards) more effective and

efficient. In this report, ﬁeffective oversightﬂ includes the idea that the oversight

will be trusted throughout our diversified society and reliable and, thus, able to

balance societal benefit and individual privacy. Effective oversight will therefore

be an efficient means toward allowing valuable HSR to proceed.
PRIVACY AND RESEARCH
Federal policies on the protection of human subjects in all types of research
rest on IRB review of the research proposals and protocols, and on obtaining the

informed consent of subjects. Both apply somewhat differently in HSR than in

clinical research, which increases the scope and complexity of research oversight
in general. IRB review is complicated because HSR studies often have
characteristics that cause studies not to require full IRB review and discussion.

On the other hand, such independent review of these studies may help ensure that

confidentiality is adequately protected. The regulations allowing IRBs to exempt

studies from full review are described in more detail in 
Chapter 2
. ﬁExemptionﬂis a formal term in the regulations applied to studies that have such minimal

impact on the subjects that no further oversight by an IRB is needed. For

situations of somewhat more, but still small, impact, the proposal might receive

expedited review from just one or a few members rather than the entire review

board. In general, an IRB representative makes the determination of whether a

project might be eligible for exemption or expedited review. Informed consent is

complicated because many HSR projects involving analysis of personal health
data collected previously for another purpose are eligible for waiver of informed
consent. Indeed obtaining informed consent is not feasible for many HSR

projects.The methods of HSR are varied and may include not only secondary
analysis of previously collected data, but also primary data collection through

surveys and interviews. This report focuses on the secondary analysis of data,
including personal health information, that have already been collected for some
other purpose, because this type of analysis raises the most challenging ethical

issues. In research where investigators collect primary data through surveys and

interviews, the subject knows that research is being conducted, can find out more

about the research, and has an opportunity to decline to participate. By contrast,

in secondary analyses of the type described, individuals may not know that they

are subjects of research and may not have the opportunity to decline to

participate. The researchers also may be unable to identify subjects individually

and, thus, unable to contact them
INTRODUCTION21
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for consent. Some people may, however, object if researchers have access to their
health information without their knowledge or consent.
The committee recognized that important privacy and confidentiality
concerns also arise in other forms of research using previously collected data

(e.g., research using archival tissue specimens) and in many types of research in

which new data are collected. Each of these areas merits careful study and the

dissemination and adoption of best practices for protecting confidentiality.

Indeed, the committee affirms that all personally identifiable health information,

no matter how it was collected or for what purpose, should be treated so as to
respect privacy and maintain confidentiality. This report reflects the committee's
specific charge to focus on the analysis of existing data used in HSR after

collection for another purpose.
Privacy and Confidentiality
Justice Louis Brandeis' reference to ﬁthe right to be left aloneﬂ (
Olmstead v.
U.S., 1928) stands as a vivid and succinct definition of privacy in general, but for
the purposes of this study, definitions more focused on information should be

considered (Box 1-1).2For the purposes of HSR, privacy can be understood as a person's ability to
restrict access to information about him or herself. Privacy is valued because

respecting privacy in turn respects the autonomy of persons, protects against
surveillance or intrusion, and allows individuals to control the dissemination and
use of information about themselves. Privacy fosters and enhances a sense of self

and also promotes the development of character traits and close relationships

(IOM, 1994). The federal regulations governing human research (45 CFR 46.102

(f)) discuss privacy in the following terms:
Private information includes information about behavior that occurs in a context
in which an individual can reasonably expect that no observation or recording is
taking place, and information which has been provided for specific purposes by

an individual and which the individual can reasonably expect will not be made
public (for example, a medical record). Private information must be individually
identifiable (i.e., the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained by
the investigator or associated with the information) in order for obtaining the
information to constitute research involving human subjects.
The regulations thus characterize privacy in terms of the expectations of the
persons whose personally identifiable health information is being discussed and

stipulate that the information must be specifically associated with the individual

in order for the individual to have a legitimate interest in protecting it. Individuals

may, however, be harmed or wronged by information associated with them

probabalistically as well as specifically identifiable information.
2Lowrance, 1997; NRC, 1997; Buckovich, et al., 1999; OPRR, 1993; Bradburn, 2000.
INTRODUCTION22
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Confidentiality refers to controlling access to the information that an
individual has already disclosed, for example, a patient to a treating physician or

to an insurance company paying for care. Confidentiality is a major expression of

respect for persons, the person who has trusted the health care provider with

private information in the belief that the information will be guarded

appropriately and used only for that person's benefit. Maintaining confidentiality
is considered important also because it encourages patients to seek needed care
and to discuss sensitive topics candidly with their physicians. If patients do not

believe they can trust their health care providers to maintain confidentiality, they

may withhold information to the detriment of the best medical judgment and care

they might receive. Confidentiality is violated if the person or institution to whom

information is disclosed fails to protect it adequately or discloses it

inappropriately without the patient's consent. The dilemma about HSR is that

personally identifiable health information that is disclosed or collected for one

purpose (clinical care, billing, etc.) is then used without consent for a different

purpose (improving the state of knowledge to benefit future and current patients).
Confidentiality is also important to the continued success and vitality of the
HSR effort. Just as in the case of medical treatment, research subjects may

withhold information if they do not have confidence that what they disclose will

be protected. Further, it is crucial to the HSR effort that researchers design

studies so that the risk of harm to subjects is minimal, in order to allow the
protocol to qualify for a waiver of the informed consent requirement. HSR
projects often apply methods to large databases of previously collected

information where individual informed consent would be impracticable or

impossible. The effect of losing the population's trust in confidentiality may have

serious repercussions both for the effective quality of medical care and for the

quality of medical records research. A 1999 poll by the California HealthCare

Foundation (CHCF, 1999) found that approximately one in five respondents

believed their personal medical information to have been improperly disclosed by

a health care provider, insurance plan, government agency, or employer.

Approximately one in

((

((

((



((
˚



˚
INTRODUCTION23
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.six respondents said they had taken some extra precautions to make sure that
medical information about them remained confidential, including paying out of

pocket, giving false information, and avoiding care. These figures have been

interpreted both as alarmingly large and as reassuringly small. In either case, the

numbers do suggest that there is significant potential for the reliability of

personally identifiable health information data to decrease if the population's
trust that the confidentiality of personally identifiable health information will be
maintained decreases.
Benefits and Risks of Harm in Research
All research on human subjects raises ethical concerns because participants
in research undergo risks of potential harm primarily, if not solely, for the benefit

of others. Balancing benefit and risk of harm is an essential part of the design of

any human subjects research. Physicians are familiar with the ethical obligation to

balance benefits and risks when providing clinical care. However, in clinical care
the patient both directly benefits from interventions and directly accepts the risks.
Research, on the other hand, is not intended to benefit the subjects directly,

because we actually do not know which treatment is best, so it is even more

important in research to ensure that the risks are acceptable in proportion to the

likely benefits, and that the risks are minimized. Indeed, these ethical principles

are at the core of federal regulations on research human subjects.
Federal RegulationsFederal regulations govern human subjects research when the research is
federally supported or regulated (e.g., by the Food and Drug Administration). The

body of federal regulations about human subjects protection (45 CFR 46 Subpart

A) is called the Common Rule, since it has been adopted ﬁin commonﬂ by many
federal departments and agencies that are involved in research with human
subjects. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has adopted similar

regulations tailored to its functions (21 CFR 50 and 56) (this report uses the

general term ﬁfederal regulationsﬂ to refer all CFR sections dealing with human

subjects protection). In addition, organizations that carry out many projects that

are federally funded and involve human subjects can negotiate multiple project

assurances (MPAs) with the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP,

formerly the Office for Protection from Research Risks or OPRR). Most

organizations holding MPAs agree to carry out all their research according to

federal regulations, regardless of whether all the research is intrinsically subject

to Common Rule regulation.
In the federal regulations, the IRB of a particular organization is charged
with reviewing and approving all research covered by the regulations that is

proposed under the auspices of the organization (note, however, that the

responsibility for ensuring compliance falls to the organization, not upon the IRB
itself).INTRODUCTION24
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In order to approve research, the IRB must be satisfied that, among other
requirements (45 CFR 46.111):
  risks to subjects are minimized and are reasonable in relation to anticipated
benefits, subjects is equitable,

 consent is obtained to the extent required, and

  provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain the
confidentiality of data are adequate.
HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH
Health services research is the study of the effects of different modes of
organization, delivery, and financing of health care services (see 
Box 1-2). HSR
includes studies of the effectiveness of health care interventions in real-world

settings, as contrasted with studies of the efficacy
3 of interventions under
controlled settings such as a clinical trial.
HSR raises particular issues regarding the protection of human subjects that
differ from the problems of clinical research, just as the methods of HSR differ

from the methods of clinical research.
4 First, many HSR projects involve
minimal risk of harm to subjects, so they may qualify for a waiver of informed

consent and individual informed consent is often impractical or impossible in

HSR projects.
5 For example, an HSR project may carry out secondary analyses of
data previously collected in the delivery of patient care or the payment for such
care. If the subjects whom the project will involve are enrollees in the federal
Medicare program, the number of subjects may be as many as several million

individuals. Further, many HSR projects use data that are already public and de-

identified, so they may qualify for exemption from IRB review or for expedited

review. Finally, many private organizations do HSRŠor programs such as

quality improvement that use similar data and methodsŠnot covered by the

federal regulations. These organizations may not have IRBs.
3The term ﬁefficacyﬂ refers to how reliably an intervention brings about a given result
under ideal, controlled conditions. The term ﬁeffectivenessﬂ refers to how an intervention
performs in the complex and variable context of real-world use and practice.
4There are other fields of research such as epidemiology, however, that share with HSR
similar methods and databases but evaluate different public health questions, (e.g. the
frequency of rare medication side effects). Although not examined here, the practices
reviewed by the committee for HSR would likely apply in these other fields.
5Informed consent is not always feasible for clinical trials either: FDA regulations at 21
CFR 50.24 allow for the use of investigational drugs without informed consent under
certain conditions such as cases where the subject's condition is immediately life-

threatening, the subject is not able to participate in giving consent, time does not permit
seeking proxy consent, and no alternative approved or generally recognized therapy is
available.INTRODUCTION25
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Since the object of HSR includes the study of health care operations and
HSR uses many of the same methods used in health care operations units to

assess their own performance, HSR is fundamentally connected to nonresearch

investigations within heath care organizations.
The committee heard one account describing the situation as a continuum,
with HSR at one end of the scale and operations at the other end (see 
Figure 3
 inAppendix B). Some HSR projects are clear examples of research; applying

scientific methods to test hypotheses and produce new, generalizable knowledge.

Other projects are certainly clear examples of internal exercises to assess the
quality of the operations of the specific organization with no intention of
producing generalizable knowledge. At the same time, quality assessment and

quality improvement (QA and QI) exercises sometimes reveal interesting and

important data that the organization recognizes to be of general interest, and that

therefore ought to be published. In addition, both scientific research in health

services and investigations into the internal operation of a health services

organization use many of the same methods (e.g., chart review, database analysis

and linkage).In fact, many projects may start out as operations assessment and then
become more like research, and many research projects involve doing very much

what would be done in an internal operations assessment. This continuum is one

of the interesting, if problematic, features of HSR. The committee proceeded with
a view to the clearer cases of research in health services, always mindful of the
less clear cases and closely related operations assessment exercises. From the

point of view of the patient or subjectŠthe person whose personally identifiable

health information may be reviewed or usedŠthe continuum appears more like a

widening circle of disclosure. At the center is the individual and health

information not yet shared with anyone; then, according to Etzioni's description

(Etzioni, 1999), comes the inner circle of those with whom the individual shares

information because they will use the information directly in the care



˚











INTRODUCTION26
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 1-1 Circles of disclosure. SOURCE: Adapted from Etzioni 1999.
of that individual. Next comes the intermediate circle of payers, and finally
the widest circle of everyone else who may have an interest in the individual's

health information (but with whom the individual may or may not have an

interest in sharing the information [
Figure 1-1]).The clearest examples of QA and QI occur in organizations involved in
health care delivery or payment. In many such assessments, individual patient

cases have to be reviewed. For example, if an organization is trying to reduce

drug errors in the hospital or shorten the length of stay after coronary bypass

surgery, for example, it may need to review the medical records of individual

patients to get a clear idea of how the process of care might be improved.

Furthermore, when a health care organization is investigating a ﬁcritical incidentﬂ

in which an error occurred, the QA committee will have to review the individual

case in detail. HSR studies generally do not require investigators to know all

personal information about each individual subject, but they often do require
preservation of linkages (via consistent code numbers) across data files for
individuals.BENEFITS OF HSR
HSR can lead to improvements in the delivery and organization of health
care, which may in turn improve health outcomes, and the cost-effectiveness of

care, for patients. It addresses large-scale systemic effects of health care delivery

changes that are difficult if not impossible to understand at the level of the

individual citizen, consumer, or patient. This kind of information is important for

planners and policy developers in both government and the health care industry.

It is also increasingly important for both corporate and individual consumers of

health care services (Clancy and Eisenberg, 1998; Eisenberg, 1998). Our health
care system is incorporating greater reliance on market decisions to improve
quality and control costs, but these decisions can be made well only with access

to good information about different health care services options. HSR provides

objective data on questions about the effectiveness of institutional variables, just
INTRODUCTION27
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as clinical trials assess the efficacy of interventions in individuals. HSR projects
aim at a variety of levels of the health care system. Some examples follow.
Policy Assessment 
Well-intentioned public policies may have unanticipated
adverse consequences or fail to fulfill their goals. However, whether they are

meeting or missing their goals, it is often difficult to assess their outcomes

without a systematic examination. HSR generates data on the outcomes of public

policies and provides an empirical base for modification or refinement of these

policies. For example, Gross et al. (1998) compared previously collected data

from several sources (including the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey) to
estimate out-of-pocket health care spending by lower-income Medicare
beneficiaries. The authors found that although Medicaid provides significant

protection for some lower-income Medicare beneficiaries, out-of-pocket health

care spending continues to be a substantial burden for most of this population.

This fact may be important in considering policies that would depend on further

cost shifting to increase out-of-pocket expenditure. In another example,

Cromwell et al. (1998) compared data over a four-year period on Medicaid anti-

ulcer drug claims, Medicaid eligibility, and acute care nonfederal hospital

discharges to assess what effect a policy of restricting reimbursement for

Medicaid anti-ulcer drugs had on the use of these drugs and on peptic ulcer-

related hospitalizations. Following implementation of the policy, reimbursements

for the drugs decreased 33 percent but there was no associated increase in the rate
of Medicaid peptic ulcer-related hospitalizations. These results opened further
research questions because there may have been quality-of-life implications for

some patients that the study did not address. Addressing these questions has

important public policy implications.Outcome Predictors 
The question of whether it makes a difference to have a
procedure done in a hospital that has a high case load of similar procedures is

important to policy makers and to individuals who may need an operation. HSR

studies have demonstrated in several cases that centers performing a greater

volume of procedures have better patient outcomes. Norton et al. (1998)

examined the effects of case volume on outcomes for knee replacement surgery

using Medicare claims data and found the results so striking that they

recommended against expanding knee replacement surgery to new centers
generally and instead recommended concentrating on developing hub centers.
Other groups of investigators have examined the relationship between volume

and outcomes in coronary interventions, where the inverse relation between

volume and mortality has been known for two decades. This does not mean that

new information is not important in changing policy, however. Sollano et al.

(1999) investigated the outcomes in several New York hospitals of three types of

operations and found that although the relationship (high volume associated with

lower mortality) persisted in two, it no longer held true for the third, coronary

artery bypass grafting. The authors attribute the disappearance of the relationship

in this operation to a recent quality improvement program in bypass operations in

the region, with important implications for the effects of QI programs in general.

OnINTRODUCTION28
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a similar note, Malenka et al. (1999) showed that for one type of surgery
(percutaneous coronary interventions), the operator did not have to do as many

procedures per year to maintain top performance as had previously been

believed, which they attributed to changes in practice due to new devices and

drugs.Provider Practices 
HSR develops data on physician behavior and practices.
Zito et al. (2000) recently demonstrated a significant overall increase in the rate

of prescriptions of psychotropic drugs for preschool-aged children (using data

from two state Medicaid programs and a salaried group-model health

maintenance organization [HMO]), which is of note in part because there are few

controlled clinical trials of the safety and efficacy of such drugs in this young age

group.HSR studies also help identify factors that may predict underuse of services
that are known to be beneficial. HSR has shown that patients who have survived

one heart attack also are known to have lower mortality if they receive

medications such as beta-blockers, aspirin, and cholesterol-lowering drugs, yet

these drugs are underused. Recent research confirms this and supports the use of

betablockers even in diabetic patients, a group for whom some physicians had
been reluctant to prescribe them (Chen et al., 1999). Other HSR studies have
sought to address questions of the adoption or lack of adoption of clinical practice

guidelines. Katz (1998) found, on analyzing the AHRQ guideline for unstable

angina, that there were several barriers to adoption including physician

variability. These included incomplete specification of exceptions as well as

unexpected increases in demand for care. Recognition of these barriers can then

be incorporated in the development of future guidelines to ease their adoption.
Effects of Business Practices and Law on Health Product Delivery 
Brooks et al. (1998) used HSR techniques to demonstrate that independent

pharmacies are at significant disadvantage compared to chains when negotiating

with insurers. Collective bargaining by pharmacies might mitigate this

disadvantage but is currently prevented by antitrust law. Such information would
be impossible for a consumer to obtain and therefore impossible to act on, yet the
consumer certainly feels the effects on the pocket book of more or less

negotiating power.RISKS OF HARM FROM HSR
The risks of HSR are primarily violations of privacy and confidentiality, not
physical risks. HSR thus differs from clinical research in which patients are at

risk for physical harms because they undergo invasive medical procedures or

receive unproven new therapies. Potential risks of violations of privacy or
breaches of confidentiality are by no means limited to research, but can occur
anytime personally identifiable health information has been collected. Potential

risks include the following:
  Risk of public (or private) disclosure of protected health secrets, which can
lead to stigmatization or discrimination in employment or insurance, and/or
INTRODUCTION29
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.shame: this is the fundamental issue and, for most people, probably the most
serious.  Risk of disruption of, or interference in, patterns within families, which may
result from unexpected and unauthorized communication of secrets within

the family.
  Risk that individuals may recognize (correctly or not) their own health
history or anecdotes in results and interpretations of a study or may suffer

anxiety simply from knowing that personal data may be in a database,

without knowing whether adequate privacy protections are in place: this

subjects the person to the 
perception 
of the first risk, even if it is not actually
present.  Risk of future contact. Privacy is ﬁthe right to be left alone.ﬂ Yet some HSR
studies permit the collection of follow-up investigations that include

contacting the individual whose data are studied. In this case, a stranger to

the person or (perhaps less alarming but still disruptive) a care provider from

long ago can suddenly intrude upon the subject's right to be left alone.
  Risk of loss of trust in the health care system and/or scientific research, and
thus loss of willingness to participate in future studies or perhaps even to

seek needed health care.
6These psychosocial harms can be avoided or mitigated if the research data
are coded or encrypted in such a way that individual subjects cannot be

identified. In addition, some harms can be prevented by strong antidiscrimination

laws. However, subjects may be 
wronged by violations of privacy and
confidentiality, even if they suffer no tangible harm. That is, even if persons do

not suffer employment difficulties or can be compensated by law if they do, this
does not change the fact that the subjects did not receive the respect due them as
persons. The federal regulations on research on human subjects explicitly require

IRBs to consider wrongs as well as harms in assessing the benefits and risks of

research.Breaches in the confidentiality of previously collected data can occur in a
variety of ways. For example, an employee who has a legitimate need to access

part of the database to carry out his or her job may make unauthorized use of that

access: a clerk in charge of determining insurance eligibility, or a nurse who is

not providing direct care to the patient, may review the records of an
acquaintance or a celebrity just for the sake of satisfying curiosity. The great
majority of occasions for data transfer and access occur not through research (or

malfeasance), but in standard health care operations. The great majority of

occasions for breach of confidentiality likewise occur in daily operations.
7 Some
instances of breaches of confidentiality are unintentional, for example, leaving a

record that includes a patient's name out in the view of a visitor or discussing a
6For a full discussion of this problem see, for example, Goldman (1998).
7The recent NRC report 
For the Record 
(1997) discussed the increasing complexity of
health information flow in detail (see especially Figure 3.1) p. 73. See also Goldman and
Hudson (1999).INTRODUCTION30
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.patient by name in the hearing of other parties in an elevator or cafeteria (Ubel et
al., 1995).
8 Also, some breaches are not accidental, but are oversights. The
committee heard of one incident in which the names of employees tested for HIV

were displayed with the test results on a slide at a presentation, for example. The

aim of the presentation was simply to describe a database of in-house health

records. Some of the employees whose records were listed in the section
displayed were actually attending the meeting. In this case the breach of
confidentiality could have been avoided through more attention or training on the

part of the research team and by the use of coded identifiers rather than direct

identifiers such as names.
As our health care system becomes more complex, information flow is
likewise increasingly complicated and the potential occasions for either a breach,

or perception of a breach, of confidentiality are correspondingly multiplied. For

example, a database marketing firm received patient prescription records from

two large pharmacies in the Washington, D.C. metro area (Lo and Alpers, 2000).
The firm then created mailings targeted to consumers of certain prescription drug
products on behalf of the pharmacies (using the letterhead of the pharmacies),

informing them of new products with similar indications. The project was

sponsored by the manufacturers of the new products, though the manufacturers

did not have access to patient data. Many of the recipients were disturbed at

receiving the letters, since the action seemed to straddle or even cross the line

between standard prescription medication compliance letters that are often sent by

pharmacies to patients and product marketing.
9Despite the potential for misuse, there are important and legitimate reasons
to maintain some identifiability in personal health information databases. Much

of the value of retrospective data-based research comes from the ability to draw
8In some cases the disclosure may be intentional: a particularly famous example of the
improper disclosure of personally identifiable health information occurred with the
unauthorized release of the HIV status of Mr. Arthur Ashe (mentioned widely, e.g., in

Shalala, 1997). It is important in the context of this report, however, to note that this
disclosure was not made in the course of research, and it was accomplished with paper
records. Of course, such disclosures are also not part of 
normal 
health care operations.
9Perceptions of breach of confidentiality can also include cases where an individual has
(knowingly or unknowingly) provided information in the course of responding to a
consumer survey or calling a product hotline, either of which often results in the
individual receiving marketing materials including disease-related product advertising
information. On receiving such information, some individuals may assume that private

health information was shared by their health care providers, not realizing that they
themselves had provided the information for the marketing effort. A different type of
concern, again not in research but in operations, was described in a previous IOM report,

Health Data in the Information Age 
(IOM, 1994). The report noted that increasing the
fringe benefits offered by employers also increases pressure on the employers to control
costs and that information about an employee's health may be shared through the company
to tailor plans so as to reduce liability (the report referred to a case that upheld the right of
an employer to reduce benefits, in which an employer became self-insured and established a

limit on AIDS-related expenses after a current employee was diagnosed with AIDS [p.
159]).INTRODUCTION31
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.inferences from data derived from different sources. For example, health care
organizations are often interested in identifying episodes of illness in a patient,

which may be manifest in records of emergency room visits, ambulance services,

hospital stays, operative records, bills from independent medical providers,

rehabilitation services, pharmacies and pharmacy benefit managers, and so forth.

In order to recognize that the data drawn from these various sources refer to the
experiences of a single individual, it is important that researchers be able to
identify the same patient in each set of records. This identification allows joining

these various datasets into a single (logical) database that contains all relevant

data about the patient. Such identification and joining is often difficult, and is one

of the motivations for keeping identifiers. The actual identity of any individual is

not really necessary to support the linkage between databases that have been

joined; all that is required is a unique identifier, which might (at least in

principle) be difficult to re-associate with the actual patient.
Even when research data are recorded in coded or encrypted format,
however, it may be possible to identify individual subjects at least with good

probability. Records are directly identifiable when individual identifiers such as

names or Social Security numbers are collected or retained (also called ﬁmanifest

identifiabilityﬂ). Yet individuals might be identified, at least probabilistically, by

linking otherwise de-identified data so that the resulting record effectively

identifies a particular individual. In this latter case, the information is said to be
indirectly identifiable (or ﬁidentifiable by inferenceﬂ). For example, race may not
be a direct or manifest identifier in the general population, but when combined

with the zip code of a relatively homogeneous area, a person of contrasting race

could be identified.
In one example of identification by inference, Latanya Sweeney showed that
three data fields (e.g., birth date, sex, and zip code) were sufficient to create a

linkage in databases, locating, with good probability, the records pertaining to a

single individual who was employed by the state. She was able to do this a matter

of hours using data that had been made publicly available only after all the

(known) identifiers had been removed (L. Sweeney, personal communication,

2000; Sweeney in press; see also Sweeney, 1997, for further discussion). This

example shows, first, that supposedly de-identified data may still be personally
identifiable when combined with other available data that either are complete or
do identify individuals. Second, it shows that the ability to manipulate databases

to locate individual subjects has increased due to advances in computing. Even if

the information collected is no more invasive now than previously, it is now

feasible for others to glean personally identifiable health information from such

data where it would have been much more difficult before.
Sweeney's demonstration should be a reminder that with the increasing
technical ease of identification by inference, there can be no guarantee of absolute

confidentiality of records. This fact in turn raises the question of how much effort

and expense ought reasonably to be invested in privacy protection. There are

various approaches to minimizing breaches of confidentiality. Some call for

strong measures at the point of disclosure, such as increasing the types of

disclosuresINTRODUCTION32
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.where explicit informed consent would be required (Norsigian and Billings,
1998; Woodward, 1999); others emphasize strong sanctions against violations of

confidentiality by the data holders or users who release or receive secondary

data; and finally, still others argue that the best course would be to stop worrying

about it entirely and instead turn to developing ways to live in society without

informational barriers (as suggested by the now-well-known aphorism of Sun
Microsystem's corporate executive officer Scott McNealy, ﬁThere is no privacy,
get over itﬂ).There are several important points to keep in mind about the risk of breaches
in confidentiality: the risk is neither new nor research specific, and some level of

risk is inevitable. First, the improper identification and disclosure of health

information about individuals is not a unique risk from HSR, nor is it a new

result of the widespread adoption of computer-based patient records,

governmental or health care industry databases or the Internet. Most instances

occur outside of research, in operations. Also, breaches occurred with paper
records as well. It is the case, however, that with the development of computing
and communications technology, both intentional and unintentional identification

and disclosure of electronic personally identifiable health information potentially

involve more types of information and more individuals than were possible with

paper records. At the most basic level, confidentiality always depends on

conscious efforts by human agents to treat other human beings with respect and

restraint, whether the activity is research or not, and whatever the state of the

technology.The protection of confidentiality is impossible to guaranteeŠsome level of
risk is inevitable.
10 It is possible to make breaches less likely and to increase the
probability that confidentiality will be maintained, but the protection of

confidentiality is a matter of shifting the probabilities; it cannot be an absolute

(see also GHPP, 1999, pp. 15Œ16). The question really is what measures can be

taken to enhance confidentiality protection, and thus retain public trust in HSR,

and10The probabilistic nature of confidentiality has been recognized elsewhere, for instance
a 1998 working group convened by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institute
of Health to examine the creation of informed consent documents had the following
recommendation regarding informing potential subjects about confidentiality and its
limitations: Confidentiality: The confidentiality section of the informed consent document

should state that although measures will be taken to protect the privacy and security of
personally-identifiable data, absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. The consent
document should list the organizations that will have access to personally-identifiable data

and that personally identifiable information may be disclosed as required by law. When
listing organizations that will have access to research records, describe for what purposes
the information will be disclosed to these organizations. (From Recommendations for the
Development of Informed Consent Documents for Cancer Clinical Trials, by the
Comprehensive Working Group on Informed Consent in Cancer Clinical Trials for the

National Cancer Institute, October 1998, posted at the following address, 
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/safeguards/consent/recs.html #Confidentiality)
.INTRODUCTION33
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.still allow research to proceed. Since it is not possible to guarantee the
confidentiality of records in general, it is also not possible to guarantee absolute

confidentiality in HSR. The measures we can take to increase the protection of

privacy and confidentiality are varied, some simple and some complex, and the

range of measures will change as computational and communications

technologies develop. The committee argues that with appropriate safeguards for
confidentiality, it is acceptable to consider a great deal of HSR as minimal risk
and appropriate to carry out without requesting consent for each reanalysis of

data.BACKGROUND AND POLICY CONTEXT
In recent years, public concern about privacy and maintaining the
confidentiality of personally identifiable health information has increased.

Legislators have responded to worried constituents by introducing a variety of

privacy bills over several sessions of Congress. Currently, there is no
comprehensive federal law that protects privacy for all health-related
information. There are some federal, and varying state, statutes that protect

certain types of personally identifiable health information under certain

circumstances (see, e.g., Gostin, et al, 1996; O'Brian and Yasnoff; 1999, also

Pritts et al., 1999). One state action that has generated considerable interest of late

was the Minnesota Access to Health Records Law (McCarthy et al., 1999), which

required informed consent from patients to use of their medical records for

research. There has been disagreement as to the actual intent and effect of this law

(Melton, 1997; Norsigian and Billings, 1998). Whatever the law's actual impact,

it expresses public concerns about privacy in research. The committee felt that

these concerns were important to address through effective privacy and

confidentiality protections and also believed that good protection could be
implemented so as to be compatible with future research. The committee hopes
that this report will help address these concerns (see 
Box 1-3 for more
definitions).In 1996, Congress enacted the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), directing the Secretary of Health and Human

Services to create detailed recommendations on standards with respect to the
privacy of personally identifiable health information. The Secretary's
recommendations were delivered to Congress in September 1997 (Shalala,

1997), and several privacy bills have been introduced in Congress since. Both the

Secretary's recommendations and most of the privacy bills introduced in the 105th

Congress would permit research using personally identifiable health information

without the subject's explicit permission if the research project were approved by

an institutional review board.
The HIPAA further directed the Secretary of Health and Human Services to
create regulations by February 2000, unless the Congress had taken legislative
action at least six months earlier. Congress did not take further action, so the
INTRODUCTION34
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.


˚-;
˚



-66-





˚

9 #

˚


1



"



˘ˆˆ˙











˚







"





!Bˆ77˝

˚





˚˚

˚

˚



INTRODUCTION35
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.


˚





˚

˚


The DHHS proposal would create new requirements for privacy protection
for all health care providers and health plans, and would establish research

standards and oversight for all research. The proposed regulations suggest that the

review function be performed by boards that are equipped to deal with data

privacy and by organizational privacy officers who will ensure system-wide

compliance with new privacy rules. The proposed regulations contemplate that

IRBs might conduct privacy review in some circumstances, but the DHHS

proposal does not suggest that IRBs are the only or even the best mechanism for

privacy review with respect to data studies. The proposed rule would permit the

use and disclosure of personally identifiable health information for research
without authorization by the subject, as long as the research protocol had been
approved by an IRB established in accord with the Common Rule (or FDA

regulations) or by a privacy board. The proposed rule then specifies that a privacy

board would have to have members with varying backgrounds but appropriate

professional competence, at least one member not affiliated with the organization

doing the research, and no members with conflicts of interest (DHHS, 1999, p.

60058).11 As this report was being written, DHHS was analyzing and responding
to the approximately 52,000 comments that the proposed rule elicited. Recent

studies of IRBs are another important policy context for this report: several have

questioned whether IRBs adequately fulfill their role of protecting research

subjects and whether they have sufficient resources to do so.
11The preamble to the proposed rule further specifies a privacy board as a body
equivalent to an IRB. During the comment period, various parties disagreed

about whether the privacy board as specified would actually be equivalent to an

IRB and able to provide the degree of oversight necessary.
INTRODUCTION36
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Historically, the focus of IRBs has been on protecting human subjects from
potential harm associated with participation in clinical research that involves

invasive medical procedures or new drugs. Little is known about IRB practices in

the area of HSR projects, though DHHS regulations at 45 CFR 46 have always

applied to non-clinical, as well as to clinical, research. Furthermore, much HSR

using large databases is undertaken with private funding and, consequently, falls
outside the purview of IRBs.
PROJECT AND SCOPE
This report is the product of a project sponsored by two agencies within the
DHHS, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and the Office

of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE).
This report is intended for all types of professionals and organizations that
use or disclose data on health services. For organizations that have IRBs whose

research is subject to federal regulation, the recommendations highlight practices
already in place in some IRBs and suggest additional support for IRB activities.
For organizations that use or disclose data but do not have an IRB or whose work

is not subject to federal regulation, the practices and recommendations emphasize

that the protection of human subjects from risks, including nonphysical risks from

use of data, is of concern to anyone who uses or discloses data. that the protection

of of human subjects from risks, including nonphysical risks form use of data, is

of concern to to anyone who uses or discloses data.
Although not all organizations have IRBs, all human subjects should be
treated with the same high standards. The committee urges organizations that do
not have IRBs to adopt practices of reviewing proposed investigations to ensure
that data confidentiality will be maintained. The committee likewise urges

organizations that have, as well as those that do not have, IRBs to adopt system-

wide confidentiality procedures and policies to protect nonresearch and research

data.The purpose of this project was to provide information and advice to the
sponsors on the current and best practices of IRBs in protecting privacy in HSR.
The charge to the committee was given in three parts as shown below.
1. To gather information on the current practices and principles followed by
IRBs to safeguard the confidentiality of personally identifiable health
information used for health services research purposes, in particular, to
identify those IRB practices that are superior in protecting the privacy,

confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable health information.
2. To gather information on the current practices and principles employed in
privately funded health services research studies (that are generally not

subject to IRB approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personally
identifiable health information, and to consider whether and how IRB
best practices in this regard might be applied to such privately sponsored

studies.INTRODUCTION37
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 1-2 Scope of the Institute of Medicine study.
3. If appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding the
confidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might be

voluntarily applied to health services research projects by IRBs and

private sponsors.
In order to address these tasks, the IOM assembled a 12-member committee
with expertise in medical ethics, health services research, IRB function, statistics,

computer science, law, and database management. The committee met by

telephone conference in January 2000. The committee and the IOM then

convened a public workshop in March 2000. The committee invited testimony

from IRB chairs and administrators, health services researchers, and other

officers of academia, government and private industry (see 
Appendix B
). The
workshop also featured presentations of the drafts of two commissioned papers,
one addressing special considerations of health services research and
confidentiality when the data pertain to minors (see 
Appendix C
) and the other
presenting an international comparison of health information privacy standards

(see Appendix D
). In addition to the workshop, the committee posted an
invitation on a list serve and on the National Academies' website to IRBs to

contribute information (see 
Appendix A
). The committee collected further
information informally by email and telephone. The committee deliberated by

telephone and e-mail, and in a closed meeting in April 2000, about the practices

described to it. Finally the committee has summarized the practices it heard that

seemed to be most effective in this report.
The committee addressed privacy and confidentiality pertaining to data used
in health services research that had already been collected for another purpose.

There are many other aspects of the privacy of electronic medical records that

were beyond the charge to the committee (
Figure 1-2
). The committee focused
INTRODUCTION38
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.its work on secondary analyses of data that had already been collected for other
uses, because such studies pose the most difficult ethical issues regarding HSR.
Although HSR that utilizes surveys and interviews (including the qualitative
HSR mentioned in 
Box 1-2) also raises ethical issues, the contact between
researchers and subjects allows the subjects to learn about the research and

decline to participate if they so choose. The committee recognized the strong

connections between these related matters and the question of protecting data

privacy in health services research that uses existing data. The committee

therefore asks the reader to bear in mind that such related matters were not in its
charge, were not addressed by the committee, and in particular, were not
discussed at the workshop.
OUTLINE OF REPORT
Chapter 2
 summarizes the federal regulations as they apply to HSR studies.
Chapter 3
 presents the committee's recommendations and findings based on the
available information from IRB's working under federal regulations. 
Chapter 4
presents the committee's recommendations and findings based on available

information from health care services and products companies that may not have
IRBs or be subject to federal regulations. The committee holds the conviction
that studies involving human subjects should be reviewed similarly whether the

study is subject to Common Rule provisions or not. As a result, the committee

makes similar recommendations regarding research that falls under the Common

Rule and research that does not. The committee considered combining 
chapter 3
and chapter 4
, but decided to keep them separate both because the implications of
the recommendations might be different for different types or organizations, and

because the separate structure seemed to reflect the committee's charge more

clearly. Finally, 
Chapter 5
 returns to the topic of the limited scope of this project
in discussing research and steps for the future. As was mentioned in the

workshop, the end of this study must not be the end of studying these important

questions, and the final chapter suggests some directions for further work.
The committee gathered information through a public workshop
(summarized in 
Appendix B
), a general information request posted through the
internet (see 
Appendix A
), and various unstructured interviews in the course of
study operations. Although the committee received just a few responses to the

posted call for information, those received were very informative. The committee

noted that all the providers of information, including respondents to the call for
information, those who briefed the staff by telephone, and participants in the
workshop, are a self-selected group of professionals committed to the IRB

process. Information collection was thus not systematic and random, but

particularly targeted. The committee also commissioned two background papers,

one to examine HSR and minors and the other to compare privacy and

confidentiality standards across national borders, which appear as 
Appendix C
and Appendix D
. Finally, biographical sketches of the committee members are
included as 
Appendix E
.INTRODUCTION39
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Human Subjects Protection and Health
Services Research in Federal Regulations
This chapter presents a brief summary of the federal regulations governing
the protection of human subjects in research, with particular attention to how the
concepts of the regulations fit with the methodology of health services research
(HSR). It provides background for the chapters on the practices of organizations

involved in human subjects research, since one of the primary goals of this

project is to help understand how institutional review boards (IRBs) implement

these regulations for HSR.
IRBS AND HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION
The cornerstones of U.S. regulations on the protection of human subjects are
review by institutional review boards and informed consent from participants in

research.Background of Federal Regulations
The Belmont Report (Belmont, 1979) articulated three principles for
research on human subjects: 
respect for persons, beneficence
, and 
justice.ﬁRespect for persons,ﬂ in the analysis of the report, includes the notions that each

human individual should be treated as an autonomous agent and that those whose

capacities preclude autonomy either temporarily or throughout life are owed

special protection. The main practical expression of the principle of respect for

persons is the requirement that the researcher first obtain the informed consent of

the subject(s). ﬁBeneficence,ﬂ or doing good, requires that the risks of
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
40Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.research be reasonable in relation to the possible benefits and that any risks
subjects may incur be minimized.
1 ﬁJusticeﬂ requires that benefits and harms of
research be shared fairly. Applying the justice principle, the IRB should ensure

that the selection of subjects or potential subject populations is equitable. Of

course it is one thing to enunciate general principles and quite another to ensure

their consistent and correct application in particular cases. There are many
difficult borderline issues in the ethics of human subjects research. Difficulties in
applying the principles underlying regulations on the protection of human

subjects in HSR differ from those in clinical research (Iezzoni, 1999 and Lo,

1999). These difficulties stem, in large part, from the history of the documents

articulating human subjects protection and the nature and methodology of HSR

federal regulations assume that clinical research is the paradigmatic use of human

subjects and therefore are directed primarily toward avoiding physical harm to the

individual subject. HSR studies, however, are generally more removed from the

human subjects, because they employ methodologies for sorting, linking, and

otherwise manipulating previously collected data. This aspect of HSR raises a

variety of questions about application of the ethical principles underlying our

beliefs about the proper treatment of human subjects. The question of whether a
particular project is research can have substantial ramifications in the ethical,
scientific, legal, and procedural requirements attached to it (Lo, 1999).
IRB Review
In the United States, federally supported and regulated human subjects
research is covered by regulations adopted specifically by 16 federal agencies

that conduct, support, or regulate research with human subjects. This shared body

of regulation, which is the ﬁCommon Rule,ﬂ appears at 45 CFR 46 Subpart A for

the Department of Health and Human Services. The Food and Drug
Administration has adopted similar regulations at 21 CFR 50 and 56.
IRB review ensures that the proposed research protocol will be reviewed by
people who are knowledgeable and not directly involved in the research. The

IRB's membership and function are defined in the regulations to ensure that it has

sufficient expertise and diversity to provide appropriate review. Diversity
1It is important to realize that this requirement is not redundant. The first part considers
the relative benefits and risks of a protocol, and acknowledges that increased scientific
understanding is desirable but is completely without cost. At the same time, the second

part mandates that an overall benefitŒrisk calculation ought not be made without
simultaneously considering the cost to the individual. That is, making the benefitŒrisk
calculation in part 1 of the requirement treats the subject as a 
means to realizing a benefit.
The part 2 provides a check on part 1, ensuring that the subject is not treated as a means
only. The lack of the part 2 check is why there has been controversy about using the
results of certain Nazi experiments, notably the series on hypothermia: the data may be
sound, but even if the information gained would benefit society, the cost to the subjects
was unacceptable, so many regard the data as tainted beyond redemption (Ivy, 1947, in
Reiser et al., 1977).
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
41Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.should include gender, race, culture, and profession. In addition to scientists, the
IRB must include at least one person who is not otherwise connected with the

institution and at least one non-scientist.
Many factors must be considered in evaluating the risks and benefits of a
research project, including its scientific merit and policy relevance, its relevance

to the local community, community values and standards of care, the specific

research setting, the populations targeted for recruitment, the nature of the

research questions and measures, and the cultural diversity of the target

populations. For these reasons, a good IRB needs to have experts both with local
and with national knowledge.
What Research Is Subject to Federal Regulations?
Federal regulations apply to all research involving human subjects that is
supported by federal funds, with certain exceptions. In addition, the FDA has a

policy of not reviewing any research submitted with a new product application
unless that research was conducted according to the regulations, regardless of
funding (21 CFR 56.103(a) and (b); see also, for example regarding contents of

applications to investigate or market new drugs, 21 CFR 312.66 and 314.50(d)

(3)(i)).Many organizations that conduct a great deal of federally funded or
regulated research involving human subjects have multiple project assurances
(MPAs) through the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP, formerly
Office for Protection from Research Risks or OPRR) in which they have agreed

to comply with federal regulations for any human subjects research, even those

projects that are funded by some non-federal source and would not otherwise to

covered by the regulations. An ﬁassuranceﬂ is an agreement or contract between

an institution and the OHRP, on behalf of the Secretary of Health and Human

Services. The assurance stipulates the methods by which the institution will

protect the rights and welfare of research subjects in accordance with the

regulations. An MPA can be approved for up to five-year intervals.
2What Establishes a Project as Research?
The definition of research in the regulations specifies ﬁa systematic
investigation . . . designed to develop or contribute to generalizable
knowledgeﬂ (45 CFR 46.102(d)). As discussed in the committee's workshop (see

appendix B
), the
2MPA is defined in the OPRR Guidebook Chapter 2, Section A(iii). There are several
thousand IRBs in operation, though estimates of the exact number vary between 3,000 and

5,000 (OIG, 2000, p. 20). Approximately 750 of these IRBs are located in approximately
430 organizations (some have several IRBs) that have entered into MPAs with the OHRP.
The great majority (more than 98 percent) of these MPAs cover all human subjects
research in the organization, although a few organizations have limited their MPAs to
cover only federally funded studies (Gary Ellis, formerly of OPRR, and Jon Merz,

University of Pennsylvania, personal communications).
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
42Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.interpretation of the key phrase ﬁgeneralizable knowledgeﬂ is difficult and can be
controversial.3 Some IRBs interpret this phrase to cover only projects in which
the investigator intends to publish the results, whereas others interpret the phrase

as covering projects whose results are disseminated beyond the department or

unit conducting the study, for example, dissemination through oral presentations

at scientific or other professional meetings. The difficulty is especially acute in
defining the boundaries of HSR since, as discussed in the previous chapter, many
projects could reasonably be categorized either as research ﬁdesigned to

contribute to generalizable knowledgeﬂ or as ﬁas internal quality assurance.ﬂ
What Establishes a Research Study as Involving Human Subjects?
The regulations define a human subject as ﬁa living individual about whom
an investigator conducting research obtains data through intervention or

interaction with the individual, or identifiable private information (45 CFR

46.102(f)). The former is not applicable in studies analyzing previously collected
data. Private information, in this context, is defined as ﬁinformation about
behavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can reasonably expect

that no observation or recording is taking place, and information which has been

provided for specific purposes by an individual and which the individual can

reasonably expect will not be made public (e.g., a medical record) (45 CFR

46.102(f)). The definition stipulates that the information must be individually

identifiable, that is, the identity of the individual can readily be ascertained or

associated with the information. In short, the open question for a project in HSR

is whether the information is identifiable.
What HSR May Be Exempt from IRB Review?
The regulations allow an IRB to exempt from further review research on
existing data and records, that is, for data and records that have been collected
previously and could be reanalyzed (see 
Box 2-1 for definitions, see also 45
CFR46.101(b)(4)):(4) Research involving the collection or study of existing data, documents,
records, pathological specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if these sources
are publicly available or if the information is recorded by the investigator

in such a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or through

identifiers linked to the subjects.
3Some authors have turned more attention to the phrase ﬁdesigned toﬂ and concentrated
on the initial intention of the investigators (see Amdur, in press). In HSR, however this

criterion, while helpful, may still be ambiguous, since intentions may change as the
project develops. As noted, projects that start as QA or QI may turn out to be publishable
and then require IRB approval.
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
43Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
9 #
!˚%˝






"


"#$˚


0/9 #
˚







˚

9 #
˚



˚"#$
˚


˚


'(
9 #
"#$



ˆ˙#˝


'(
9 #
"#$












˚

HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
44Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved."#$

/









"#$


"#$

"#$


Of course there are difficulties here too, in addition to those already
discussed, such as the meaning of ﬁrecorded by the investigator.ﬂ Some
interpretations apply this exemption as long as no identifiers will be made public;
others, if the investigator will not have the identifiers (although an assistant

might); and others, only if no identifiers will be recorded by anyone. The OHRP

has clarified that 
information should be considered identifiable regardless of who
holds the code that can link information to individuals, and the holder may be the

researcher, the data provider organization, or some third party
. A particularproblem in HSR that the regulations do not directly address is the possibility of

identifying in databases individuals who have an unusual constellation of

characteristics. Such indirect inferences can be made by using computer analyses

and linking several databases. In addition, when the study participants are known

to the investigators in other contexts, such as clinical care or community ties, the

identity of individuals with rare characteristics can be inferred.
As the committee heard in the workshop, some institutions have an explicit
policy requiring that all protocols be screened by the IRB, so that investigators

are never placed in the position of deciding themselves whether their projects
should be exempt from IRB review. The IRB or IRB office can ensure that the
protocol meets the criteria for exemption from IRB review. Under this

interpretation, the term ﬁexemptﬂ does not mean ﬁexempt from any IRB

oversight.ﬂ Although the IRB may determine the protocol to be exempt from

certain requirements, it may require others, such as periodic status reports. Often,

the IRB chair and members who do the initial screening of potentially exempt

protocols also carry out expedited review.
Some committee members suggested that the very term ﬁexempt,ﬂ although
formally codified in the regulations, may be misleading. In particular, the
regulations might mislead investigators to exempt their own research, when in
fact the protocol may not meet regulatory criteria for exemption. In addition,

some committee members remarked that the regulatory term expedited may be

unfortunate, since surely both investigators and IRB members would wish all IRB

reviews to be completed promptly. Finally, one possible solution might be to

discard bothHUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
45Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.terms in favor of ﬁadministrative reviewﬂ since so many of these studies do
receive quick turnaround review from the IRB chair and/or administrator.
What HSR May Qualify for Expedited Review?
The regulations also provide for expedited review of protocols in certain
cases. An expedited review is carried out by the IRB chair or by one or more

experienced IRB members. The DHHS publishes a list of categories of research

that may be eligible for expedited review, including records research, which

follows (63 FR 60364Œ60367, November 9, 1998):
ﬁ(5) Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) that
have been collected, or will be collected solely for nonresearch purposes (such
as medical treatment or diagnosis).ﬂTo qualify for expedited review, research must involve no more than
minimal risk. The concept of ﬁminimal riskﬂ therefore plays a prominent role in

determining whether a study qualifies for expedited review. Studies may not,

however, qualify for expedited review if (63 FR 60364Œ60367, November 9,

1998)ﬁ[I]dentification of the subjects and/or their responses would reasonably place
them at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financial
standing, employability, insurability, reputations, or be stigmatizing, unless
reasonable and appropriate protections will be implemented so that risks related
to invasions of privacy and breach of confidentiality are not greater than
minimal.ﬂIf the reviewers do not approve the study for expedited review, it must
receive a full IRB review.
May Informed Consent Be Waived?
For a project that 
is research involving human subjects and is 
not 
exempt,the IRB must ensure that the subjects have given free and informed consent to

participate unless the informed consent requirement may be waived. In general,

the IRB must ensure that the subjects receive adequate information about the

research protocol, and its possible benefits and risks, in a form that is

understandable to them; and that their consent was not coerced (45 CFR 46116
(a)); and finally, that their consent was documented (45 CFR 46.117).
The requirement of informed consent may, however, be waived by the IRB
if the research involves no more than minimal risk, the waiver will not harm the

rights or welfare of the subjects, the research could not otherwise be practicably

carried out, and when appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional

information after participating (45 CFR 46 116(d)). The concept of ﬁminimal
riskﬂ is therefore a key element in determining whether informed consent can be
waived.HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
46Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.What Is Minimal Risk?
Minimal risk, as defined in the regulations, ﬁmeans that the probability and
magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in and

of themselves that those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the

performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or testsﬂ (45 CFR

46 102(i)). Like the terms discussed above, ﬁminimal riskﬂ can raise difficulties.
For instance, it is not clear whether the terms ﬁdaily lifeﬂ and ﬁroutine testsﬂ refer
to healthy people or to sick patients. In a clinical trial, the risk of side effects may

be much greater in sick patients than in healthy volunteers. Other difficulties arise

particularly in the case of HSR. On the one hand, in HSR projects that involve

only analyses of previously collected data, there is no risk of physical harms such

as an adverse reaction to an investigational drug or device. On the other hand, if a

subject believes it reasonable to expect that medical records will not be disclosed

for other purposes and the subject is later identified, he or she may well consider

the risk to have been greater than ordinarily encountered and may feel wronged

by a waiver of informed consent.
PREVIOUS STUDIES OF IRBS
Several recent studies have examined IRB function and procedures. The
DHHS' National Institutes of Health (NIH) commissioned a large-scale study of

IRBs that was released in May 1998 (Bell et al., 1998). This study concluded that
the IRB system was functioning according to the regulations and was providing
an adequate level of protection for human subjects although improvements were

certainly possible. Many respondents to this study expressed concern about the

large and rapidly expanding workload of IRBs. The following month, the DHHS

Office of the Inspector General (OIG) released a study that highlighted several

challenges to the IRB system (Brown (OIG), 1998b). This report noted that IRBs

are facing greatly expanded workloads including new types of research.

Furthermore, IRBs do not always have access to either the expert personnel or the

training they would need in order to deal effectively with some of this research.

The need for improved IRB training and access to expert consultants also arose in

the present IOM study.
In February 1999, the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a
report on IRB function in the specific context of medical records privacy (GAO,

1999). The GAO study observed that IRB review currently may not ensure the

confidentiality of medical records when used in research. If the research is to be
conducted at another institution, the IRB may rely on the confidentiality policies
and procedures in place at that institution rather than carrying out its own

assessment of the confidentiality of the data. Furthermore, the IRB may never

even consider the issue of confidentiality if the study itself is eligible for

exemption or expedited review according to the provisions of the federal

regulations. Several of the respondents to the GAO study, however, detailed the

information they require of investigators. These requirements, including
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
47Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statements of who will have access to the data and what provisions will protect
the confidentiality of the data, were similar to some practices that were presented

to the committee, which are highlighted in 
Chapter 3.In April 2000, the OIG released an update reporting on conditions since its
1998 recommendations. According to the OIG, the problem of resources

continues to plague IRBs. The OIG summarized its previous recommendation on

resources and its current assessment:
ﬁPrior Recommendations: 
Require that IRBs have sufficient resources to
adequately carry out their duties. Our recommendation was directed not only to
staff and board member resources, but also to space, computers, and other
essential elements. We urged OPRR (note: now OHRP) to hold institutions
accountable for the resource commitments they made in their assurances.
Update: 
OPRR's enforcement efforts have brought attention to IRB resource
shortages at individual institutions and have led to additional support for IRB

function at a number of those institutionsŠand quite likely at others that have
taken note of the OPRR efforts. However, no further action has been taken to
develop indicators of adequate resource levels or enable greater investments to
support IRB functions. One approach that warrants more attention, and that NIH
reports is under consideration, would be to allow an additional increment of

grant funds to institutions to be used to provide necessary resources for IRBs.
Such an approach could help reinforce to institutions and investigators that a
well-supported IRB is a necessary cost of doing business. (Brown (OIG), 2000,
p. 15).ﬂThe IRB is the central feature of our human subjects protection system, so it
is not surprising that the functioning of IRBs continues to generate great interest
both in the federal government and in the nation generally. Subsequent chapters
of this report suggest approaches that some IRBs have used with good success,

but implementing them requires resources.
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION IN HSR
Within HSR, application of the three principles of human subjects protection
(respect for persons, beneficence, and justice) to the subjects of data in large data
bases becomes quite problematic, especially for researchers who may have no

means of knowing the identity of the individuals. The general question of seeking

informed consent poses a number of challenges, for example:
  In cases where large, rich databases already exist, a requirement to contact
subjects prior to reanalyzing the data effectively would make it impossible to

use the data for research (Iezzoni, 1999). All of the data would then be
wasted, and no good research, hence none of the benefits of research, would
be available.
  Further, the act of contacting the people requires more information and
invades their lives, so if the information used in and resulting from the

research did remain truly anonymous, the investigator would have violated

the privacy of the
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
48Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.subjects anyway simply to tell them about an activity that might not be
violating their privacy. Also, contacting individuals requires personal

identifiers, so someone would have to know who was in the study, thereby

raising the disclosure risk.
  Whatever the independent good of seeking informed consent in general, a
requirement to seek it for HSR also could result in biased samples. The

potential bias that would have to be considered could come about as

described below.
  Asking individually for consent to use data in a study lowers the participation
rate. Asking people for permission to use their medical information in

complex statistical models of health care systems may lead to increased

confusion and unnecessary fear and anxiety. HSR can be difficult to explain

to a nontechnical audience, and attempting to show why each variable is
needed may give the audience the impression of being manipulated.
  Because nonparticipants may differ from participants in significant ways,
asking individually for consent will introduce bias that may not be possible to

control.  As a result of bias from nonparticipation, the quality of the evidence resulting
from the final analysis will be reduced.
 as a result of bias from nonparticipation, the balance of benefit and risk
in the study will be less favorable.
HSR investigators and their IRBs have concluded that individual informed
consent, especially on a study-by-study basis, is one of the aspects of the clinical

research model that is impossible to apply in research conducted by analyzing

previously collected data. At the same time, the law presumably passed because a

sizable number of citizens were concerned, which would be consistent with the

results of a 1993 Harris Health Information Privacy Survey showing that 64

percent of respondents said their permission should be required before their

records could be used in medical research, even if no personally identified
information about them were published. In clinical research, specific informed
consent is, as has been pointed out, the bedrock realization of the principle of

respecting persons. In HSR, where the risks and the constraints are different, it is

necessary to identify or develop alternative modes of respecting persons that will

apply the principle in a feasible manner and address concerns about maintaining

the confidentiality of the data.
PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
The application of the basic principles of human subjects protection in HSR
raises specifically questions such as:
 privacy ought to be protected,
 confidentiality ought to be maintained, and

 persons whose data are recorded ought to be respected.
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
49Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Many responsible professional groups and expert individuals have developed
sets of guiding principles for the treatment of health information.
4The objective of this study was to collect practices. Good practices should
apply the principles of ethical human subjects research but also provide more

specific guidance to investigators and IRBs than abstract principles can provide.

In addition, good practices are flexible, taking into account the type of research

and type of organization in question. That is to say, if we agree that we want to

support HSR and obtain the benefits it has to offer, then we must identify and

implement practices that adequately protect the subjects of HSR, while allowing
worthwhile HSR to proceed. The committee hopes that the practices highlighted
in the following chapters will facilitate HSR with appropriate and feasible

mechanisms for the protection of human subjects, and will stimulate the

development and dissemination of more advanced practices in the future.
The scope of this study, highlighting the empirical collection of practices,
recognized that good normative principles are already codified in the federal

regulations, but that no amount of codification can provide adequate direction for

the day-by-day, study-by-study, work of an IRB. In short, regulations are

important to provide norms, but they must still be implemented with the

judgment and practical experience of individuals closest to the situation. This is

what the local IRB system is designed to do. As apparent in 
Chapter 3
 and
Chapter 4
, the sense of the committee is that the local IRB system is strong and
the committee strongly supports HSR using it.
Any local IRB that reviews HSR will, however, have to understand the
special problems of HSR and how to apply the federal regulations. The aim of

sharing best practices is to support the local IRB with the good ideas already

developed by other IRBs. One real challenge will be to find the best means of

disseminating these good ideas (
Chapter 5).4Because different groups are developing principles to address different problems, or at
least to address problems in different contexts, the sets of principles do not directly overlap
in many instancesŠin particular, not mentioning a principle is not evidence that an

organization would oppose it. These different perspectives make for difficult comparison
(but see Buckovich et al., 1999). For example, several recommend removing personal
identifiers as early, as and to the greatest extent, possible (GHPP, ISPE, Lowrance) or with
some reservations (AAMC), many urge the proactive development of procedural and
technical safeguards to protect privacy (GHPP, ISPE, JHITA, AAMC, Lowrance) and call

for imposing penalties for breaches of confidentiality (GHPP, AAMC, JHITA, ISPE,
PhRMA, Lowrance); some include specific protection for data access for research
(AAMC, PhRMA); and several support the idea that individuals should be able to review
their own records (GHPP, JHITA, ISPE, Lowrance).
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH IN FEDERAL
REGULATIONS
50Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Best Practices for IRB Review of Health
Services Research Subject to Federal
RegulationsResearch with human beings is subject to federal regulations if it is federally
supported or regulated for some other reason (e.g., will be submitted to the FDA
as part of a new drug application). In addition, organizations that hold a multiple
project assurance (MPA) from the Office of Human Research Protections

(OHRP, formerly OPRR) usually, as a condition of the MPA, require all research

at the institution to be subject to federal regulations, including research that is not

federally supported. Furthermore, some organizations that do not hold such an

MPA may also require all research to be conducted in accordance with federal

regulations as a matter of organizational policy.
This chapter presents the recommendations and findings of the committee
regarding the practices of institutional review board (IRB) review for health
services research (HSR) that is done according to the federal regulations (whether
the organization follows the federal regulations by requirement or by policy

choice). The committee collected information from some universities and health

centers and private research foundations, hearing testimony at a public workshop

and collecting materials and statements from participating IRBs (see 
Appendix A
and Appendix B
).The committee was not able to conduct a comprehensive survey of IRB
practices. The recommendations and findings that follow are based on the

available data from a limited number of organizations and may not be
representative of the entire IRB system. The committee presents these
recommendations and findings in the hope that they may be helpful to some

organizations, and may inform and stimulate further discussion about how IRBs

can better fulfill their important role.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
51Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONSRecommendation 3-1. Organizations should work with their IRBs to
develop specific guidance and examples on how to interpret key terms in the
federal regulations pertinent to the use in HSR of data previously collected
for other purposes. Such terms include 
generalizable knowledge, identifiable
information, minimal risk 
and privacy and confidentiality. 
Organizations and
their IRBs should then make such guidance and examples available to
investigators submitting proposals for review.
The committee found that several topics cause considerable worry to
investigators and IRBs because federal regulations are open to varying
interpretations, with divergent implications.
The first of these topics is what activities are considered 
research and what
criteria are used to operationalize the distinction between 
research 
and otheractivities. A key feature of the federal definition of research is whether the
activity contributes to generalizable knowledge. In trying to distinguish research

from activities such as quality assessment (QA) or quality improvement (QI) that

use similar techniques to analyze personal health information in databases,

however, both the federal regulations and the interpretations of these regulations

by OHRP contain insufficient practical guidance for investigators and IRBs.
A second important issue is what constitutes 
identifiable information 
asdefined in the federal regulations. Once again, the federal regulations provide
little direction to investigators and IRBs on how to operationalize these terms, for

example, whether or how it would be determined that data were 
unidentifiable, ifthey were coded in such as way that the investigator would have access to the

data but also have great difficulty in reestablishing the identity of subjects.
A third issue is what constitutes 
minimal risk 
in HSR research and, in
particular, what steps to protect the confidentiality of data in HSR suffice to allow
the project to be considered as minimal risk. The issues of identifiable

information and minimal risk have important implications for whether a project

may be exempt from IRB review or receive expedited review or whether

informed consent of research participants may be waived.
On all these issues, IRBs should communicate more directly with
investigators and give local examples more specific than the guidance currently
available in federal regulations and clarifications by OHRP. Clearer guidance

would make IRB review more efficient as well as enhance the protection of

subjects by helping to ensure that HSR projects incorporate confidentiality

protections that the IRB finds important.
The committee found that IRBs vary in how they interpret federal guidelines
pertaining to whether a project is intended to yield ﬁgeneralizable knowledge ﬂ
and thus should be subject to IRB review.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
52Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the federal definition, research is ﬁdesigned to develop or contribute to
generalizable knowledgeﬂ (45 CFR 46.102(d)). The concept of generalizable

knowledge seems to include both scientific rigorŠto avoid error and to assure

that findings can be widely appliedŠand an intent to disseminate the findings of

the investigation. The IRB representatives participating in the workshop agreed

that an activity would be considered research if the investigator plans to publish
the findings. IRBs differ, however, in how they interpret other situations,
particularly activities that might be considered QA or QI. Some organizations

take an inclusive view of research, considering a project to be research if the

findings will be disseminated outside the division or department that carried out

the project. In this view, if the findings will be presented at a scientific meeting

or to administrators from other organizations (e.g. other teaching hospitals), they

will contribute to generalizable knowledge even if they are not published. Dr.

James Kahn of the University of California in San Francisco, for instance,

suggested at the workshop that if data are collected systematically, the project

should be reviewed by the IRB, since it is reasonably likely that the investigator

will publish the results if the findings are interesting (see 
Appendix B
).Ms. Angela Khan, IRB administrator from the University of Texas Health
Sciences Center in San Antonio (UTHSCSA) explained at the workshop (see

Appendix B
) that her institution's IRB considers a number of issues in deciding
whether a project is research rather than QA or QI. In assessing whether certain

studies (generally only those directed toward internal QA) should be exempt from

review, the IRB would consider whether
  the findings of the study will be disseminated beyond the department
proposing to carry out the study;
  the protocol includes any change in clinical care or clinical processes that
will affect other patients;
  the data to be collected would be available to the investigator only through
the study (i.e., the investigator would not have access to such data in normal

practice); and,
 is any risk of harm or wrong to patients or staff.
If the answer to all of these questions is ﬁno,ﬂ then the UTHSCSA IRB
would consider the protocol exempt as a QA activity. Other research may be

exempt under the regulations but probably also would be reviewed at least by a

subcommittee of the IRB, and informed consent might still be required. Ms. Khan

also noted that generally the first consideration alone is sufficient to classify a

project as research, since most investigators do in fact wish to publish their

findings, even from projects that were planned as internal investigations, if they

should prove interesting.On the other hand, other IRBs use a narrower view of research. Dr. Robert
Amdur of the University of Florida and also a presenter at the workshop (see

Appendix B
) suggested a contrasting approach. Starting from the premise that
activities best characterized as QA or QI should be excluded from IRB review,
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
53Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.he argued that publication (i.e., contributing to a lasting collection of
generalizable knowledge), is a necessary condition for an activity to be

considered research. Therefore if researchers say that they would 
not 
carry out the
project if the results could 
not 
be made public, the project must be considered
research. By contrast, for nonresearch activities such as QA or QI, there would

still be sufficient internal organizational motivation for collecting the data, even
though the activity would never increase the store of generalizable knowledge
(Amdur et al., in press).
The committee found that another common dilemma occurs when the
investigator does not initially intend to publish, and therefore does not ask for IRB

review, but afterwards discovers the findings to be so interesting that they ought

to be published. IRBs apparently vary in the way they handle such situations.

Because the intentions of the investigators may change, other authors have

suggested additional criteria for research, similar to those that some IRBs are

already using. Casarett et al. (2000) suggest considering a QA or QI project as
research if most of the subjects would not be expected to benefit directly from the
knowledge generated and if the subjects would incur risks beyond those of

normal practice.The committee also heard that the determination of whether an activity is
research, and hence how the observed individuals are to be protected, is

particularly problematic in small organizations. Small organizations wishing to

study their outcomes to improve their operations may not have access to

resources for developing formal protocols and may not have an IRB that can

review the project. Thus, an inclusive definition of research could preclude
important projects in small organizations. In the workshop, participant Dr. Joanne
Lynne of RAND gave the example of small hospices and home health care

organizations who want to improve their own services but also share their

findings with similar organizations, perhaps as part of a multisite study. The

committee noted, however, that the likelihood of identifying individuals and the

difficulty of maintaining confidentiality are both greatly increased in small

organizations. Furthermore, in hospice care, information may be recorded about

such sensitive topics as family disputes, emotional problems, or even illegal

activities such as physician-assisted suicide. Hence individuals who are patients

in small organizations and who are the subjects of projects carried out in small

organizations that fall in the ambiguous zone between research and QA/QI, may

be in need of the protection due human subjects; indeed they may be very
vulnerable populations in need of strong protections.
The committee concluded that in light of these different viewpoints of
various IRBs, investigators may be unclear how federal guidelines define research

and how their own IRB will interpret those guidelines with regard to HSR.
The committee found that some IRBs have specific and detailed criteria for
determining whether information is identifiable.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
54Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the federal guidelines, research on existing data, documents, or records is
exempt from IRB review ﬁif the information is recorded by the investigator in

such a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or through identifiers

linked to the subjectsﬂ (45 CFR 46.101(b)(4)). Thus, the concept of identifiable

information is crucial in determining whether an HSR project is exempt from IRB

review. As mentioned in 
Chapter 1
, the question of whether a record is
identifiable is difficult because identifiability is not a property solely of the record
itself but may be an inferential result of the record plus a linkage with some as-

yet-unspecified database by an as-yet-undefined algorithm. How the question is

answered has profound implications for the way the research in question will be

regulated (Lo, 1999).Ms. Khan noted that the UTHSCSA IRB, regarding projects using data from
computer databases, asks the investigator to list all the fields to be collected and

to indicate who will actually collect the data, how respect for confidentiality by

any personnel involved will be ensured, and how further dissemination of the

information will be prevented (e.g., storing data on computers that are not

networked, storing codes identifying individuals separately from data, using

passwords and/or key requirements to restrict access both to computers for data
storage and to computer housing identifying codes). Another workshop
presenter, Dr. Tora Bikson of RAND, suggested a general rule that RAND uses:

if sorting data according to any variables produces subsets with ten or fewer

members, these individuals will be at risk for identifiability by inference. The

committee did not test or corroborate this cutoff point, which would require more

theoretical work, but noted that rules of this type are good examples of useful

practices.The committee concluded that it is desirable for several reasons to have such
explicit criteria on the identifiability of information. Explicit criteria improve the

quality of HSR by promoting more careful consideration of the issue of whether

information can be linked to identifiable individuals. Furthermore, explicit

criteria promote consistency in the IRB review and allow more efficient review.

If investigators know how the IRB determines whether information is

identifiable, they can use that knowledge in study design to avoid problems such

as building in unintentional identifiability. At the same time, it is important to
remember that identifiability is a dynamic property, so it will never be possible to
rely on a list of steps or an algorithmŠthe investigator and the IRB will have to

think critically and exercise judgment in every case.
The committee found that IRBs vary in how they handle projects that may qualify
as exempt from IRB review and in the formality of procedures for expedited

review.The committee heard that some organizations require any investigator to
notify the IRB of all projects, including projects that might qualify for one of the

exemptions in the federal regulations, and to submit annual status reports. By

notifying the IRB of a project, the investigator would at least have the benefit of
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
55Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.some external review of the protocol. Several organizations provide investigators

with interactive on-line or at least printable forms that ﬁwalkﬂ the investigator

through a short deliberation about whether the protocol really qualifies for

exemption from IRB review (see Box 3-1 and Figure 2 in Appendix B). On theother hand, other organizations allow investigators to decide for themselves

whether a protocol is exempt from IRB review, and do not attempt to determine

whether the investigator's decision is consistent with federal regulations. Still

other organizations may allow the department head or chair to certify that a

research project qualifies for exemption.
The sense of the committee is that any project benefits from at least some
review from a party external to the project. In many projects, a review by an IRB

chair or member alone may be sufficient, but even this quick review provides the

project, the investigator, and most of all, the potential subjects with the benefit of

an outside check that human subjects are adequately protected.
Likewise, clarifying the institutional procedures for expedited IRB review in
HSR would have several salutary effects. It would call the attention of

investigators to ethical issues regarding HSR. Furthermore, such clarification

would encourage health services researchers to consider in a standardized way the

issues of IRB review, patient consent, and protecting confidentiality. Clearer and

more standardized procedures would make IRB operations more efficient, first,

by allowing IRB members to focus their attention on difficult cases and, second,

by giving investigators suggestions that IRBs currently request only after a

protocol is reviewed, so that the investigators would be likely to submit proposals

that incorporated these elements the first time. Finally, such standardization

increases compliance with IRB policies and federal regulations that are intended

to protect subjects in HSR.
Recommendation 3-2. IRBs should develop and disseminate principles,

policies, and best practices for investigators regarding privacy and

confidentiality issues in HSR that makes use of personal health data

previously collected for other uses.
Confidentiality in handling health information is important for its own sake
and for the enhancement of public trust in research. The committee heard several

innovative and feasible ways to facilitate the maintenance of confidentiality.
The committee found that the identifiability of data in HSR is a continuum, such

that absolute guarantees of confidentiality are impossible.
Even when investigators have made reasonable and good-faith efforts to
deidentify data, to restrict access to a need-to-know basis, and to maintain

confidentiality, the identity of an individual can sometimes still be inferred. The

committee heard of examples in which individuals could be probabilistically

identified from supposedly de-identified public use files. The committee also

heard about the increased chances of identification within small populations (see

Appendix B). These probabilistic identifications by inference result from
unforeseen links between the de-identified data in one database and complete or

identifiable data from another source. It is also, of course, always possible for a

human employee mistakenly to allow data to become available.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO

FEDERAL REGULATIONS
56Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.


˘ˆ
˛˚˜ !˜"#$˝!˝
˘

((
((
((


ˆ8?˝

((
˚


((


")!˛(


Many health services researchers and IRBs have developed practical and
specific procedures for protecting privacy and confidentiality in HSR projects

that involve analyses of previously compiled databases. For example, researchers

in health services may need to identify individual subjects to combine data from

different datasets or to compare follow-up information with baseline data. Such

projects can still protect subjects by using computer-generated identifiers or by

encrypting the data, rather than identifying individuals by name, hospital record

number, or Social Security number. When the project requires definite linking,

the researcher will have to use unique individual identifiers, such as Social
Security number, Medicare Health Insurance Claim number, health record
number, or some unique code generated within the project for this purpose, to

establish that records in different datasets belong to the same person. However,

relying on a single linking variable can lead to some errors if the number is

entered incorrectly for a particular transaction (hospital stay, doctor's office

visit). Therefore, prudent investigators would, if possible, use some other

attributeBEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
57Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as a corroborating linking variable, such as sex or date of birth. Probabilistic
linking, in contrast, reflects the fact that people can share identifying attributes

such as names and birthdates, so that investigator is not certain that the linked

records belong to the same person.
In other cases the identifying information needed for accurate data merging
may not be specific to the patient. For instance, a study on hospital characteristics

might require the names of hospitals to merge Medicare Part A claims files with

the American Hospital Association survey database, but would not have to

identify specific patients. In addition, researchers can take additional steps to
prevent the identification of individuals with unusual characteristics (see also
Table 3-1
 for further detail). There may be only a few individuals of a given age
with a rare diagnosis in a certain zip code who were hospitalized between certain

dates, and such individuals may be readily identified by inference because there

are so few persons with these characteristics. Researchers can, however, change

the recording of the data so that there are more records in each data cell. For

instance, it is harder to identify individuals if the investigator records the year of

birth rather than the exact birthdate, the first three digits of the zip code rather

than the entire zip code, and the number of hospitalized days rather than the exact

dates of hospitalization. Furthermore, researchers can reduce the number of

outliers on a scale by collapsing categories at the extremes of the scale. For

instance, the researcher can set the highest value for a cost-of-hospitalization data
field at something greater than a certain dollar amount, rather than retaining the
exact figures for high-cost hospitalizations. Although there can be no absolute

guarantees of confidentiality, these measures reduce the likelihood that

individual subjects would be identified. If adopted more widely where

appropriate, these procedures would enhance protections for subjects of HSR. At

the same time, it is important for IRBs to bear in mind that different techniques

are appropriate in different research projects, so different subsets of these

techniques might be applicable or not usable in different studies.
The committee found that IRBs were able to suggest many ways in which
protocols could better protect confidentiality with simple measures.
The committee heard of cases that illustrated problems or potential problems
with confidentiality that IRBs had averted. In some studies, investigators planned

to record identifiers with the data even though there was no need to maintain the

identifiers. In fact when the IRB questioned the necessity for using identified

data, the investigators realized they simply had never thought of whether their

research required the identification and they immediately removed them. In

another instance, already mentioned, that was reported to the committee at the

workshop, one participant described finding his own HIV results projected in a

meeting with personally identifying information, with no other purpose than
showing an example of records in the database. In both cases, the basic problem
appeared to be that the persons collecting data had not considered the

confidentiality
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
58Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.implications of their methods. These examples demonstrate the usefulness of a
review independent of those involved in the protocol.
The committee also found that some IRBs give detailed attention and clear
advice to investigators on how better to protect confidentiality at various steps
of an HSR project.Ms. Khan said that for any protocol involving particularly sensitive data, the
UTHSCSA IRB requires the investigator to obtain a federal certificate of

confidentiality. The certificate of confidentiality is a legal mechanism (described

in the Public Health Service Act, Section 301(d)) designed to protect certain

types of sensitive data from subpoena (see Wolf and Lo, 1999). The committee

also heard, however, from organizations that store such sensitive data in facilities

outside the United States to protect them from discovery processes (the
committee did not, however, seek legal opinions as to whether such a strategy
would provide effective legal protection from discovery). Colonel Anderson, IRB

chair at the United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Disease,

reported that the Army's procedures specify that that an investigator may request

that research records be maintained on request under special coded identification

numbers, with a linkage to the individual's Social Security number. The key

linking the study identification number and the Social Security number is then

stored separately under extremely limited access. In general, networked,

distributed, and backed-up digital information and environments together pose

new types of threats to privacy. Some researchers, for instance, may not realize

that taking a diskette with backup files home to work on a personal computer that

is connected to a DSL line (that is on all the time) creates a serious security

breach. Such examples suggest that the role of technical experts may yet be
underappreciated.The committee found that violations of privacy and confidentiality might occur in
HSR studies that have small numbers of subjects in cells, but that careful IRB
review including appropriate consultation with persons knowledgeable about
any specific community norms may help investigators to revise protocols to
reduce such risks.The committee heard that small, isolated minority communities and their
individual members might be particularly vulnerable to breaches in

confidentiality, often unintended. The risk is increased in situations where the

number of individuals is small and the individuals are readily recognized by

others in the community. If a project targets a particular rural county or Indian

Reservation, for instance, there may be only one or a few individuals with a

particular characteristic (e.g., giving birth to twins) and these individuals would

be readily identified in the local situation even if their identity were effectively

hidden from strangers.
At the same time, the risk of loss of the confidentiality veil and exposure to
stigma is increased for the individuals and for the community as a whole if the
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
59Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.community is relatively small and its members are readily recognized as
members by the majority society. It would be important for those IRBs that review

such research to consider concern for the community as a whole, but might be

effected through protection of individual members, since U.S. legal tradition

contemplates privacy as belonging to individuals, not groups. For example, a

study designed to assess the need for certain health services can at the same time
have the effect of identifying the community with a negatively valued
characteristic (such as underuse of prenatal care or, more strongly, drug or

alcohol abuse during pregnancy as evidenced by neonatal symptoms). In this

case, all members of the community where the need has been shown may suffer

stigma even if not involved in the study or not possessing the characteristic in

question.The risk may be increased still further by the presence of culturally
significant identifiers that are not recognized as sensitive private information by

researchers who are not familiar with the community and therefore do not mask

all the sensitive data fields. For example, specific locations, occupations, or other

characteristics may indicate a very small subgroup even within a minority

community (e.g., a few members of a particular tribe on a reservation inhabited
primarily by another tribe), so that those individuals could be unintentionally
identified. Similarly, among some Native Americans, revealing the name of a

particular lodge or other immediate grouping could be considered an invasion of

privacy.Dr. Freeman of the Indian Health Service IRB pointed out that many such
mistakes could be avoided by consulting with the community for unanticipated

risks to privacy (see 
Appendix B
). For example, the name of the lodge need not
be disclosed in a publication; the site of the study might be identified simply as a

tribe in a certain state. Dr. Freeman also noted that a minority community may be
particularly apt to worry about mistreatment from researchers, and any perceived
mistreatment at the hands of one researcher will have negative impact on the

ability of future researchers to gain community cooperation. Members of the

committee also noted that there may be no generally agreed-upon spokesperson to

represent the community, but even if there are multiple overlapping groups

involved, the IRB could ensure that the investigator had consulted several

representatives and at least had some input even if it is not possible to have a

definitive or comprehensive statement.
The committee found that the particular issues of the use of minors as subjects
are connected mainly with informed consent and assent by the subjects. Specific
cases in which children are at elevated risk, however, such as when they have

been removed from their parents due to domestic violence, demand additional
care and protection for these vulnerable subjects.
The committee found that when children are the subjects of HSR that makes
secondary use of previously collected data, there are situations in which the risks

of breach of confidentiality may go beyond the risks existing for adult subjects. In

such situations, investigators and IRBs should take special care to ensure that
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
60Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.these vulnerable subjects are protected. In the type of HSR addressed in this
study, including analysis of data collected for some other purpose, informed

consent for each study is generally not practicable and the challenge for

researchers is to build in appropriate confidentiality protections so that the risk to

subjects will truly be minimal. As discussed in 
Appendix C
, ﬁminorsﬂ is not a
homogeneous class, and the potential for psychosocial risks such as
embarassment vary with age within the class. In many cases, the when risk of
confidentiality breach in general has been minimized effectively, the committee

sees no greater risk to minors, in respect of their being minors, than to any other

subject. In specific cases, such as perhaps research on domestic violence and

foster care, individual children might be identifiable because they are in a

relatively small group. Furthermore, if subjects are identified, they may be at risk

for being removed from a parent or guardian even though better placement

options may not be available. Thus, the confidentiality of these subjects' identity

should receive extra scrutiny. It is also true that records research might reveal

patterns of injury, perhaps allowing abuse of a child to be detected and stopped.

The committee also found that certain variables, such as hospitalizations, are so

much rarer among minors than among older adults that special consideration for
protecting the confidentiality of these variables as potential identifiers is
warranted. As with the previous finding regarding subjects who are members of

small minority communities, protecting the confidentiality of data on minors will

be enhanced by an IRB whose members or consultants are knowledgeable about

the particular issues of a study and about the relevant developmental changes of

the minor subjects involved, and can help highlight variables of unusual

identifying potential.
Recommendation 3-3. IRBs should redesign applications and forms (paper
and electronic) tailored to HSR that analyzes data originally collected for
other purposes and then distribute them widely (e.g., post them on-line) to
assist investigators in writing the human subjects sections of their HSR
proposals and in preparing applications for IRB review. IRBs should be

knowledgeable about the differences between HSR and clinical research,
and any forms developed should reflect these differences.
A checklist or logical series of questions lays out the criteria that the
institution has adopted to determine, for example, what constitutes research.

These instruments are useful in several ways: they call the attention of

investigators to ethical issues arising in HSR, and they help investigators to think

through systematically the specific issues regarding IRB review, patient consent,

and protection of confidentiality.
Interactive forms and checklists can make IRB review more effective and
efficient. Investigators can see if their projects might meet criteria for waiver of

informed consent, expedited review, or exemption from review. If necessary, the

investigators can revise their study without the delays involved in resubmitting a

revised hard copy of the protocol to the IRB and waiting for review by the IRB
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
61Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.staff or a board member. Such forms would allow IRBs to focus their review,
again by drawing attention to difficult cases. Overall, interactive forms would

enhance compliance with IRB policies and federal regulations and would make

review less burdensome for investigators and IRB members alike.
The committee found that some organizations make use of interactive online
forms to help investigators determine whether a project should be considered
research and whether it qualifies for expedited review.
In general the committee was favorably impressed with organizations such
as RAND that had devised interactive on-line forms to minimize investigator time

and paperwork requirements.
RAND has implemented an on-line system to help ensure that there is
appropriate IRB review of all protocols. The brief on-line questionnaire in

Box 3-1 initially helps the investigator determine whether the project might
require IRB review. If the questionnaire so indicates, then a more detailed

questionnaire helps the investigator explore the alternatives of exemption from
IRB review, expedited review, or full review see (
Figure 2
, Appendix B
). The
on-line system may indicate that a project would not fall into the category of full

IRB review if it uses only anonymous or public use datasets, or de-identified

datasets if neither RAND nor any another party on the contract has access to the

identifiers. In addition, the IRB is notified whenever a project receives an

internal funding account numberŠin fact, assigning such a number automatically

triggers a message to the investigator to start the questionnaire. The system is

designed to be inclusive, that is, to send any borderline cases to IRB members for

specific attention. In more difficult situations, the IRB chair and/or selected

members would have to decide whether the particular project could be exempt.

Examples of situations in which an IRB members would have to become involved

to decide whether further IRB review might be needed include projects that will

use anonymous or nonsensitive primary data gathered through surveys,
interviews, or other methods requiring a direct interaction with subjects; projects
that gather data from public officials or candidates; or intervention research that

is anonymous and without risk.
The committee did not hear of comparable automation in a university setting
but found that automating the burden of paperwork as much as possible would

increase compliance and reduce burdens on both investigators and IRBs. Just as

increased protections come at the price of increased investment in equipment and

expertise, so would it be necessary for organizations to invest in IRB operations
improvements to increase their efficiency.
As has been mentioned, the committee concluded that, principal
investigators intending to involve human subjects should not be in the position of

exempting themselvesŠwith or without forms and guidance documents; rather,

the protocol should receive at least some outside review. At the same time, forms

such as those by RAND would be helpful in facilitating prompt and high-quality
review. The design and dissemination help the institution, the IRB, and
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
62Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the investigator systematically approach questions such as whether an activity is
research. In another example, a university-based IRB showed how the university

was working to help its investigators ascertain whether projects would be

classified as research or QA and/or QI. There, the investigator is asked to

consider whether the proposed study contains any of the following elements,

which the institution has recognized as potentially associated with research rather
than QA or QI:
Characteristics of projects using HSR methods that are research, not QA or
QI: any previously unknown phenomena
 information beyond that routinely collected for the patient care in
questionalternative treatments, interventions, or processes

current process
To which might be added:
for publication if possible
Although the committee would wish the IRB chair or designee to
corroborate an investigator's assessment of a project as rather than research, the

preparation of systematic materials such as the above list would facilitate review.
Recommendation 3-4. IRBs should have expertise available (either on the
committee or through consultants) to evaluate the risks to confidentiality

and security in HSR involving data previously collected for some other
purpose, including the risks of identification of individuals and the physical
and electronic security of data.
The committee urges IRBs and investigators to consult information
technology and data security experts about protecting confidentiality in their

specific situations. It is not the intent, nor would it be possible, for this committee

or this report to provide an adequate basis for a data security program.
The committee found that the IRBs would probably benefit from guidance on how
confidentiality can be protected so that IRB members have more background on
what to look for in a protocol.
The committee followed the lead of previous IOM and National Research
Council (NRC) reports regarding the question of how to protect confidentiality

and considered protecting access to the data per se, as well as protecting

individual subjects by manipulating the data after they have been collected.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
63Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.








˚





˚






"˘
























































˚











SOURCE: Excerpted from NRC,1997; pp. 8Œ9, Box ES.1.BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO

FEDERAL REGULATIONS
64Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protections based on controlling access to sensitive data include procedural
disciplines, such as making data available only under licensure agreements and

training personnel not to use methods such as fax or Internet transmission that are

not secure means of transferring data. Other ways of protecting data from

unauthorized access include technical means, such as installing software that

requires user authentication, and physical protections, such as guarding laptops
with sensitive data while traveling and storing sensitive data where it would be
safe from access (which may include storage outside the country for protection

from subpoena, although the committee did not ascertain the reliability of this

strategy).Previous reports from the National Academies have discussed technical
means of protecting data privacy and maintaining confidentiality. 
For the
Record (NRC, 1997); included a detailed list of technical and organizational
measures for immediate adoption (see pp. 8Œ9, Box ES.1) to enhance

confidentiality protection. The technical protections are shown in 
Box 3-2.The feasibility of these measures was demonstrated in a proof-of-concept
project at a large medical center (Halamka et al., 1997) by a team including a

member of the earlier NRC committee (Peter Szolovits, also a member of this

committee). The committee emphasizes that this report is not the place to

recommend a detailed data security program but suggests that IRBs consider the

protective measures already described and implement them if they have not done
so. The committee also emphasizes that increased protection comes at an
increased cost, which requires investment, generally in both equipment and

expertise, by the organizations conducting research.
Protections based on manipulating the form of the data after collection have
also received detailed examination in previous NRC reports. 
Private Lives and
Public Policies 
(NRC, 1993) addressed the confidentiality and accessibility of
government-held statistics generally and recommended confidentiality measures

including data-masking techniques such as topcoding (setting an upper limit on a

range of values [e.g., age 70 and over], so as to avoid reporting increasingly rare
outlying values in ranges where they would be isolatedŠsee 
Box 3-3 for other
examples). Many of these measures are also feasible for handling data in general,

not only government-held databases. As with any manipulation, however, each

technique has disadvantages as well as advantages, so the committee emphasizes

that it is important for the investigator to have flexibility in applying the

techniques best suited to the particular research question and dataset(s) of the

protocol.Again, the committee emphasizes that this study could not undertake
detailed presentation of data-masking techniques, but suggests that investigators

and IRBs consider the protective measures already described and implement them

where possible if they have not done so. Ideally, these technical and data-masking

safeguards for confidentiality would be implemented in the context of policies
and procedures adopted by the organization for all uses of personal health
information, including clinical care, business activities, or research. The chair of

the Private Lives and Public Policies 
committee (George Duncan, also
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
65Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of a member of this committee) noted that many government agencies including
the Bureau of the Census and the National Center for Health Statistics have

significant experience with the release of data with confidentiality protections and

should be consulted in future work.
This committee notes that it may also be helpful for investigators and IRBs
to have access to specific lists of potential direct identifiers for removal. Such

lists of procedures and specific identifiers may, however, never be exhaustive

and, as stated in the previous finding, a set of guaranteed conditions may not be

possible.*The committee found that some organizations provide IRBs and investigators
access to experts in information technology.
RAND has installed a three-person privacy team as part of its IRB. The team
includes an information resource specialist (who specializes in security measures

such as encryption and creating codes to substitute for identifying data), a data

librarian (who specializes in rules and practices for dealing with large datasets

acquired from other organizations), and a networks specialist (who specializes in

conditions and limitations of safe data transfer over the network). These

professionals help design and implement data-safeguarding plans commensurate

with the level of risk for various protocols. The committee concluded that in light

of rapid developments in information technology (IT), such access to expertise in

information technology is highly desirable.
Most IRBs do not, however, have the power or resources to implement data
security programs on their own, and their time must be devoted to reviewing

research proposals, protocols, and annual reports. What IRBs can do is reject

studies that do not have acceptable data security measures, while at the same time

working to understand the value of reductions in the incidence and severity of

security breaks relative to the cost of increased security precautions. The host
*As an example of a good beginning of a list for identifiers to be wary of, the committee
referred to 164.506(d)(2)(ii)(A) of the proposed rule (DHHS, 1999). The list includes
name; address; names of relatives or employers; birth date; telephone, fax number, or
email address; medical record; health plan beneficiary, account, certificate/license
number; vehicle or other device serial numbers; Web universal resource locator; Internet

protocol address number; voice or fingerprints; photographs; or any other unique
identifying number characteristic or code that the covered entity has reason to believe may
be available to an anticipated recipient of the information. The confidentiality of data that

were de-identified to this extent would be better protected, but as noted, the data might
still allow the probabilistic identification of persons by inference with other data sources.
The proposed rule accounts for this possibility with an additional condition stipulating that
if data are to be disclosed, then the covered entity must have no reason to believe that any
anticipated recipient of such information could use the information, alone or in

combination with other information, to identify an individual. As has been noted,
however, this condition may be impossible to satisfy.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
66Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.organization and research sites are usually the loci of data security programs.
These organizations determine their own level of investment in IT and levels of

affordable data security. The committee therefore concluded that IRBs should

obtain consulting services from data security experts to gain better understanding

of the expected yield in reduction of the likelihood of break-ins to a secured data

system produced by alternative security programs.
Recommendation 3-5. Institutions that carry out HSR and train health
services researchers should require that trainees, investigators, and IRB
members receive education, with updates as technology changes, regarding
the protection of privacy and confidentiality when using data previously
collected for another use.
Education is critical not only for IRB members, but also for researchers,
technicians, and any other employees who may come in contact with health

information. Better education about how to protect confidentiality and possible

sources of risk will help investigators design better confidentiality protection into

their proposed studies from the start. Better education of all employees who may

come in contact with the data will help raise the level of understanding and

alertness throughout the organization.
The committee found that organizations vary in how they educate IRB members
about research ethics and federal guidelines. The committee found that learning

on the job may be inadequate preparation for IRB members.
The committee heard at the workshop that some IRBs have apparently not
had the opportunity to gain experience with HSR and may ask for incongruous

changes. Some organizations provide training for IRB members in formal courses

or seminars, or by providing orientation materials (OPRR, 1993). Several

organizations send members to professional meetings and seminars, such as those

sponsored by the organization Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research

(PRIM&R). Certainly informal education from more experienced IRB members

and administrators provides continuing training during IRB meetings. As noted

earlier, the OIG has already observed that IRBs are facing greatly expanded

workloads, including new types of research, and do not always have access to
either the expert personnel or the training they would need in order to deal
effectively with some of this research. At the same time, IRBs often face serious

resource limitations, which in turn affect training.
The question of the OHRP's role in IRB member education was raised at the
workshop, not only disseminating regulations as the office currently does, but

also the possibility of OHRP's collecting and disseminating information about the

best practices of IRBs. Dr. Puglisi, representing OHRP, said that information and

guidance are posted on the OHRP website, and that the OHRP is actively

expanding its educational activities.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
67Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.˝ˇ˝



































˘





































ˇ
























BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
68Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
ˇ



































The committee found that some organizations require training of investigators in
research ethics and IRB procedure.
Many investigators in HSR are initially trained in a variety of disciplines,
including clinical medicine, pharmacy, epidemiology, and health administration,

but rarely specific programs in HSR. Training investigators as well as IRB

members may greatly enhance human subjects protection and speed the initiation

of good research. Educational activities must, however, be designed to target the

needs and time constraints of adult learners who are also busy researchers. In

particular, training should be tailored to the type of research methods that

researchers useŠthe ideal training for clinical trials investigators would not be

helpful for health services researchers. Several organizations require, or are

planning to require that investigators pass a course on human subjects protection
before their protocols can be reviewed. NIH already requires that intramural
investigators pass an on-line course on research ethics and regulations. The

committee believes such education should be encouraged and expanded, provided

that this is feasible for the already heavy schedule of most investigators. The

committee heard some promising ideas about how to provide this training, such

as on-line tutorials, but several members noted that there could be resistance at

some institutions to making any training a requirement, because of the heavy

workload that many investigators already carry.
In addition to formal courses, IRBs play an important role in educating
investigators through individual discussions regarding specific projects. IRB

administrators and chairs participating in the workshop reported that their

organizations function more effectively as collaborative educators than when

trying to function as enforcers and that collaboration also effectively reduces the

need for enforcement.Recommendation 3-6. Health care or other organizations that disclose or
use personally identifiable health information for any purpose including

research or other activities using HSR methods should have comprehensive
policies, procedures and other structures
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
69Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to protect the confidentiality of health information and should have in place
appropriate strong and enforceable sanctions against breaches of health
information confidentiality.
Access to specific expertise and enhanced general education are important,
but the committee also observed that the human element of the research

enterprise necessarily includes human potential for error and even malfeasance.

Therefore organizations should complement and support the proactive strategies

of expertise and education for better confidentiality protection with deterrents to

wrongdoing. Such sanctions ought to be graded according to the offense (e.g.,
whether the incident was a simple mistake or an intentional violation) and should
apply not only to researchers but to all employees of the organization.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB REVIEW OF HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL REGULATIONS
70Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Best Practices for IRB or Other Review
Board Oversight of Health Services
Research Not Necessarily Subject to Federal
RegulationsThis chapter presents the recommendations and findings of the committee
regarding the practices of organizations conducting research or quality

assessment or quality improvement activities that are not necessarily subject to

federal regulations. The committee collected information from health care

provider organizations (Intermountain Health Care and HealthPartners), a

pharmacy benefit management company (Express Scripts), and the epidemiology

section of a pharmaceutical company (Merck). The committee heard testimony at

a public workshop and collected materials and statements from these

organizations (Appendix A and Appendix B
).As in the previous chapter, the reader should note that the committee was
not able to conduct a comprehensive survey of private organizations that utilize

health information, much less to collect all their practices for maintaining

confidentiality. The recommendations and findings that follow are based on

information from various organizations, but neither the committee nor the

informants make any claim to be representative of the entire segment of the

industry. The committee presents these recommendations and findings in the

hope that they may be helpful to some organizations and may inform and

stimulate further work in this area. The committee believes that studies involving

human subjects should be reviewed similarly whether the study is subject to

Common Rule provisions or not. As a result, the committee has recommendations

in this chapter that are similar to those in the 
Chapter 3. The committee decided to
keep two separate chapters in part because the implications of the

recommendations might
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH

SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
71Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be different for different types of organizations, and also because the separate
structure seemed to reflect the committee's charge more clearly.
The committee was impressed with the commitment to privacy and
confidentiality that the representatives of several private companies presented at

the workshop. Companies appear to be at different stages of developing internal

privacy or confidentiality policies regarding HSR and should be encouraged to

continue to develop these organizational policies and procedures. The committee

believes this recommendation to be consistent with the spirit of proposed federal

regulations on privacy (DHHS, 1999). It is, however, outside the scope of this
project to make a detailed critique of those regulations.
RECOMMENDATIONSRecommendation 4-1. Researchers should have all HSR reviewed by an IRB
or other review board regardless of the source of support or whether the
research is subject to pertinent federal regulations.
Recommendation 4-2. IRBs and other boards that review HSR that is not
subject to federal regulation should assess their practices in comparison
with the best practices of IRBs working under pertinent federal regulations
and, when the latter offer improvements, adopt them. Alternatively, when
their own practices are superior though not subject to federal regulation,

they should share them with IRBs applying the Common Rule.
IRBs, or other suitable review bodies, offer a review of research projects by
knowledgeable persons not directly associated with the project. This independent

review protects subjects of research because independent reviewers may identify

concerns and suggest ways to minimize risks that were not apparent to

investigators. The committee heard several examples of protocols that were or
could have been substantially improved with respect to confidentiality by
relatively simple modifications. Research subjects, who undergo risks for the

benefit of science and society as a whole, should have the protections of such

independent review as a matter of ethical best practice, regardless of funding

source. There is little ethical justification for making a distinction between the

level of protection afforded subjects in federally funded projects and that given

subjects in projects funded by private sources if the risks to these subjects are

comparable; indeed, proprietary projects could have additional conflict-of-

interest pressures and thus might greatly benefit from outside review.
The committee found that some organizations and their IRBs apply the federal
regulations to all health services research, regardless of funding source even
though they are not legally required to do so.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH
SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
72Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee commends this consistent approach and notes that well-
designed review operations, procedures, and practices, some of which are

highlighted in the previous chapter, should allow the extension of IRB or other

review board oversight without creating significant additional burdens for

researchers or review boards. In addition, this would allow both researchers and

potential subjects to benefit from a review that is independent of the study staff,
for instance, by identifying potential investigatorŒsubject communication
problems early on.
The committee believes that the best practices identified in the previous
chapter are feasible to implement in electronic data systems, provided that the

institution has the resources to do so and that implementing them can

substantially increase confidentiality. In general, the techniques mentioned are

ﬁpracticesﬂ precisely because they are already in use at some institution (see also

Halamka et al., 1997). These practices include using codes, rather than identifiers

such as Social Security numbers or names, to locate a record and a variety of
measures to reduce the likelihood that individuals can be identified by inference.
In particular, the committee recommends the following observations from
the previous chapter to institutions that do HSR and similar work that is not

subject to federal regulations.
As in Recommendation 3-2, IRBs or other review boards should develop
lists of principles, policies, and best practices on protecting privacy and

confidentiality in HSR for use by investigators. Because the identifiability of data

in HSR is a continuum, so that absolute guarantees of confidentiality are

impossible, it is critical to take all reasonable steps that can synergistically

enhance confidentiality, such as the areas of consideration listed in 
Box 3-2 and
Box 3-3.As noted in Recommendation 3-3, the committee suggests that the
development and on-line posting of applications and review forms specifically

designed for HSR would improve the quality of review of HSR projects. IRBs

and other review boards in any setting should be educated about the differences

between HSR and clinical research, and any forms developed should reflect these

differences.As mentioned in Recommendation 3-4, IRBs or other review boards should
have available expertise (either on the committee or through consultants) to

evaluate the risks to confidentiality and security in HSR, including the risks of

identification of individuals and the physical security of data. The committee

urges review boards and investigators in any setting to consult information

technology experts about protecting confidentiality in their specific situations. It

is not the intent of, nor would it be possible for, this committee or this report to
provide an adequate basis for a data security program.
Also, as stated in Recommendation 3-5, organizations should require that
researchers and other employees who come in contact with confidential health

information receive education in the handling of this information to maintain

confidentiality.
The committee concluded that principal investigators intending to involve
human subjects in research or for other types of investigations should not be in
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH
SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
73Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the position of exempting themselves; rather, the protocol should receive at least

some outside review. Such a check by knowledgeable, independent individuals

will facilitate consistently high standards of treatment for all confidential health

information in research and for all subjects whose data are so used.
Recommendation 4-3. Health care organizations that conduct projects

applying the methods of HSR to personally identifiable health information

for purposes such as QA or QI, disease management, and core business

functions as well as for research should have comprehensive policies,

procedures, and other structures to protect privacy when personal health

information is used for research or other purposes.
Intermountain Health Care, a large, integrated health care organization,
reported that most violations of confidentiality occurred outside the research

arena, in areas such as clinical care and business activities. This distribution is

not surprising, because most uses of personal health information are in these

nonresearch areas. From the viewpoint of the patient, it does not matter whether a

violation of confidentiality occurs in a research project or other activity because

the risks of being harmed or wronged may be the same. Publicity about violations

or alleged violations of confidentiality undermines public confidence in both

health care operations and research.
The committee found that companies that purchase, deliver, and/or reimburse

health care services could likely engage in many activities that analyze personal

health information using the same techniques as HSR, which fall into the ﬁgray

zoneﬂ between research and nonresearch described in the workshop summary

(see Figure 3 in Appendix B).As detailed in the earlier report 
For the Record (NRC, 1997, see especially,
pp. 66Œ68, Table 3.3), health care organizations use personal health information

for clinical care, billing, payment, quality improvement, and business planning.

The need to make personal health information accessible for these purposes must

be balanced with the need to respect the confidentiality of such information.
The committee found that some organizations have developed comprehensive

policies and procedures regarding the confidentiality of personal health

information that are best practices. These comprehensive policies apply to

research as well as to other activities making use of personally identifiable

data.A comprehensive program has several facets: organizational components
such as a privacy board that recommends and implements policies; procedural

components including an active training and enforcement program for all

employees, technical components such as the use of audit trails to detect

unauthorizedBEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH

SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
74Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.uses of personal health information; and a suitable board to review research
projects. Comprehensive organizational privacy policies and procedures apply to

researchers as well as clinicians and administrative staff. A review board can be

more certain that confidentiality is protected in research if the organization has a

strong, comprehensive policy.
The committee heard that Intermountain Health Care (IHC) has an
Information Security Committee that may be similar to the privacy boards

described in the proposed rule. The IHC Information Security Committee (IISC)

is constituted similarly to an IRB, including community members, as well as line

administrators, researchers, and computer specialists. The IISC works closely

with the IRB on activities on the HSR side of the continuum. The IISC is also

responsible for determining whether projects from the ambiguous area in the
middle of the health care operations/research spectrum should proceed to seek
IRB review. Finally, the IISC generates and recommends data security policies to

the Board of Trustees of the company and then helps implement these policies

and procedures throughout the organization, thus enhancing confidentiality

protections at the operations end of the continuum.
Recommendation 4-4. Health care or other organizations that disclose or
use personally identifiable health information for any purpose including QA
or QI, disease management, and core business functions as well as for
research should have in place appropriate, strong, and enforceable
sanctions against breaches of the confidentiality of health information.
Committee members agreed that previous experience provides ample
evidence that, although most investigators and staff are upstanding, there will

always be a few who are subject to the temptation to misuse access to

confidential information. In fact, the committee felt that this aspect of human

subjects protection may have been neglected and therefore recommends

consideration of deterrent policies for organizations working with IRBs under the

Common Rule and for the organizations considered here. Such individuals and,

even more, the subjects of any research projects that they may come in contact

with, would benefit from a credible threat of sanctions for improper use or

inspection of confidential information. Such sanctions ought to be graded

according to the offense, (e.g., whether the incident was a simple mistake or an
intentional violation) and should apply not only to researchers but to all
employees of the organization. Just as in organizations that have IRBs, it is

important that the proactive approaches of expertise and education toward proper

handling of confidential information also be complemented and supported with

sanctions against mishandling information.
The committee heard at the workshop that at the personnel level, all IHC
employees must sign a confidentiality agreement, which must be renewed every

two years, and then comply with a ﬁneed-to-knowﬂ policy limiting who has

access to which data. The company also tracks data access with automatic

electronicBEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH
SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
75Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.







˚











































SOURCE: NRC, 1997. Page 9, Box ES.1.
logs and has designed the electronic records system to ensure that
identifiable portions are accessible only to designated employees. IHC terminates

employment because of privacy infractions.
Many of the provisions in Recommendations 4-3 and 4-4 are consistent with
the recommendations regarding organizational practices discussed in 
For the
Record (NRC, 1997) and quoted in 
Box 4-1. As noted in 
Chapter 3
, thecommittee emphasizes that a complete analysis of organizational structures and
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH
SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
76Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.processes to enhance the maintenance of confidentiality is beyond the scope of
this project but recommends that organizations consider these practices and

implement them as appropriate, if they have not already done so.
The committee encourages health care organizations to adopt provisions that
are practicable in their circumstances. Comprehensive policies for all uses of

personal health information will avoid issues of how to oversee activities that are

in the gray zone between research and QA or QI. If a comprehensive policy is in

place, a QA or QI project will have strong confidentiality safeguards that make

the risk to patients minimal.
BEST PRACTICES FOR IRB OR OTHER REVIEW BOARD OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH
SERVICES RESEARCH NOT NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS
77Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Recommendations for Next Steps
ﬁThe end of this study will not be the end of studying [the issue of privacy
and confidentiality in health services research],ﬂ said Dr. Michael Fitzmaurice of
the Department of Health and Human Services' (DHHS') Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ), one of the agencies sponsoring this study, during

the committee's workshop. The committee endeavored to stay strictly within the

focused charge for the project. In the course of the study, however, the committee

identified many important issues in addition to institutional review board (IRB)

practices that should be addressed if subjects of health services research (HSR)

are to be protected adequately. Throughout this report the committee has tried to

refer inclusively to IRBs and/or other review boards (unless circumstances

specified only IRBs). The term ﬁIRBﬂ has regulatory implications of the

extension of federal oversight in a new area. The term ﬁprivacy boardﬂ has been

used in a rule that, as this report was being written, had been proposed but not

finalized and may mean different things to different people.
The committee has also tried to emphasize that any HSR should be reviewed
according to the ethical principles reflected in the federal regulations and further

that the reviewers should be knowledgeable about HSR and privacy protection
and should be independent of the research group. Although not all HSR is in fact
subject to federal regulations, the committee concluded that the review of HSR

ought to follow the principles of these regulations.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS78
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONSRecommendation 5-1. Institutions whose IRBs or other review boards
review HSR should ensure adequate administrative support and funding
for review bodies and should incorporate improving review operations into
overall institutional strategic planning, and organizations that sponsor HSR
should also support designating adequate funds for such review.
The committee corroborated previous reports that questioned whether IRBs
have the resources to carry out their mission. The committee noted especially the

April 2000 update report of the DHHS Office of the Inspector General, (OIG).

This report, 
Protecting Human Research Subjects: Status of Recommendations
,concluded that the resource problems identified in the OIG's 1998 report,

Institutional Review Boards: A Time for Reform
, still exist. The committee heard
that many IRBs already have a heavy workload of proposals for review and that

most members serve in a voluntary capacity. Additional resources will be

required to implement the best practices described in 
Chapter 3 and Chapter 4.The committee found that IRBs (or any other review boards) need adequate
funding specifically to review HSR.
As just mentioned, previous reports have documented the need for adequate
funding of IRBs. The committee heard corroborating evidence that resources
continue to be a problem for IRBs. A recent committee at the University of

California at San Francisco, an institution conducting a great deal of research

involving human subjects, recommended that high priority be given to adequate

IRB staff support, increased use of computerized information systems, and

increased funding for training investigators about IRB function (see also

Appendix B
).In addition to adequate resources for staff and committee members, IRBs or
other review boards need additional funding for new activities that could make
their work more effective and efficient. With regard to HSR, for example, review
committees need access to more expertise in information technology, such as how

investigators can reduce the likelihood that subjects will be identified through the

use of coding and encryption and through defining variables in ways that

eliminate data cells having a small number of subjects with an unusual set of

characteristics. Furthermore, human subjects protection programs will require

additional resources to put into place the kinds of computer decision support

systems that would enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of reviews of HSR

studies and better ensure that these studies have in place appropriate safeguards

for confidentiality.
The committee also heard a number of proposals for how to provide the
resources that human subjects protection committees would need to carry out
their missions adequately. Dr. James Kahn, IRB chair at the University of
California in San Francisco, proposed that IRB review be added as a line item in

grants,RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS79
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.doubting that sufficient overhead funds would be directed to IRB support at a
large university that has many other competing uses of overhead funds (this

proposal is very similar to that suggested in the 1998b and 2000 OIG reports).

Some committee members argued that support of the IRB, manifestly a necessary

overhead cost of supporting a human subjects research program, is a particularly

appropriate use of overhead funds. In fact, Dr. Kahn reported that UCSF had
commissioned an ad hoc committee to review the UCSF IRB's function. The ad
hoc committee was asked to consider the composition, procedures, and support of

the IRB and whether it could be of better service to the university. The committee

returned a list of recommendations, including several suggestions about

increasing the use of electronic information systems, as well as increased training

for researchers to address both research responsibilities and institutional

procedures, and increasing staff support for the human subjects protection

program. In addition, Dr. Kahn specifically suggested designating 1 to 1.5

percent of each grant using human subjects to be earmarked as funding for the

human subjects protection program. Independent IRBs, of course, charge

investigators or institutions a set fee to review protocols.
Determining the resource needs of IRBs and analyzing how to provide the
necessary support in different organizational contexts, although far beyond the

scope of this report, are important issues that must be addressed. Groups such as

the American Association of Medical Colleges (AAMC), Public Responsibility in

Medicine and Research (PRIM&R), and Applied Research Ethics National

Association (ARENA) can play key roles in addressing these issues. Particular

attention has to be given to how to support innovative uses of computer
technology that would make IRB review less burdensome and help train
investigators in research ethics and IRB requirements.
Recommendation 5-2. The DHHS and other federal departments and
private organizations such as the Association of American Medical Colleges
(AAMC), the Association for Health Services Research (AHSR, but now
known as the Academy for Health Services Research and Health Policy),
the American College of Epidemiology (ACE), the International Society for
Pharmacoepidemiology (ISPE), Public Responsibility in Medicine and
Research (PRIM&R), the Applied Research Ethics National Association

(ARENA), and others should continue or expand educational efforts
regarding the protection of the confidentiality of personally identifiable
health information in research.
While these recommendations highlight DHHS as the sponsor of this study
and a major sponsor of relevant research, the recommendations should be applied

by other Common Rule signatory departments and agencies as well. The

committee believes that the approach of identifying best practices for IRB

oversight of HSR is a fruitful one that should be further developed.
Recommendations of best practices will provide more specific guidance to
investigators andRECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS80
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IRB members than is currently available. This approach draws its strength from
the commitment of both IRB members and administrators and of researchers to

protecting the rights and welfare of the subjects of HSR. Both IRBs and scientists

have developed useful practices that, if more widely adopted, could lead to

improved protection of confidentiality and privacy, without creating undue

burdens. Private organizations can play a crucial role in developing and
publicizing best practices. Professional societies such as AHSR, ACE, and ISPE
are composed of investigators who carry out studies analyzing large databases of

data previously collected for other uses. AAMC represents medical schools that

train researchers and carry out a great deal of HSR. PRIM&R and ARENA

members review HSR studies and help educate investigators about the protection

of human subjects. All of these organizations can help identify and disseminate

best practices for the protections of privacy and confidentiality in HSR.

Ultimately, such best practices for data security or confidentiality protection

should be developed for each of the other specific types of data collection

methods used in HSR including, but not limited to, focus groups, mail surveys,

telephone surveys, personal interviews, home visits, interactive data collection

via the Web, and remote sensing, as well as secondary analysis of health data that
have already been collected for some other purpose.
The committee found enthusiasm and openness to new ideas on the part of the
IRBs and investigators who participated.
The committee was impressed that in the spirit of scientific collaboration and
competition, many health services researchers, IRB members, and IRB

administrators were receptive to good ideas and wanted to excel in how they

protect confidentiality in HSR. As with any other aspect of research, there is a

great deal to be gained when people from different institutions exchange ideas

and experiences. These stakeholders recognize that public confidence that

personally identifiable health information will be used appropriately is crucial to

the continued ability to carry out important HSR projects in a timely fashion. The

committee found that these stakeholders were dedicated to resolving the tension

between confidentiality and access to personally identifiable health information
for HSR in an ethically acceptable manner.
The committee observed that the general willingness of IRB administrators,
chairs, investigators, and organizations whose research is not subject to federal

regulations to participate in its workshop and to consider and try ideas that had

been developed at other institutions indicates that the distribution of information

on best practices would likely be well received. Such recommendations should be

transmitted to investigators and IRBs through the Internet, as well as through

presentations at professional society meetings and workshops, and in training
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS81
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.grants and awards, program grants, and center grants.
1 This committee, because
of the time frame, could take only the first steps in identifying best practices for

IRB review of HSR. Further efforts, including more systematic input from IRBs

and health services researchers, could lead to more specific and comprehensive

suggestions for institutions and investigators to adopt.
The difficulty in the dissemination of information about best practices
identified through this approach may be in locating a central venue and keeping it

up to date. The DHHS can promote interactions among scientists and IRBs that

will lead to wider dissemination of good ideas regarding the oversight of HSR

and protection of the subjects of HSR. Through its roles in funding HSR,

supporting training programs in HSR, and overseeing human subjects protection,

the DHHS can have great impact on strengthening IRB review of HSR while
allowing valuable research to proceed. In the long run, greater public confidence
that personally identifiable health information is adequately safeguarded will

promote more support for HSR and perhaps avoid the restrictive legislation and

regulation that some European nations have adopted (see for example

Appendix D
).The committee found that identifying best practices is a promising approach to
strengthen the protection of HSR, while allowing valuable studies to proceed in a
timely and practical manner.
The committee found that the federal regulations and the interpretations and
guidance issued by OHRP do not provide sufficiently specific guidance for many

issues regarding HSR. As discussed earlier in this report, IRBs and investigators

admit that they struggle with such difficult concepts as identifiable information

and the definition of HSR. Bringing together people who grapple with these

issues is likely to lead to greater agreement and clarity.
Based on these findings, the committee believes that DHHS should convene
meetings that will facilitate these exchanges of ideas and identify feasible best

practices that institutions might choose to adopt more widely. The meetings

should include health services researchers, IRB members and administrators,

leaders of institutions that carry out HSR, experts in information technology,

experts in ethics and law, and public representatives. Such interdisciplinary

expertise will be needed to resolve the complex problems regarding the protection
of subjects of HSR. The working group should draw on the expertise of
organizations that are required to handle sensitive computerized personal

information in a confidential manner. Such organizations would include

commercial firms transacting business over the Internet as well as government

agencies such as the Bureau of the Census and the National Center for Health

Statistics. Although the committee was unable to consult with these organizations

because of time constraints,
1Informal communication already flourishes through the Medical College of Wisconsin
IRB (MCWIRB) list serve (see 
www.mcwirb.org
) and should be encouraged and enhanced
however possible.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS82
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.it recognizes that such expertise would be extremely useful to health services
researchers.In addition, the committee identified from material presented at the
workshop several topics that require additional discussion. These include how to

contact persons identified through secondary data analysis using large databases

for more intensive interviews in those instances where it is possible and necessary

to identify and contact subjects (often neither is true of HSR); how to review

multisite HSR projects, particularly those carried out in small health care

organizations that do not have IRBs; and how to ensure that HSR projects
involving children take into account the changing needs, vulnerabilities, and
capacities of children as they mature (see, for example, 
Appendix C).Recommendation 5-3. Organizations that furnish health services
researchers with personally identifiable health information should ensure
that the data are prepared in a manner that protects confidentiality
adequately.The committee heard several instances reported at the workshop where HSR
investigators requested de-identified data from federal agencies but received
data that had not been de-identified because the agency in question lacked the
resources to do so.
As large holders of personally identifiable data, the situation of federal
agencies having to choose between providing data that have not been

deidentified, or simply refusing to provide data for research at all, is worrisome.

Organizations holding health data should develop and/or implement lists of

points to consider in reviewing data requests with respect to protecting privacy

and confidentiality in HSR.
Similarly, either such holders of information should require that the health
services researcher submit evidence that the proposed research has undergone IRB

review, or the data holder should review the study through its own independent

review process.Committee members observed further that if data suppliers possessed more
highly developed data warehouses so that investigators could always go back to

the source to pick up forgotten variable(s), health services researchers would be

more likely to ask for only those variables they really believe they will need.

When data requests are limited to a one-time, take-what-you-need process,

investigators are prone to ask for much more than they expect to need just in case

they might be forgetting something.
Recommendation 5-4. The funders of HSR should be willing to cover the
cost of preparing personally identifiable health information that is collected

in clinical care, billing, or payment so that confidentiality can be adequately
protected in HSR.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS83
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee found that health services researchers and other data handlers
need sufficient funding to protect adequately the confidentiality of personally
identifiable health information.
The committee heard examples of how health services researchers lacked the
resources to adopt computer-based measures that would strengthen confidentiality

in important HSR. For example, a health services researcher at a leading

academic hospital reported that she was finding it increasingly difficult to obtain

consultation from their excellent medical informatics group because these experts

were over-committed to other projects.
The committee concluded that adequate resources to consult with and pay
for the services of computer experts will be essential if confidentiality is to be

adequately protected in HSR. In most cases, funders of HSR will have to allow

such computer consultation and services as line items in grants. The need for such

support should be accepted as an integral cost of high-quality HSR.
Recommendation 5-5. The DHHS should continue and expand efforts to
encourage holders of personally identifiable health information to make this
information available to researchers as public use files after suitable
application of techniques to minimize the risks of identifiability.
If an organization holding health data has made a dataset publicly available
without restriction, as is done with the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS),

then projects using only such data can be considered minimal risk and eligible for
exemption per 45 CFR 46.101(b)(5). In order to promote HSR, data-holding
organizations should consider making as much data available in the public

domain as is safely possible. The committee notes that the Interagency

Confidentiality and Data Access Group has developed a checklist for use in

considering whether data may be released, which helps holders of data develop

such public use files.
2 This group is affiliated with the Federal Committee on
Statistical Methodology, an interagency committee first convened in 1975 and

dedicated to improving the quality of Federal statistics.
Recommendation 5-6. The AHRQ should consider supporting a feasibility
study on developing procedures for facilitating linkage of separate data files
containing sensitive data from different sources to create analytical files

such that it would be possible for researchers to create linkages that are
reliable and informative, and at the same time, to protect the confidentiality
of the original data disclosure through de-identification and other
protective measures so as to save
2Confidentiality and Data Access Committee, Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology. Checklist on Disclosure Potential of Proposed Data Releases (July 1999):
http://www.fcsm.gov/spwptbco.html
.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS84
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the subject from being placed at risk of harm or wrong through improper
re-identification.Much of the value of retrospective, database-oriented research comes from
the ability to draw inferences from data derived from different sources. The

committee urges interested parties including DHHS agencies to encourage

research on linkage and anonymization with a view toward two goals: first, to

create linkages that are reliable and informative, and second, to approach as

closely as possible the goal of anonymized data.
The ability to link records to one another may be very important, though
that does not mean that the data need to be linked to the identity of the

individual. Health care organizations may have to identify episodes of illness in a

patient, which may be found in records of emergency room visits, ambulance

services, hospital stays, operative records, bills from independent medical

providers, rehabilitation services, pharmacies and pharmacy benefit managers,

and so forth. To recognize that the data drawn from these various sources refer to

the same individual, it is important that researchers be able to identify the same

patient in each set of records. This identification allows joining of these various

datasets into a single (logical) database that contains all relevant data about the
patient. Such identification and joining is often difficult and is one of the
motivations for keeping names or other direct identifiers in the records. The true

identity of any given individual is not really necessary to merge databases; all

that is required is some unique identifier, such as a code, which could be difficult

to re-associate with the actual patient. Ideally, then, the various sources of data

would have their records indexed by the same set of identifiers, but ones that are

not easily re-associated with the actual patient's identity.
There are several possible ways to address this problem. One suggestion
exploits developing cryptographic and authentication technology to create health

information identification systems (as explored in a pilot study of Kohane et al.,

1998, described in greater detail in 
Box 5-1). Such a system would have the
advantage of allowing different databases to be linked through an identifier that

could be certified as associating records about the same individual but would be

difficult for any user to decode. As different projects were designed, the

investigators could specify different types of health identifiers to maximize

values in various dimensions including the extent to which the identifying code

could be used in other projects and the degree of security surrounding it. Since

the program designed by Kohane and colleagues generates identification systems
(not a particular identification code), the resulting flexibility and complexity of
the identifiers would be much less vulnerable to decoding than a single certified

identifier such as a Social Security number, while still allowing database linkage.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS85
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.


&


%

&










˚














˝
!-%
!1%

˚

!,%

!0%˚




"#$˝

















˚


˚
˚





˚"

˚
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS86
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.



˙





&˚


"#$

"#$

















SOURCE: Kohane, Isaac S.; Dong, Hongmei; and Szolovits, Peter. Health
Information Identification and De-Identification Toolkit. 
Proceedings of the
American Medical Informatics Association 
Symposium 1998: 356Œ360.
Another type of linkage system would depend on trusted third parties to be
responsible for linking the separate data files. These entities could hold the keys

linking individuals to the data. After merging datasets, this entity would then strip

off the identifiers, check that identification cannot be (reasonably) inferred
3, andtake any needed steps to protect the data. This approach has the advantage of

being simpler to implement, specifically because it requires that many fewer

organizations and individuals develop high degrees of technical competence and

organizational commitment to use standard procedures. The disadvantages are

related to the centralization of the linkage operation.
The committee notes that the question of how precisely to perform the data
file linkage in any particular case is not straightforward but varies depending on

the characteristics of the specific research question and data used. At the same

time, such merges can be technically complex, so access to a central, highly
3The committee recognizes that the question of how difficult identifiability by inference
must be in order to make data safe for release will continue to be a matter of debate and
notes that the standard should be expected to change as technology changes.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS87
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.skilled facility to perform them could improve the overall efficiency of the
research enterprise. There is, however, an additional theoretical risk that such

trusted entities, because they are known to hold large amounts of personally

identifiable health information, may be the target of intruders. Thus there is a

need to test the feasibility of this approach, regarding both the capability of a

central facility to be flexible with the technical needs of different types of
projects and the safety of a central merging facility.
Recommendation 5-7. DHHS (AHRQ and/or NIH) and other federal
departments or agencies should consider developing and supporting a
research agenda concerning IRB protection of subjects from nonphysical
harms such as risks to privacy and confidentiality in human subjects
research (including cultural meanings of privacy and confidentiality).
Such a research agenda would likely include current IRB practice, as well as
new procedures and policies to provide better human subjects protection, and also

would include monitoring of IRB practices. A systematic study of non-physical

risk assessment was beyond the charge given to this committee, and the

committee would in any case have found itself unable to accomplish it due to

limitations of time and in respect of the Office of Management and Budget

(OMB) rules on extensive surveys. The committee found, however, that such

information would be of great use both as a baseline and, if updated periodically,

as a basis of continuous policy evaluation. The findings would be of use to IRBs,
researchers, regulators, and any other parties interested in privacy and
confidentiality.
Recommendation 5-8. The OHRP should review the possibility of proposing
a change to the regulations with respect to HSR to replace the terms
ﬁexemptﬂ and ﬁexpediteﬂ with ﬁadministrative review.ﬂ
The committee is recommending this review only with respect to HSRŠthe
committee did not investigate possible consequences for other types of research

that might be affected if the change were applied to all research on human

subjects. The committee heard several reports that well-intentioned and

conscientious researchers may judge a study to be exempt from review under the

current regulatory language and therefore never bring it to the attention of a

review board. Since the committee has concluded that all HSR should receive

some review by a board that is independent of the research project, the committee

suggests that this possibly misleading terminology be avoided. The committee

recognizes, however, that a change to the Common Rule involves coordination

among many agencies and may therefore be difficult to achieve. The committee
further recognizes that others may have other suggestions for a new term. The
committee's goal in this matter was to offer a term that recognized
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS88
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that some studies do not need full IRB review but did not seem to suggest that the
investigator should decide what level of IRB review is needed.
Recommendation 5-9. Health services researchers, and institutions that
participate in and benefit from HSR, should voluntarily adopt best
practices for IRB review of HSR.
The committee found that some policies intended to strengthen confidentiality
and privacy may have serious adverse consequences for HSR.
The committee found that some nations have adopted laws or regulations
that allow individuals to exclude their personally identifiable health information

from databases, that require written consent from patients for use of health

records for research, and that require the anonymization of data for any secondary

data analysis. Such measures were enacted to protect the confidentiality of

computerized personally identifiable health information (see 
Appendix D).The committee learned, however, that some measures intended to promote
privacy and confidentiality may have serious adverse consequences for HSR

(AAMC, 2000; AHSR, 2000). A requirement of individual informed consent

would render impossible valuable HSR, notably projects using HMO, insurer, or

Medicare and Medicaid databases. Furthermore, population-based studies would

be biased if people could exclude themselves from research. Even if studies were

possible, their results could be misleading because persons who agree to HSR

may be different in important and unpredictable ways from persons who refuse to

participate. In addition, a requirement that all secondary data analyses use only

anonymized data would make it impossible to conduct valuable HSR that

requires follow-up of a cohort or the linking of data from different datasets.

Thus, some measures intended to strengthen privacy and confidentiality may lead
to invalid studies and be a poor basis for public policy decisions.
If patients and members of the public in general do not find that they can
trust that confidential information will be protected throughout research, they may

seek further measures to protect confidentiality. Some such measures could be

detrimental to HSR. The committee therefore urges investigators, data users and

data holders and publishers to voluntarily adopt and continually upgrade the best

practices of IRBs and other review boards in ensuring the protection of data

privacy and confidentiality in HSR.
Recommendation 5-10. All stakeholders in HSR should support strategies to
improve the protection of privacy and confidentiality without impeding

research.The committee found it necessary to encourage further study beyond the
scope of its charge. Although there was not time in this project to explore wider-

ranging ideas, the committee suggests several as potential starting points in a
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS89
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.multifaceted strategy to improve the awareness of privacy issues and improve
confidentiality protection practices:
  DHHS could sponsor a conference to include health services researchers,
journal editors and editorial boards to discuss inclusion of privacy protection

methods in journal articles and requiring evidence of IRB review as a

condition for publication, and HSR-related journals and health care

management journals could sponsor special issues devoted to health data

privacy and confidentiality and could refuse to publish results from studies

that had not received IRB review.
  DHHS should investigate revising the Public Health Service grant application
guidelines to incorporate a formal section on data privacy or confidentiality

protection in the human subjects section of the application.
  DHHS could include data privacy experts on scientific peer review panels
that are charged with the review of HSR proposals.
  Funders of HSR, including DHHS, HMOs, and private companies and
foundations (perhaps working through a professional organization such as

the AHSR), should consider issuing a special research solicitation on data

protection methods, to include research on methods of attacking security

protections.  PRIMR and organizations supporting HSR could sponsor a conference on the
equitable selection of subjects for research. Certain populations may be

over-solicited as subjects of current HSR projects, because of availablity of

suitable databases, federal requirements to have minorities adequately

represented, or policy interest in certain topics, such as the impact of poor

access to health care. Questions for consideration could include whether

participation in many studies may increase the risk that confidentiality will

be breached and harms or wrongs occur as a result, and, whether there may

be a risk of stigma if a group is overrepresented in current research, even if
individual subjects who are members of the groups are at minimal risk for
having their individual confidentiality violated.
  Universities and colleges should conduct special one-week courses in data
security for students majoring in HSR and related fields.
  Organizations with special interest in data privacy and good-quality HSR
should consider sponsoring a prize competition, perhaps annually, for the

best privacy and confidentiality practices by a health care organization. This

might be akin to the Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award, which has

had such an impact on quality assurance in industry. Given the importance

currently being placed on privacy and the attendant competitive value that an

organization may see in winning such an award, there may well be sufficient

incentives for organizations to put forth their best ideas and document them

in a way that is understandable. Such a prize competition could be seen as a

positive side of such awards as the Annual UK ﬁBig Brotherﬂ Awards, which

highlight egregious
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS90
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.breeches of privacy,
4 but would really be more like the Malcolm Baldridge
award in spirit, with health data privacy protection as the focus.
The methods of HSR, applied to data previously collected for other
purposes, have been useful in discovering and demonstrating systemic effects and

population-level trends in the organization and delivery of health services. It is

important that we, as a society, continue to have access to such research in order

to inform policy making in both private and governmental arenas. At the same

time, it is important that we, as a society, protect the privacy of individuals and of

vulnerable groups, and the confidentiality of information that patients share with

health care providers. As a result of the present study, the committee has
concluded that it is possible both to carry out valuable HSR and to protect
confidentiality. However, to do so will require adequate funding. Resources are

needed to support dedicated, trained IRB members and staff, to establish

organizational confidentiality policies and electronic security practices, to educate

researchers, and to provide statistical and computer expertise. The true test of our

commitment to the twin values of advancing useful knowledge and protecting

confidentiality is whether we are willing to make the needed investments to

achieve both goals.
4For the Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award, see 
http://www.quality.nist.gov.For the Big Brother Awards, see 
http://www.bigbrotherawards.org/. Note that the
organization also recognizes achievements in privacy protection, but generally within the
United Kingdom.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS91
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEXT STEPS92
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferencesAmdur, Robert, Speers, Marjorie A., and Bankert, Elizabeth. IRB Triage of Projects that Involve
Medical Record Review. In press.
Applebaum, Paul S. Threats to the Confidentiality of Medical RecordsŠNo Place to Hide. JAMA.
2000 Feb 9; 283(6):795Œ796.
Association of American Medical Colleges. AAMC Comments on The Recommendations of the
Secretary of Health and Human Services on the ﬁConfidentiality of Individually Identifiable
Health Information.ﬂ AAMC Testimony Presented to the Senate Labor and Human
Resources Committee. 1997 Nov 10.
Association for Health Services Research. Definitions of Health Services Research. 2000.
James Bell Associates. Review DraftŠFinal Report Evaluation of NIH Implementation of Section
491 of the Public Health Service Act, Mandating a Program of Protection of Research
Subjects (NO1-OD-2-2109). 1998 May 19.
Belmont 1979. The Belmont Report. Office of the Secretary. Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the
Protection of Human Subjects of Research. The National Commission for the Protection of

Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. 1979 April.
Bradburn, Norman M. PopulationŠBased Survey Research. Presentation Done at National Bioethics
Advisory Commission. 2000 Apr 6.
Brainard, Jeffrey. An Inside Look at How a University Tries to Protect Human Subjects. The
Chronicle of Higher Education. 2000 Mar 17: A31.
Brooks, John M.; Doucette, William, and Sorofman, Bernard. Factors Affecting Bargaining
Outcomes Between Pharmacies and Insurers. Health Service Research Selected Papers From

The Association for Health Services Research Annual Meeting, June 21Œ23, 1998. 1999

Apr; 34(1 Part II):439Œ451.
Brown, June Gibbs, Inspector General. Institutional Review Boards: The Emergence of Independent
Boards. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General. 1998a Jun.
REFERENCES93Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Brown, June Gibbs, Inspector General. Institutional Review Boards: A Time for Reform. Department
of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General. 1998b Jun.
Brown, June Gibbs, Inspector General. Protecting Human Research Subjects: Status of
Recommendations. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General.

April 2000.
Buckovich, Suzy A., Rippen, Helga E., and Rozen, Michael J. Driving Toward Guiding Principles: A
Goal for Privacy, Confidentiality, and Security of Health Information. Journal of American

Medical Informatics Association. 1999 MarŒ1999 Apr 30; 6(2):123Œ133.
California Health Care Foundation. Americans Worry About the Privacy of Their Computerized
Medical Reports. California Health Care Foundation: CommunicationŠPress Releases.

1999 Jan 28.
Casarett, David; Karlawish Jason H.T., and Sugarman, Jeremy. Determining When Quality
Improvement Intiatives Should Be Considered Research: Proposed Criteria and Potential

Implications. JAMA. 2000 May 3; 283(17):2275Œ2280.
Chen, J.; Marciniak, T. A.; Radford, M. J.; Wang, Y., and Krumholz, H. M. Beta-blocker therapy for
secondary prevention of myocardial infarction in elderly diabetic patients. Results from the

National Cooperative Cardiovascular Project. Journal of the American College of

Cardiology. 1999 Nov 1; 34(5):1388Œ1394.
Clancy, Carolyn M. and Eisenberg, John M. Outcomes Research; Measuring the End Results of
Health Care. Science (Reprint Series). 1998 Oct 9; 282.
Cromwell, David M.; Bass, Eric B.; Steinberg, Earl P.; Yasui, Yutaka; Ravich, William J.; Hendrix,
Thomas R.; McLeod, Susan F., and Moore, Richard D. Can Restrictions on Reimbursement

for Anti-Ulcer Drugs Decrease Medicaid Pharmacy Costs Without Increasing

Hospitalizations? Health Services Research; 33(6):1593Œ1610, 1999.
DHHS (Department of Health and Human Services), and Office of the Secretary. Standards for
Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information; Proposed Rule. Federal Register.

1999 Nov 3; 64(212):59918.
Edgar, Harold and Rothman, David J. The Institutional Review Board and Beyond: Future Challenges
to the Ethics of Human Experimentation. The Milbank Quarterly. 1995; 73(4):489Œ506.
Eisenberg, John M. Health Services Research In A Market-Oriented Health Care System. Health
Affairs Media & Managed Care. 1998 JanŒ1998 Feb 28; 17(1).
Etzioni, Amitai. Medical Records: Enhancing Privacy, Preserving the Common Good. Hastings
Center Report. 1999 MarŒ1999 Apr 30: 14Œ23.
General Accounting Office. Medical Records Privacy Access Needed for Health Research, but
Oversight of Privacy Protections Is Limited. GAOŠReport to Congressional Requesters.

1999 Feb., GAO/HEHS-99-55.
General Accounting Office. Scientific Research: Continued Vigilance Critical to protecting Human
Subjects. GAOŠReport to Ranking Minority Member. 1996 Mar., GAO/HEHS-96-72.
GHPP (Health Privacy Working Group). Best Principles for Health Privacy. Health Privacy Project;
Institute for Health Care Research and Policy, Georgetown University. 1999. Available

online at 
http://www.healthprivacy.org/latest/Best_Principles_Report.pdf
.Goldman, Janlori, and Hudson, Zoe. A Health Privacy Primer for Consumers EXPOSED. Health
Privacy Project. Institute for Health Care Research and Policy. Georgetown University.

Washington, DC. 1999 Dec. Available online at 
http://www.healthprivacy.org/resources/exposed.pdf.REFERENCES94Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Goldman, Janlori. Protecting Privacy To Improve Health Care. Health Affairs. 1998 NovŒ1998 Dec
31; 17(64):47Œ60.
Gostin, Lawrence O. and Hadley, Jack. Health Services Research: Public Benefits, Personal Privacy,
and Proprietary Interests. Annals of Internal Medicine. 1998 Nov 15; 129(10):833Œ835.
Gostin, Lawrence O., Lazzarini, Zita; Neslund, Verla, and Osterholm, Michael T. The Public Health
Information Infrastructure A National Review of the Law on Health Information Privacy.

JAMA. 1996 Jun 26; 275(24):1921Œ1927.
Gross, David J.; Alecxih, Lisa; Gibson, Mary Jo; Corea, John; Caplan, Craig, and Brangan,
Normandy. Out-of-Pocket Health Spending by Poor and Near-Poor Elderly Medicare

Beneficiaries. Health Care Research Selected Papers From the Association For Health

Services Research Annual Meeting, June 21Œ23, 1998. 1999 Apr; 34(1 Part II):241Œ254.
Halamka, John D.; Szolovits, Peter; Rind, David, and Safran, Charles. A WWW Implementation of
National Recommendations for Protecting Electronic Health Information. Journal of the

American Medical Informatics Association. 1997; 4(6):458Œ464.
Hanken, Mary Alice. Standards for Confidentiality, Privacy, Access, and Data Security. Topics in
Health Information Management. 1996 May: 44Œ48.
Iezzoni, Lisa. Ethical Consideration in Future Health Care Research: Protecting Privacy and Related
Concerns. Presented at Connecting Ethics and Health Policy, Bethesda, Maryland, Oct 1,

1999.Ivy, Andrew C. Nazi War Crimes of a Medical Nature. Reprinted With Permission of the Editors from
Federation Bulletin. 1947; 33:133Œ146 in Reiser, Stanley J.; Dyke, Arthur J., and Curran,

William J. Ethics in Medicine: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Concerns. MIT

Press. 1977.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Committee on Regional Health Data Networks and Molla Donaldson,
and Kathleen N. Lohr, editors. Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and

Privacy. 1994. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Committee on Health Services Research: Training and Work Force
Issues and Marilyn J. Field, Robert E. Tranquada and Jill C. Feasley, editors. Health

Services Research: Work. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 1995.
ISPE (International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology). Data privacy, medical record
confidentiality, and research in the interest of public health. [Web Page]. 1997 Sep 1.

Available at: 
http://www.pharmacoepi.org/policy/privacy.htm
.JHITA (Joint Healthcare Information Technology Alliance). Advocacy Paper: Medical Records
Confidentiality Legislation [Web Page]. Available at: 
http://www.jhita.org/medical.htm
.Katz, David A. Barriers Between Guidelines and Improved Patient Care: An Analysis of AHCPR's
Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health Care Research Selected Papers From

the Association For Health Services Research Annual Meeting, June 21Œ23, 1998. 1999

Apr; 34(1 Part II):377Œ389.
Kohane, Isaac S.; Dong, Hongmei, and Szolovits, Peter. Health Information Identification and De-
Identification Toolkit. Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Association,

Symp. 1998; 356Œ360.
Lo, Bernard, and Alpers, Ann. Uses and Abuses of Prescription Drug Information in Pharmacy
Benefits Management Programs. JAMA. 2000 Feb 9; 283(6):801Œ806.
Lo, Bernard. Values in Research: What are policy-relevant issues to study: How to do it ethically?
Presented at Connecting Ethics and Health Policy, Bethesda, Maryland, Oct 1, 1999.
REFERENCES95Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lowrance, William W. Privacy and Health Research: A Report to the U.S. Secretary of Health and
Human Services. 1997 May.
Malenka, D. J.; McGarth, P. D.; Wennberg, D. E.; Ryan, T. J Jr.; Kellett, M. A. Jr.; Shubrooks, S. J.
Jr.; Bradley, W. A.; Hettelemen, B. D.; Robb, J. F.; Hearne, M. J.; Silver, T. M.; Watkins,

M. W.; O'Meara, J. R.; VerLee, P. N., and O'Rourke, D. J. The relationship between

operator volume and outcomes after percutaneous coronary interventions in high volume

hospitals in 1994Œ1996: the northern New England experience. Northern New England

Cardiovascular Disease Study Group. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 1999

Nov 1; 34(5):1471Œ1480.
McCarthy, Douglas B.; Shatin, Deborah; Drinkard, Carol R.; Kleinman, John H., and Gardner,
Jacqueline S. Medical Records and Privacy: Empirical Effects on Legislation. HSR: Health

Services Research. 1999 Apr; 34 (part II)(1):417Œ425.
Melton, L. Joseph III. The Threat to Medical-Records Research. The New England Journal of
Medicine. 1997 Nov 13; 337(20).
Norsigian, Judy and Billings, Paul. Privacy and Medical-Records Research. The New England
Journal of Medicine. 1998 Apr 9; 338(15).
Norton, E. C.; Garfinkel, S. A.; McQuay, L. J.; Heck, D. A.; Wright, JG.; Dittus, R., and Lubitz,
R.M. The effect of hospital volume on the in-hospital complication rate in knee replacement

patients. Health Services Research. 1998 Dec; 33(5 Pt 1):1191Œ1210.
NRC (National Research Council). Committee on Maintaining Privacy and Security in Health Care
Applications of the National Infrastructure, Computer Science and Telecommunications

Board, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics and Applications, and National

Research Council. For the Record. Protecting Electronic Health Information. Washington,

DC: National Academy Press. 1997.
NRC (National Research Council) Panel of Confidentiality and Data Access, George T. Duncan,
Thomas B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, editors. Private Lives and Public Policies

Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statistics. 1993.
O'Brien, Dale G., and Yasnoff, William A. Privacy, Confidentiality, and Security in Information
Systems of State Health Agencies. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 1999; 16

(4):351Œ358.
OPRR, National Institute of Health. Intitutional Review Board (IRB) Guidebook, 1993 [Web Page].
1993. Available at: 
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/oprr/irb/irb_guidebook.htm
.PhRMA. PhRMA Policy Papers: Twin Goals: Privacy and Progress [Web Page]. Available at: 
http://www.phrma.org/issues/goals.html.Pritts, J.; Goldman, J.; Hudson, Z.; Berenson, A.; and Hadley, E. The State of HealthPrivacy: An
Uneven TerrainŠA Comprehensive Survey of State Health Privacy Statutes. Health Privacy

Project; Institute for Health Care Research and Policy, Georgetown University. 1999.

Available online at 
http://www.healthprivacy.org/resources/statereports/contents.html
Shalala, Donna. Confidentiality of Individually Identifiable Health Information, Recommendations of
the Secretary of Health and Human Services, pursuant to section 264 of the Health Insurance

Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. 1997 Sep 11.
Sollano, J. A.; Gelijns, A. C.; Moskowitz, A. J.; Heitjan, D. F.; Cullinane, S.; Saha, T.; Chen, J. M.;
Roohan, P. J.; Reemstsma, K.; and Shields, E. P. Volume-outcome relationships in

cardiovascular operations: New York State, 1990Œ1995. Journal of Thoracic Cardiovascular
Surgery. 1999 Mar; 117(3):419Œ428.
Sweeney, LaTanya. Weaving Technology and Policy Together to Maintain Confidentiality. Journal
of Law, Medicine & Ethics. 1997; 25:98Œ110.
REFERENCES96Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ubel, PA; Zell, MM; Miller, DJ; Fischer, GS; Peters-Stefani, D; and Arnold, RM. Elevator talk:
observational study of inappropriate comments in a public space. American Journal of

Medicine. 1995; 99:190Œ194.
Wolf, Leslie E. and Lo, Bernard. Practicing Safer Research Using the Law to Protect the
Confidentiality of Sensitive Research Data. IRB: A Review of Human Subjects Research,

1999; 21(5):4Œ7
Woodward, Beverly. Challenges to Human Subject Protections in US Medical Research. JAMA. 1999
Nov 24; 282(20):1947Œ1965.
Zito, Julie Magno; Safer, Daniel J.; dosReis, Susan; Gardner, James F.; Boles, Myde, and Lynch,
Frances. Trends in the Prescribing of Psychotropic Medications to Preschoolers. JAMA.
2000 Feb 23; 283(8):1025Œ1030.
REFERENCES97Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES98Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acronyms and AbbreviationsAAMCAssociation of American Medical Colleges
ACEAmerican College of Epidemiology
AHRQAgency for Healthcare Research and Quality
AHSRAssociation for Health Services Research
ASPEAssistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
ARENAApplied Research Ethics National Association
ASPEAssistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
CFRCode of Federal Regulations
DHHSDepartment of Health and Human Services
DSLDigital Subscriber Line
FDAFood and Drug Administration
GAOGeneral Accounting Office
GHPPGeorgetown Health Privacy Project
HIPAAHealth Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HIVHuman Immunodeficiency Virus
HMOHealth Maintenance Organization
HSRHealth Services Research
IHCIntermountain Health Care
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS99
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IISCIHC Information Security Committee
IOMInstitute of Medicine
IRBInstitutional Review Board
ISPEInternational Society for Pharmacoepidemiology
ITInformation TechnologyJHITAJoint Healthcare Information Technology Alliance
MCWIRBMedical College of Wisconsin IRB Discussion Forum
MPAMultiple Project AssuranceNHISNational Health Interview Survey
NIHNational Institutes of Health
NRCNational Research Council
OECDOrganization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OHRPOffice of Human Research Protections (formerly OPRR)
OIGOffice of Inspector General
OMBOffice of Management and Budget
OPRROffice for Protection from Research Risks
PBMPharmacy Benefit Management
PhRMAPharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America
PKIPublic Key InfrastructurePRIM&RPublic Responsibility in Medicine and Research
QAQuality AssuranceQIQuality Improvement
RTIResearch Triangle Institute
UCSFUniversity of California at San Francisco
USUHSUniform Services University of Health Sciences
UTHSCSAUniversity of Texas Health Sciences Center in San Antonio
WIRBWestern Institutional Review Board
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS100
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
Study Activities
As contracted with the sponsors, the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, the
Institute of Medicine created a 12-person committee that was charged with
identifying best practices of institutional review boards and private organizations

in the protection of privacy and maintenance of confidentiality in health services

research. The committee included members with expertise in medical ethics,

health services research, epidemiological research, clinical research, IRB

function, health and privacy law, statistics, computer science, and health data-

base administration. The committee met by telephone conference call in January

2000 and held a workshop in March 2000 (agenda follows). The workshop, which

was open to the public, included presentations from IRB administrators and

chairs, research foundations, and health care services companies (see

Appendix B
). The workshop also featured presentations of the drafts of two
commissioned papers (see 
Appendix C
 and 
Appendix D
). In addition to the
workshop, the committee posted an invitation on a list serve and on the National
Academies' website to IRBs to contribute information (invitation follows
workshop agenda).
APPENDIX A
101Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP ON INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARDS
Institute of Medicine
Cecil and Ida Green Building,
Rooms GR-130 and GR-110
2001 Wisconsin Avenue, N.W.
March 13Œ14, 2000
Monday, March 13, 2000

8:30 a.m.Call to Order, Welcome by Chair Bernard Lo, M.D.

Charge to Committee, Introductions, Procedures, and Greetings from

Sponsors9:15OPRR overview
Thomas Puglisi, Ph.D.9:30IRB Administrators
Art Anderson, M.D., Fort Detrick, U.S. Army

Angie Khan, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio
10:00Discussion

10:30Break

10:45IRB Chairs/or Members
James Kahn, M.D., University of California at San Francisco

Robert Amdur, M.D., University of Florida

Steve Garfinkel, Ph.D., Research Triangle Institute

Tora Bikson, Ph.D., RAND Corporation
11:45Discussion

12:30 p.m.Lunch

1:30Private/or Independent IRB
Angela Bowen, M.D., Western Institutional Review Board
1:45Discussion

2:00Pharmaceutical Company
Harry Guess, Ph.D., Merck
2:15DiscussionAPPENDIX A
102Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2:30Health Services Companies

Fred Teitelbaum, Ph.D., and Jennifer Low, Esq., Express Scripts

Brent James, M.D., and Morris Linton, J.D., Intermountain Health Care

Andrew Nelson, HealthPartners
3:15Discussion

3:30BREAK

3:45Comparing Privacy Standards Internationally
Bartha Knoppers, J.D.
4:15Discussion

5:30AdjournTuesday, March 14 (GR 110)

8:30 a.m.Call to Order, welcome by Chair, Brief Introductions of Committee
9:00Technical Update
Lawrence Dietz, Esq., Axent Technologies
9:15Discussion

9:30Special Considerations Regarding Data on Minors
Ross Thompson, Ph.D.
10:00Discussion

10:15Break

10:30Special Considerations of Privacy in Heavily Studied Minority
Populations

William Freeman, M.D.
10:45Discussion

11:00General Discussion

12:00 noon
Adjourn Open Session
APPENDIX A
103Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INVITATION TO IRBS TO PROVIDE INFORMATION ON
PRACTICES OF REVIEWING HEALTH SERVICES
RESEARCH*The Institute of Medicine (IOM) is conducting a project on the role of IRBs
in the protection of data privacy in health services research. As part of that

project, we are requesting general information from practitioners in the field with

respect to the issues identified below. We expect that this information request

will be of interest to those who currently chair, serve on, or administer an IRB,

and whose committee at least occasionally receives protocols for research that

depend on secondary data mining or linkage, in health services research or

similar secondary analyses of health-related data.
By ﬁhealth services researchﬂ we mean studies primarily using already-
collected data to examine the impact of organization, financing, and management

of health care services on access to, or the delivery, cost, outcomes, or quality of,

services. Secondarily, we would include studies of already collected data that

associate data sets to examine the outcomes of interventions, where similar

privacy issues may arise.
Under the Statement of Task for this project, the IOM will gather
information on current practices and principles, and if possible, recommend a set

of best practices, for use by IRBs in safeguarding data privacy in health services

research. The IOM has appointed a committee and has scheduled a workshop

intended to supply information to the committee with respect to these issues.
Interested persons are invited to provide information regarding the practices
of IRBs in protecting data privacy in health services research. This is not intended

as a comprehensive survey, and we are not testing any specific hypothesis. Please

feel free to elaborate on some or all of the issues identified below.
Unless you indicate otherwise on your response, your name and contact
information will be made available only to IOM staff, and will not be presented to

the study committee. The substance of your response (without your name and

contact information) will be provided to the IOM study committee (with your

response identified only by general category such as hospital, university, etc.) and

will be included in a public access file created by the IOM and made available to

the public upon request. By submitting a response, you give permission to the

IOM to quote or use all or part of your submission (without specific identification

of you) in our final report or other works of the institution, which may be posted

on the world wide web or translated into other languages.
If you would like to provide information, please send it to the contact points
below. Please also feel free, as always, to contact the Responsible IOM Staff

Officer listed below if you wish to discuss any aspect of the project.
*Posted on MCWIRB list serve and National Academies Current Projects System
website.APPENDIX A
104Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Discussion Issues
1. Policy or practices, if any, for identifying specific studies as health
services research.
2. Procedures, if any, for determining which health services research studies
are exempt from IRB review.
3. Procedures, if any, to determine whether and which information is
identifiable when assessing risk of disclosure in an health services

research protocol.
4. Procedures, if any, for weighing the importance of the research relative to
the risk (of disclosure) to those whose data are used.
5. Procedures, if any, in place for merging different datasets, and in that
context, for assuring that identifiable health information is protected
6. Procedures, if any, used for reviewing protocols to assure that identifiable
health information is being protected while the study is actually

underway.
7. Procedures, if any, to review protocols for the protection of data after a
study is completed.
8. Procedures, if any, for auditing or oversight to make sure protections and
procedures are used and enforced.
9. Provisions, procedures and/or principles that should be more widely
adopted by IRBs in safeguarding data privacy in health services research.
Thank you.
Lee L. Zwanziger, Ph.D.

Senior Program Officer

Institute of Medicine
APPENDIX A
105Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BInstitutional Review Boards and Health
Services Research Data Privacy: A
Workshop Summary
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) and the Committee on the Role of
Institutional Review Boards in Health Services Research Data Privacy Protection

hosted a workshop on March 13Œ14, 2000, to gather and to exchange information

on the protection of human subjects in health services research (HSR). HSR

examines the impact of the organization, financing and management, of health

care services, on the access to, delivery, cost, outcomes and quantity of those

services. The benefits of such studies include increased understanding of the

effects of changing parts of the health care system, such as whether a change in

the reimbursement policy for a particular class of drug has any effect on the

health or quality of life of the participants. The major risk in such research is not

physical harm, but risk resulting from improper disclosure of personal

information, that is, a breach of confidentiality. Confidentiality can be protected

by limiting access to data and strengthening protections of data handling.
However, HSR can be conducted only if researchers have access to data. Thus,
data privacy and data access are objectives that have to be balanced.
POLICY CONTEXT
In recent years, public interest in and concern about the privacy of personally
identifiable health information has increased. Currently, there is no

comprehensive federal law that affords protection for the privacy of all health-

related information. There are some federal laws, and state statutes varying by

locale,This Appendix was released as a separate workshop summary in June 2000.
APPENDIX B
106Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that protect certain types of personally identifiable health information under
certain circumstances (Gostin et al., 1996; O'Brian and Yasnoff, 1999; Goldman

and Hudson, 1999).In 1996, Congress enacted the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), which directed the Secretary of Health and Human

Services to publish regulations by February 2000, unless the Congress had taken

legislative action at least six months earlier. The Secretary published a Notice of

Proposed Rulemaking in November 1999 (Department of Health and Human

Services, 1999), with the comment period closing on February 17, 2000. As this
workshop was being held and summarized, the Department was analyzing and
responding to the many (approximately 52,000) comments that the proposed rule

elicited.Historically, the focus of institutional review boards (IRBs) has been on
protecting human subjects from harm associated with invasive clinical procedures

or administration of new drugs. In HSR there are few physical risks. Much HSR

involves the analysis of previously collected, personally identifiable, health

information recorded in the course of clinical care, billing, or payment for

services. Thus, in HSR the primary risks are due to breaches of confidentiality,
with ensuing loss of privacy and possible stigma and discrimination. Little is
known about IRB practices in the area of HSR projects. Furthermore, much HSR

using large databases falls outside the scope of federal regulations that require

oversight by IRBs because it is undertaken with private funding by organizations

that do not hold federal multiproject assurances that require all research at the

institution to fall under IRB review.
SCOPE OF PROJECT
In order to facilitate the national discussion of the topic of IRB oversight of
HSR, the sponsors commissioned the IOM to call together a panel of national

experts on various aspects of the problem. The purpose of this project was to

provide information and advice on the current and best practices of IRBs in
protecting privacy in health services research. The project was sponsored by the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Office of the Assistant

Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, both in the Department of Health and

Human Services. The charge to the committee was as follows:
1. To gather information on the current practices and principles followed by
institutional review boards to safeguard the confidentiality of personally

identifiable health information used for health services research purposes,

in particular, to identify those IRB practices that are superior in protecting

the privacy, confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable health

information.2. To gather information on the current practices and principles employed in
privately funded health services research studies (that are generally not

subject to IRB approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personally

identifiableAPPENDIX B
107Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.health information, and to consider whether and how IRB best practices in
this regard might be applied to such privately sponsored studies.
3. If appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding the
confidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might be

voluntarily applied to health services research projects by IRBs and

private sponsors.
This summary describes the presentations and discussions that took place at
the IOM Workshop on the role of Institutional Review Boards and Health

Services Research Data Privacy. This summary reflects what transpired at the

workshop and does not include committee deliberations, findings, or conclusions.

The committee's deliberative report is being published separately (IOM, 2000).
WORKSHOPThe workshop itself was one of the major information-gathering activities of
the committee. The committee invited speakers including IRB administrators and

chairs from universities, research foundations, the U.S. Army and private

businesses, as well as representatives from health care services and

pharmaceutical companies. The committee also welcomed all interested parties to

attend and to participate in discussion periods following the presentations. The
invited speakers and members of the audience were asked to provide information
on what their organizations actually do to protect confidentiality in health

services research, whether or not the research they do falls under the purview of

the common rule. The committee also asked the participants to share any

observations they had made regarding which practices are best and which might

be applicable to other institutions.
The Office for Protection from Research Risks (OPRR) is the agency that
administers the federal regulations on human and animal subjects. The director of

OPRR's Division on Human Subject Protections presented an overview of federal

regulations on human subjects, particularly regulations pertaining to the

determination of whether a records review study involves human subjects, when

data are considered identifiable, whether a study might be exempted from IRB
review, and whether informed consent from subjects might be waived.
The committee heard presentations by several speakers who administer or
chair IRBs in universities, private foundations, corporations, or military settings.

Highlights mentioned included how IRBs have wrestled with determining

whether data would be identifiable and how to ensure that potential risks to all

affected parties are considered. For instance, the set of subjects may include not
only the patients who received a service, but also the health care providers who
delivered the service. In most HSR studies, the subjects themselves are not likely

to receive any direct benefit, so the tolerance of some IRBs for risk to the

subjects is correspondingly low, although IRBs consider risk to subjects in

balance with the benefits to society of the research in the case of HSR as with any

protocol. Other highlights follow.
APPENDIX B
108Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.An IRB chair from the UCSF medical school reported on an internal study
leading to a recommendation that research grants should include 1.0 to 1.5

percent of the budget as an above-the-line item directed to the support of the

institution's human subjects protection program.
A former IRB chair, recently relocated to University of Florida, identified
the differentiation of health services research and health services operations as

critical, but also noted that the evaluation of risks to privacy is not new for IRBs

and that current federal regulations allow appropriate flexibility.
An IRB chair from RAND described its on-line system for initiating research
projects, designed to help investigators determine whether the project might be

addressed as research and, if so, to explore the possibilities of exemption from

full IRB review, eligibility for expedited review, or requirement for full review.
This IRB has access to a three-person privacy team, including an information
resource specialist, a data librarian, and a networks specialist, to help design and

implement data safeguarding plans commensurate with the level of risk for

various protocols.
An IRB chair from the Research Triangle Institute observed that it is very
important that health services researchers have the freedom to work with their

IRBs to modify standard consent and confidentiality language as appropriate for

the particular study in question. He concluded that although many issues are often

not well understood by IRB members or by researchers because they represent
new or rare situations, the IRB system is workable and working, and has never in
his experience been an onerous burden to researchers.
An officer from Intermountain Health Care described the comprehensive
technical protections and enforceable policies the organization has implemented

in the protection of personally identifiable health information, whether in the

context of research or in day to day operations of providing health services. He
noted that all known violations of privacy have occurred in operations, but none
have been found in the research branch.
A representative of AXENT, an information security firm, spoke on recent
market trends in security such as the widespread adoption of Web access security

products and virtual private networks, the slower adoption of products for

authenticating users (i.e., public key infrastructure products), public key
infrastructure products, and the general tendency of organizations to contract for
information technologists rather than develop in-house expertise.
The chair of the IRB of the Indian Health Service spoke about ethical issues
regarding research with minority groups, including both the privacy of

individuals within small and isolated groups and the privacy of the group itself. In

either case, he observed, consultation with individuals familiar with the
particulars of the group is important to avoid unintentional privacy violations and
to build trust between the researchers and the participants.
The committee had commissioned two background papers, in accord with
the contract between the IOM and the sponsors, which were presented in draft at

the workshop. One paper analyzed issues regarding HSR with children. The
APPENDIX B
109Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.author identified three issues of particular concern in considering health services
research involving minors, including the heterogeneity of the population in

question, complications arising from proxy consent, and the changing interests

and risks affecting the subjects as they grow older. The second commissioned

paper analyzed international standards regarding the use of personally identifiable

health information for HSR. The author studied international conventions and
guidelines and the domestic law of several nation states. This analysis pointed
out different approaches to requiring oversight of the use of personally

identifiable health information in HSR by IRB-like bodies and the uses of such

information without individual consent. Both papers are appended to the

committee's report, as is this workshop summary.
APPENDIX B
110Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1 INTRODUCTION
The Institute of Medicine and the Committee on the Role of Institutional
Review Boards in Health Services Research Data Privacy Protection hosted a

workshop on March 13Œ14, 2000, to gather and to exchange information on

human subjects protection in health services research.
Health services research uses quantitative or qualitative methodology to
examine the impact of the organization, financing, and management of health

care services on the access to and the delivery, cost, outcomes, and quality of

services. Another IOM committee (IOM, 1995) recently developed the following
definition:Health services research is a multidisciplinary field of inquiry, both basic and
applied, that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery,
organization, financing, and outcomes of health care services to increase
knowledge and understanding of the structure, processes, and effects of health
services for individuals and populations.
As these definitions show, HSR includes a broad range of questions and of
research methodologies. This IOM project concentrates on HSR conducted

through analyses of previously existing databases of health information. Further,

among such studies, this project considers just the role of institutional review

boards in ensuring that the study design will maintain confidentiality in the use of

the subjects' data.
The benefits of HSR studies include increased understanding of the results
of policy changes and other systemic effects in health care. The major risk in this

branch of research, where the actual object of study is not the human body,
APPENDIX B
111Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.but data about human beings, is likewise not to life and limb, but rather the risk
resulting from improper disclosure of personal information. Any potential for

harm would come about through possible breaches of confidentiality. The

methodology, and in many respects the type of questions, of HSR are often very

similar to the questions and methods directed toward assessing and improving the

quality of operations within an organization. As a result, a boundary between
research and operations is often difficult to locate.
It is important to distinguish privacy and confidentiality. The following
explanation is provided by the Office of Protection from Research Risks in

guidance to institutional review boards.
Privacy can be defined in terms of having control over the extent, timing, and
circumstances of sharing oneself (physically, behaviorally, or intellectually) with
others. Confidentiality pertains to the treatment of information that an individual
has disclosed in a relationship of trust and with the expectation that it will not be
divulged to others in ways that are inconsistent with the understanding of the

original disclosure without permission. (OPRR Guidebook, Chapter Three,
Section D, 1993)
The protection of privacy is an important matter, and many individuals
regard the protection of their privacy (and likewise the confidential treatment of

private information they choose to disclose) as an important ethical value. The

responsible conduct of high-quality research is also an important value, and many

individuals appreciate the benefits of effective health care, efficacy that is based

on information that can be obtained only from population data. Privacy and

confidentiality can be protected by limiting access to data. Good research can be

conducted only if investigators have access to data. Risks to individuals (from

possible breaches of confidentiality) and benefits both to individuals and society

(from the results of good research) are thus two concerns that we must balance.
In research, one way to ensure that subjects are protected, and in particular
for this report's concerns, that the confidentiality of personally identifiable health

information is maintained, is to have the proposed study reviewed by an

institutional review board (IRB). IRBs are usually located within the organization

doing the research, so that they can be aware of the nuances of the local situation.

IRBs must ensure that they follow federal regulations pertaining to the protection

of human subjects but they also use their local knowledge in practice along with

the general principles in those regulations. This is why it was important in this

project to consider the practices that IRBs actually follow as well as the

regulations they apply through those practices.
It is also important to understand that IRB review is required only for
research activities. So if data were to be collected for some proposed research

(i.e., federally funded or otherwise subject to federal regulation), the protocol

would be reviewed by an IRB for the protection of confidentiality. But health

care provider or product companies often undertake reviews of their internal

operations to assess and improve the quality of care and/or products they

provide. These
APPENDIX B
112Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.quality assessment and quality improvement exercises are not defined as research
but may involve similar types of data collection as HSR, as well as raising similar

questions about the use of private information and the maintenance of

confidentiality. So if similar data were to be collected or used by a health care

provider or health product company in the course of day-to-day clinical care or

business operations, such collection and use would not be subject to regulations
requiring IRB review.
BACKGROUND AND POLICY CONTEXT
In recent years, public interest in and concern about privacy and personally
identifiable health information has increased and continues (e.g., Appelbaum,

2000). Some individuals have been disturbed, for instance, at corporate use of
health information to create targeted mailings that seem to straddle the line
between anticipating health questions and marketing products. For example, a

database marketing firm received patient prescription records from two large

pharmacies in the Washington, D.C. metro area (Lo and Alpers, 2000). The firm

then created mailings for the pharmacies on the pharmacies' letterhead targeted to

consumers of certain prescription drug products, informing them of new products

with similar indications. The project, which was quickly canceled by the

pharmacies in response to customer complaints, had been sponsored by the

manufacturers of the new products, although the manufacturers never had access

to any patient records themselves. In other cases, these worries have been

heightened by still more dramatic reports of privacy violations, such as the

release of HIV test results of hundreds of individuals to several Florida
newspapers (in Etzioni, 1999). Such incidents are not HSR, but still increase
general concern about the reliability of privacy protections.
In 1996, Congress enacted the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act directing the Secretary of Health and Human Services to

prepare detailed recommendations on standards for privacy and personally

identifiable health information. The Secretary's recommendations were delivered
to Congress in September 1997 (Shalala, 1997), and several privacy bills have
been introduced in Congress since that time. Both the Secretary's

recommendations and most of the privacy bills introduced in the 105th Congress

would permit personally identifiable health information to be used in research

without the person's explicit permission if the research project were approved by

an IRB.
The HIPAA further directed the Secretary of Health and Human Services to
publish regulations on privacy standards by February 2000, unless the Congress

had taken legislative action at least six months earlier. The Secretary published a
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in November 1999, with the comment period
closing on February 17, 2000 (Department of Health and Human Services, 1999).

The proposed regulations would create new requirements for privacy protection

for all health care providers and health plans, and would establish research

standards and oversight for all research. In addition, the proposed rule would

permit the use and disclosure of personally identifiable health information for

researchAPPENDIX B
113Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.without authorization by the subject, as long as the research protocol had been
approved by an IRB or, if it does not fall under regulations requiring IRB review,

then by an equivalent body. As this workshop was being held and summarized,

the department was analyzing and responding to the many (approximately

52,000) comments that the proposed rule elicited.
Another important context for this report is recent media attention to
research on human subjects. For example, news stories on topics such as gene

therapy and clinical trials in developing countries have highlighted concerns

about human subjects protections. Policies on many levels, from institutional to

international, address of the proper and ethical conduct of research with human

subjects. In the United States, the use of human beings as research subjects is

governed by federal regulations when the research is federally funded. The body
of federal regulations about human subjects protection (45 CFR 46 Subpart A) is
called the Common Rule, since it has been adopted ﬁin commonﬂ by many

federal departments and agencies that are involved in research with human

subjects as the basis for their regulations. The Food and Drug Administration

(FDA) has adopted similar regulations (21 CFR 50 and 56) and will not consider

clinical trial results submitted in support of a marketing application unless the

trial was approved by an IRB. In addition, many organizations that do human

subjects research have entered into agreements to conduct all their research

according to the Common Rule, regardless of funding. Such agreements are

called multiple product assurances (MPAs, see also footnote 6 below).
The provisions of this shared body of regulation, including the Common
Rule and MPAs as well as FDA regulations, grew from a variety of sources

including the Belmont Report (Belmont, 1979). The Belmont Report presented

the ethical basis of human subjects research as three principles: respect for

persons, beneficence, and justice. The main mechanism in the human subjects

protection system for protecting research subjects and for assessing the balance

between the risks and benefits of research is the institutional review board. An

IRB is a standing committee composed of scientists and/or physicians not directly
involved with the proposal being reviewed and including at least one person who
is not primarily involved in scientific pursuits and at least one person who is not

otherwise connected with the institution. IRBs review proposals for research with

human participants to make sure that any risk of harm to the subjects of the

research is reasonable in relation to the possible benefits and that they will be

respected as persons, not just used as research subjects. In many studies the

subjects participate only after giving informed consent. So the IRB must make

sure that subjects will be fully informed and then have an opportunity to consent,

decline to participate in the research, or withdraw at anytime, unless the research

is of such low risk that informed consent is not needed. In federal regulations, the

IRB of a particular organization is charged with reviewing and approving all

research at the institution covered by the regulations. The criteria set out in the
regulations for IRBs to use in assessing research proposals are listed in 
Box 1-1.APPENDIX B
114Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

˜˜-+

+




'˙6

˜

˜-+
ˇ
ˇ
˜-+




':6






';6
%

'=6

'<6

'>6˘





˘ˇ

SOURCE: 45 CFR 46, Subpart A 46.111.
Research using databases containing health information on individuals, of
which health services research is one example, also falls under the Common
Rule, although the Belmont Report and regulations primarily address clinical
APPENDIX B
115Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.research and individual direct interventions. HSR involving the analysis of

previously collected data is somewhat different from clinical research in that

subjects participate indirectly because researchers are sorting data on large sets of

individuals but not intervening with the specific individuals themselves. As a

result, the application of the principles may also have to be somewhat different in

HSR.PROJECT OBJECTIVES
The sponsors commissioned the IOM to call together a panel of national
experts on various aspects of the problem. The purpose of this project was to

provide information and advice on the current and best practices of IRBs in

protecting confidentiality in health services research. The project was sponsored

by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Office of the

Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, both in the Department of

Health and Human Services.
The charge to the committee was as follows:
1. To gather information on the current practices and principles followed by
institutional review boards to safeguard the confidentiality of personally

identifiable health information used for health services research purposes,

in particular, to identify those IRB practices that are superior in protecting

the privacy, confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable health

information.2. To gather information on the current practices and principles employed in
privately funded health services research studies (that are generally not

subject to IRB approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personally

identifiable health information, and to consider whether and how IRB

best practices in this regard might be applied to such privately sponsored

studies.3. If appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding the
confidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might be

voluntarily applied to health services research projects by IRBs and

private sponsors.
The charge did not encompass many other possible questions about privacy
of medical records or electronic records in general. The committee recognized the

strong connections between these related matters and the question of protecting

data confidentiality in health services research. However, in keeping with the

committee's charge, these issues were not discussed at the workshop. The

committee also did not discuss issues of privacy and confidentiality as they

pertain to other types of research, for example, clinical research that deals with

sensitive topics such as HIV infection, mental illness, or substance abuse.
The committee focused its attention on HSR involving the secondary
analysis of existing data because this type of research raises the most dilemmas

about how IRBs can protect the confidentiality of the patients' data. To be sure,

HSR that involves, for example, questionnaires to patients about satisfaction or
clinical outcomes also raises concerns about privacy and confidentiality.
APPENDIX B
116However, patients must be contacted and must cooperate for data to be gathered.

BecauseProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of these interactions, the research may be less likely to be exempt from IRB
review, and potential subjects have the ability to decline to participate.
The committee therefore urges the reader to bear in mind that such related
matters were not in the charge, were not addressed by the committee, and in

particular, were not discussed at the workshop.
SCOPE OF WORKSHOP REPORT
This summary describes the presentations and discussions that took place at
the March 13Œ14, 2000 IOM Workshop on Institutional Review Boards and

Health Services Research Data Privacy Protection. This summary reflects what

transpired at the workshop and does not include committee deliberations, findings

or conclusions. The committee's deliberative report is being published separately
(IOM, 2000).The workshop itself was one of the major information-gathering activities of
the committee. The committee invited speakers including IRB administrators and

chairs from universities, research foundations, the U.S. Army, and private

businesses, as well as representatives from health care services and

pharmaceutical companies (see appended workshop agenda). The committee also
welcomed all interested parties to attend and to participate in discussion periods
following the presentations. The invited speakers and the audience were asked to

provide information on what their organizations, whether IRBs or organizations

doing research not under the purview of the Common Rule, currently and actually

do to protect privacy in health services research. The committee also asked the

participants to share any observations they had made regarding which practices

are best and might be applicable to other institutions.
Some of the issues discussed at the workshop and in this document have
been the subject of recent IOM and National Research Council (NRC) reports.

These reports include 
For the Record 
(NRC, 1997), 
Health Data in the
Information Age 
(IOM, 1994), and 
Private Lives and Public Policies 
(NRC,1993).DEFINITIONSThis summary uses several terms repeatedly, for which the committee has
offered definitions below.
* In most cases, these definitions are incomplete in a
global sense, reflecting their use in the context of the present study; ﬁprivacy,ﬂ

for instance, has other shades of meaning to be sure, but the definition below
emphasizes the use of the word in regard to information.
Informational PrivacyŠThe right of individuals to control access to, and the
use of, information about themselves.
*Bradburn, N., 2000; Buckovich et al., 1999; NRC, 1997; Lowrance, 1997; IOM, 1995;
OPRR, 1993.
APPENDIX B
117Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ConfidentialŠa manner of treating private information, which has been
disclosed by the individual subject of the information to a particular person or

persons, such that further disclosure of the information will not be allowed to

occur without authorization.
Health Services ResearchŠa multidisciplinary field of inquiry, both basic
and applied, that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery,

organization, financing, and outcomes of health care services to increase

knowledge and understanding of the structure, processes, and effects of health

services for individuals and populations.
Personally Identifiable Health InformationŠinformation such that an
individual person can be identified as the subject.
Institutional Review BoardŠadministrative body established to protect the
rights and welfare of human research subjects in research activities of the

institution to which the board is affiliated, by reviewing proposed research

protocols and approving or requesting changes prior to their inception.
APPENDIX B
118Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 WORKSHOP SUMMARY
The Committee on the Role of Institutional Review Boards in Health
Services Research Data Privacy Protection hosted a public workshop on March

13Œ14, 2000 (agenda appended). The committee invited speakers with a variety

of institutional perspectives and also welcomed contributions from the audience.

As a starting point for the workshop, the committee reviewed its charge (as given
in the previous section). The committee was charged with collecting information
on the current practices of institutional review boards for protecting data privacy

in health services research, gathering information on the practices of

organizations that are not required to consult IRBs but still carry out HSR

activities where data privacy and confidentiality are of concern, and to the extent

possible, identifying and recommending the best practices for wider adoption.

This section presents a summary of the workshop proceedings. The summary

does not include deliberations, findings, or recommendations by the committee

(see IOM, 2000)INTRODUCTORY PRESENTATIONS
The first series of presentations was given by representatives of several
agencies within the federal Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).

The sponsors of the project, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

(AHRQ) and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
(ASPE), outlined their perspective on the objectives of the workshop and the
committee's task, and the Office for Protection from Research Risks (OPRR)
APPENDIX B
119Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.provided an overview of the current regulations on the protection of human
subjects in research.
Comments from Sponsoring Agencies
Dr. Michael Fitzmaurice of the AHRQ, one of the agencies sponsoring the
project, spoke first. Dr. Fitzmaurice observed that the tension between the

availability of data for research and the protection of data for maintaining

confidentiality and privacy will not disappear but has to be managed through

judicious balancing of these countervailing interests. Essentially, these interests
should reinforce each other. In order to facilitate the national discussion of this
balancing with regard to the use of individually identifiable health data by health

services researchers with principles and best practices for maintaining

confidentiality, the sponsors commissioned the Institute of Medicine (IOM) to

convene a panel of national experts on various aspects of the problem. The

panel's report will provide guidance to assist IRBs that review HSR,

organizations that are not required to use IRBs but may still be concerned with

balancing privacy and data access in such research, and health services

researchers themselves.
Dr. Fitzmaurice continued that the DHHS is directed under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act to promulgate federal regulations

governing the privacy of personal health information. The proposed regulations

allow the release of individually identifiable health data and information for use

in research, under appropriate conditions. Current and proposed regulations

would set conditions for safeguards that researchers must observe. Oversight
mechanisms described in the proposed federal regulations on health privacy
(Department of Health and Human Services, 1999) depend on the current IRB

system but also would require complementary oversight bodies, called ﬁprivacy

boardsﬂ(see 
Box 2-1); that would oversee the protection of personal health
information in research not covered (by regulation or voluntarily) by the current

IRB systemŠnon-federally funded research for the most part.
Mr. John Fanning of the ASPE (also a sponsor of the project) provided
further context for the workshop. Mr. Fanning pointed out that many sets of

principles pertaining to privacy protection have already been published, but these

principles may fail to provide practical guidance to investigators and IRBs

concerned with HSR.
1 In addition, he noted, little information is available
regarding actual practices and procedures whereby the principles are implemented
by IRBs. Such information is needed in order for IRBs to improve their oversight
of HSR. In particular, Mr. Fanning explained, the agencies sponsoring the project
1Because different groups are developing principles to address different problems, or at
least to address problems in different contexts, the sets of principles do not directly overlap
in many instancesŠin particular, not mentioning a principle is not evidence that an
organization would oppose it. These different perspectives make for difficult comparison
(though see Buckovich, 1999). See, for example, GHPP, 1999; ISPE, 1997; Lowrance,

1997; AAMC, 1997; JHITA (web page), PhRMA (web page).
APPENDIX B
120Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.





˚"#$




˚


((

((
((˚
((˚

((˚
((

((

((



SOURCE: DHHS, 1999.believe that identification of best practices of IRBs in reviewing HSR could
provide helpful guidance to other IRBs, as well as to organizations that are not
required to have IRBs review health services research but wish to ensure that
confidentiality and privacy are adequately protected in HSR.
The location of the boundaries of HSR, in the focus of the present project,
has been an additional and difficult question. The regulations now in place define
ﬁresearchﬂ as an activity intended to result in generalizable knowledge. However,

it is often difficult to draw a line between HSR and other activities that use

personal health information in databases, such as internal efforts at quality

assurance, business planning, or marketing.
In the discussion immediately following the presentations, committee
members highlighted their concerns about focusing on the protection of privacy in
the context of research while ignoring very similar activities using databases that
APPENDIX B
121Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.contain personal health information when undertaken for business or
administrative purposes. The sponsors' representatives replied that the Common

Rule applies only to the oversight of research, not to these other activities. Thus,

although the appropriate use of personal health information for purposes other

than research is an important question that the nation has to address, the current

project is intended to address only the more limited but still important topic of
HSR.Overview of Current Human Subjects Regulations
The OPRR administers the federal regulations on human and animal
subjects. Dr. Thomas Puglisi, director of OPRR's Division of Human Subject

Protections, presented an overview of the human subjects regulations to the
committee. IRBs have to address several questions, all of which may require
some interpretation specific to HSR. First, does an activity constitute research?

Second, is the project exempt from IRB review? Third, may individual informed

consent be waived?
Dr. Puglisi explained that the regulations apply to projects involving human
subjects, defined as protocols in which there is to be an intervention or interaction
with a living person that would not be occurring, or would be occurring in some
other fashion, but for the research or if identifiable private data or information

will be obtained for the protocol in a form associable with the individual

(Figure 2-1
). Private information, in this context, is defined as ﬁinformation
about behavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can reasonably

expect that no observation or recording is taking place, and information which

has been provided for specific purposes by an individual and which the

individual can reasonably expect will not be made public (e.g. a medical

record)ﬂ (45 CFR 46 102(f)). The definition stipulates that the information must

be individually identifiable, that is, that the identity of the individual can be

readily ascertained or associated with the information.
Dr. Puglisi noted that several aspects of these regulations already merit
attention with regard to HSR. With HSR, the second condition marking an
activity as research is generally the most pertinent (ﬁidentifiable private data or

information will be obtained for the protocol in a form associable with the

individualﬂ), since HSR often works with data that have already been collected

and hence requires no further interaction with subjects. The question of

identifiability can be difficult, since coded data are not necessarily nonidentifiable

because subjects often still can be identified by inference.
The term research is also defined in the regulations: the activity must be
systematic and designed to contribute to generalizable knowledge. The important
term ﬁgeneralizableﬂ is not, he pointed out, itself defined in the regulation. This
term usually must mean at least that the product of the activity is intended to be

applicable beyond the immediate situation and present conditions. For example, a

project that is intended for publication in a medical journal or presentation at a

conference would be deemed research, whereas an organization's internal review

of records for the purpose of improving its operations would likely not be

consideredAPPENDIX B
122Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 2-1  Is the definition of ﬁhuman subjectﬂ at 45 CFR 46.102(f) met
in the research activity?
research. Different organizations, however, make different distinctions
between research and quality assurance activities.
Activities may be exempt from IRB review, either because they are not
research or because they may not meet the definition of human subjects research

as described above. These conditions are a basis of a specific exemption (45

CFR46.101(b)(4)):(4) Research involving the collection or study of existing data, documents,
records, pathological specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if these sources are

publicly available or if the information is recorded by the investigator in such a
manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or through identifiers linked to
the subjects.
For a project that is research involving human subjects and is not eligible for
exemption as above, the IRB must ensure that the subjects have given free and
informed consent to participate, unless the informed consent requirement
APPENDIX B
123Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.can be waived. The requirement for informed consent may be waived by the IRB
under some conditions including that the research involves no more than minimal

risk and the research could not otherwise be practicably carried out (where ﬁnot

practicableﬂ is not specifically defined but means a general zone between merely

inconvenient and truly impossible). The key point in considering when a waiver

of informed consent would be appropriate is ﬁminimal risk.ﬂ In HSR, Dr. Puglisi
explained, the IRB would have to consider the protections for confidentiality that
were built into the protocol, keeping in mind that the protocol may require access

to records on very large numbers of individuals, and weigh the probabilities of

harm or wrong to these individuals. With adequate protections, the IRB often

determines that the risk would be minimal and individual informed consent

therefore unnecessary.
In discussion following the presentation, several committee members raised
the question of review of a protocol's expected benefit to society and its scientific

merit, with regard to which matter different IRBs take different views. The

question of the role of OPRR in education also surfaced, in particular its possible

involvement in collecting and disseminating information about the best practices

of IRBs. Dr. Puglisi said that a great deal of information and guidance is posted
on OPRR's website and that OPRR is actively expanding its educational
activities.IRB FUNCTIONMany different types of institutions conduct research with human subjects
and therefore have IRBs associated with them, including universities, state and

federal agencies, hospitals, and research foundations. The committee invited

speakers from a variety of these institutions to present information on the

practices and experience with protecting the confidentiality of data in health
services research in their respective organizations.
In preparation for the workshop, the speakers were given a list of points to
discuss points about IRBs and HSR, which are listed in 
Box 2-2.2 Many
presenters used these discussion points as a basis for their remarks. The summary

of the presentations and discussion below follows these points as much as

possible. Some discussion points, however, did not apply to some speakers, and
several speakers remarked that they did not wish to repeat what had already been
said about IRB function, so they did not specifically speak to all the discussion

issues in their presentations.
2This list of suggested discussion issues was also posted on an IRB-targeted list serve
and on the projects' section of the National Academies' Current Project System website,
with an invitation to provide any relevant information or experience. The full invitation is
included in Appendix A of IOM (2000).
APPENDIX B
124Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.


"#$












˚
˚
SOURCE: IOM 2000, Appendix A.
IRB AdministratorsThe first speakers were IRB administrators. IRB administrators coordinate
IRB activities and provide staff support for IRB meetings and actions. IRB

administrators typically work very closely with their IRBs in substantive as well

as procedural capacities, often serving as voting members and in some cases even

chairing the board.
The first presenter was S. Angela Khan, Institutional Coordinator of
Research Review of the IRB at the University of Texas Health Sciences Center in

San Antonio (UTHSCSA). The second presenter was Colonel Arthur Anderson,

M.D., administrator and also chair of the IRB for the U.S. Army Medical

Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick. Col. Anderson

highlighted some of the special features of human subjects research in the

military. The summary of their remarks follows, with some modifications, the
issues listed in 
Box 2-2.Identifying Specific Studies as HSR
Ms. Khan explained that the UTHSCSA IRB does not specifically classify
protocols as to whether they are HSR, but in any case does not review such

projectsAPPENDIX B
125Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.any differently than other protocols. This IRB has reviewed protocols addressing
various HSR questions including the effects of training and of guidelines, the

delivery and perception of services, and the costs of different services.
Col. Anderson explained that his institute is a research institute that is not
primarily involved with providing health care to persons with illnesses. The

institute does very little that would be classed as HSR but is heavily involved in

vaccine research studies, which give rise to many concerns about privacy

protections for the soldiers who volunteer.
Determining Which HSR Studies Qualify as Exempt
Ms. Khan reported that in assessing whether certain studies (generally only
those directed toward internal quality assurance [QA]) should be exempt from

review, the IRB would consider
  whether the findings of the study will be disseminated beyond the
department proposing to carry out the study,
  whether the protocol includes any change in clinical care or clinical
processes,  whether the data to be collected would be available to the investigator only
through the study (i.e., the investigator would not have access to such data in

normal practice), and finally
 there is any risk to patients or staff.
If the answer to all these questions is no, then the protocol could be
considered exempt as a QA activity. Other research may fall into an exempt

category under the regulations but probably also would be reviewed at least by a

sub-committee of the IRB, and informed consent might still be required. Ms.

Khan also noted that generally the first consideration about publication is

sufficient to classify a project as research since most investigators do in fact wish

to publish their findings, even from projects that were planned as internal

investigations, if they should prove interesting.
Ms. Khan explained that other research that falls into one of the categories
defined in the regulations as exempt undergoes the review by IRB members who

review protocols in the ﬁexpeditedﬂ category.
3 Even for exempt studies, the IRB
opens files, requires annual reports, and for studies involving contacts with

subjects (e.g., interviews), often requires researchers to obtain informed consent

or to provide subjects with written material including the elements that would

appear on a consent form.
3In the context of HSR, the most relevant exempt category is ﬁresearch, involving the
collection or study of existing data, documents, records, pathological specimens, or

diagnostic specimens, if these sources are publicly available or if the information is
recorded by the investigator in such a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or
through identifiers linked to the subjectsﬂ (45 CFR 46.101(b)(4)).
APPENDIX B
126Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Col. Anderson explained that Army regulations are separate from civilian
regulations, but that the Army's regulations on human subjects research closely

follow the Common Rule as previously presented by Dr. Puglisi. He explained

further that the Army's regulations on the treatment of military research subjects

have been expanded (by Title 10 USC 980) to include a ban on waiving informed

consent when data collected will include identifying information, unless the
research is exempt. Finally, he said that the military criteria for exemption are
substantively the same as the civilian criteria as codified in the common rule.
Determining Whether Information Is Identifiable in Assessing Risk of
DisclosureMs. Khan noted that the UTHSCSA IRB continues to wrestle with how to
determine whether data would be identifiable. For projects collecting data from

computer databases, it asks the investigator to list all the fields to be collected and

to indicate who will actually collect the data, how respect for privacy by any

personnel involved will be ensured, and how further dissemination of the

information will be prevented (e.g., storing data on computers that are not

networked, storing codes identifying individuals separately from data, using
passwords and/or key requirements to restrict access both to computers for data
storage and to computer housing identifying codes).
Col. Anderson explained that the Army tracks all the records associated with
a soldier by Social Security number. In the case of certain types of research such

as developing vaccines in preparation for missions to other climates or protection

of soldiers from possible biological warfare, the military has adopted special

precautions for maintaining confidentiality of the records. Although many of the

personal privacy issues of civilian life cannot enter into the military environment

(i.e., a soldier's health status must be known to his or her supervisors, and he or
she cannot deny them access to it because it determines medical qualification to
serve), additional privacy protection has been adopted for soldiers who volunteer

as the subjects of biological warfare vaccine research. These additional protection

measures were adopted because information about the particular vaccines tested

might later be used as a basis for the denial of insurance coverage or other

benefits or might be used to refuse issuing a visa in cases where the vaccine

record suggested an assignment in a nation unfriendly to the United States. Col.

Anderson noted that the use of vaccines, whose 
names are the same as those of
highly hazardous organisms associated with biological warfare, does not have any

real risks greater than those of ordinary vaccines used for the general public, but

the names may be frightening. To shield their privacy, soldiers may opt for

separate research medical records, stored apart from regular clinical records, so
that records regarding research participation remain confidential and under more
restricted access.APPENDIX B
127Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Weighing Importance of the Research Relative to Risk
Ms. Khan explained that risk to subjects must be balanced against benefits
of the research in HSR, as with any protocol. However, in most of the HSR

studies, she continued, the subjects themselves are not likely to receive any direct

benefit. Thus, the UTHSCSA IRB's tolerance for risk to the subjects tends to be

correspondingly low. The IRB tries to assist investigators in identifying possible
disclosure risks, stemming, for instance, from overlooked links between fields or
retention of identifying information that could be eliminated without jeopardizing

the results of the research. Ms. Khan observed that investigators sometimes retain

identifying fields as a matter of convenience and sometimes even do so when

there is no need for the information. The IRB can assist by alerting investigators

to the possible risks and educating them about how to avoid them.
In the review of the privacy issues in an HSR study, Ms. Khan noted that the
UTHSCSA IRB considers all those about whom data would be collected, and

whose privacy might therefore be at risk. In some protocols, for instance, the set

of subjects regarding whom data will be collected includes not only the patients

who received a service, but also the health care providers who delivered the

service. In this case, the UTHSCSA IRB is concerned that the privacy of health
care providers is protected.
Ensuring That Identifiable Information Is Protected During the Study
Ms. Khan explained that the UTHSCSA IRB requires information at the
time of the application detailing how the protocol will protect confidentiality.

Upon approval, the IRB instructs the investigators that they may not make any
changes to these procedures without prior IRB approval. The IRB requires status
reports annually or more often. Ms. Khan also noted that for any protocol

involving particularly sensitive data, the IRB requires the investigator to obtain a

certificate of confidentiality.
4Col. Anderson mentioned that an investigator may request that research
records be maintained under special coded identification numbers, with a linkage
to the individual's Social Security number. The key linking the study
identification number and the Social Security number is then stored separately

under extremely limited access.
4The certificate of confidentiality is described in the Public Health Services Act (§301
(d)). It provides protection for research data from subpoena by law enforcement agencies.
The investigator applies directly to the appropriate official, which varies depending on the
nature of the sensitive data. The types of data that may be eligible for protection include
information pertaining to sexual matters, drug use, illegal activity, mental health, or other
information that could damage the subject's financial standing, reputation, or could be in

some way stigmatizing. See also Wolf and Lo, 1999.
APPENDIX B
128Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Enforcement of Procedures to Protect Confidentiality
Ms. Khan concluded that IRBs function best when working in a
collaborative, educational relationship with the investigators. The UTHSCSA

IRB requires periodic status reports on all studies but does not itself audit

investigators or otherwise engage in active surveillance to ensure compliance.

Indeed, if a compliance assurance role proves necessary, she argued that it would
be more effectively carried out by another office so as not to lose the positive
relationship with investigators that the IRB has developed.
Regarding Col. Anderson's presentation, committee member Peter Szolovits
commended the Army's ability to maintain effective barriers between different

parts of the organization so as to keep a file of identifiers for use if necessary but

not risk improper disclosure, and asked if such a centralized resource for
psuedonymizing data could be used at other institutions. Col. Anderson replied
that the centralization of subject data demographics, control of data privacy, and

enforcement of procedures to maintain them might be implemented effectively in

a military organization but be impracticable or impossible in a civilian setting.
Additional Recommendations by Presenters
Ms. Khan offered several additional recommendations. First, in multisite
projects, personally identifiable health information generally ought not to be

shared beyond the local investigators. Second, she suggested that studies
involving collection of data through telephone interviews, which are frequently
used to collect information about services rendered (though not the focus of this

workshop), should be carefully reviewed and not necessarily approved if the

subject's name and telephone number will be given to a contract research

organization to make the calls. Finally, Ms. Khan emphasized that IRBs can and

should develop collaborative relationships with other parts of their institutions.

As an example, she suggested consulting with university committees that review

research for appropriateness and research allocation. She explained that since

these bodies tend to be concerned with both costs and legal exposure during

research, it is important that they and the IRB coordinate their policies.

Coordination both avoids frustrating investigators with inconsistent requirements

and builds in more internal support for compliance with the policies.
General Discussion Following Presentations
Committee member Lisa lezzoni commented that some IRBs either prefer,
or believe themselves required, to insist on using exactly the same language on
the consent form as would be used for clinical trials. In her experience, the result

is that potential participants in a health services research study that may involve a

review only of their records are warned about risk of physical injury, possibly

including death. Ms. Khan and several IRB administrators and/or chairs replied
APPENDIX B
129Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that their IRBs work to ensure that the language of the consent form reflects the
actual risks of the protocol.
Dr. Iezzoni also mentioned that one branch of HSR, qualitative health
services research, involves detailed interviews with a small sample of patients and

that, in these cases, additional precautions are needed to protect the privacy of the

participants. For instance, if the interviews are taped or videotaped, the voices

and/or faces may have to be masked.
Finally, a member of the audience, Dr. Joanne Lynne of RAND, urged the
committee to be mindful of the plight of very small hospices and other health care

providers who wish to carry out quality improvement projects. Such

organizations may lack the resources to locate or negotiate with an IRB.
Academic IRB Chairs
Dr. James Kahn, chair of the Committee for Human Research at the
University of California in San Francisco (UCSF), presented first, followed by

Dr. Robert Amdur of the University of Florida, recently IRB chair at Dartmouth

Medical School.Identifying Specific Studies as HSR
Dr. Kahn said that HSR studies at UCSF are reviewed in the same way as
other studies involving human subjects, except that the wording in the informed
consent form would be modified to reflect the type of research and would not
warn of physical injury. Dr. Kahn commented that if data are to be collected

systematically, the project ought to be reviewed by the IRB, since it is reasonably

likely that the investigator will publish the results if the findings prove to be of

interest.Dr. Amdur said that the differentiation of health services research from
various types of health operations such as internal quality assessment is critical
and argued that IRBs ought not to take on the task of protecting privacy in non-

research settings. Instead, protection of privacy in a nonresearch setting ought to

be addressed in other ways. He was concerned not only about the workload of

IRBs but also about placing administrative burdens on quality improvement

projects and health care operations. He suggested that the way to distinguish

research from other activities is to determine whether the project would be done

in the same way if the project directors knew they would not be able to publish or

otherwise present the results in an academic forum (Amdur et al., in press). That

is, if the project would be done even if the findings could not be published or

disseminated, it is not research. He pointed out that the fact of publication alone

would not be a sufficient criterion because the results of nonresearch assessments
are in fact sometimes published, but that research is always undertaken with a
view to contributing to public, general, knowledge.
APPENDIX B
130Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Determining Which HSR Studies Qualify as Exempt
Dr. Amdur argued that current federal regulations are applicable and
appropriate for evaluating health services research. Current regulations already

allow waiving of informed consent when risk would be minimal and the project

could not reasonably be carried out if informed consent were required. From this

perspective, he continued, the problem then resolves again to the need for the IRB
to take a rigorous view of what is research and to turn back any proposals that
ought, under the regulatory definition of research, to be viewed as a health care

operations or QA activity.
Weighing Importance of the Research Relative to Risk
Dr. Amdur commented that for IRBs that are operating according to the
Common Rule, the fundamental risk assessment approach is not a new task and

the regulatory structure is already, for the most part, in place. He continued that

reviewing HSR protocols, in particular the evaluation of risks associated with
possible invasions of privacy or breaches of confidentiality, does not make the
risk assessment task any different. An IRB could need additional knowledge or

expertise about how privacy might be invaded (whether intentionally or

inadvertently) since some means now available have only recently been

developed.Additional Recommendations by Presenters
Dr. Kahn reported that in response to several recent incidents in which the
IRBs of other institutions had been criticized for inadequate oversight, the vice
chancellor of the UCSF had commissioned an ad hoc committee to consider some
specific questions in reviewing the UCSF IRB's function. The ad hoc committee

was asked to consider the composition, procedures, and support of the IRB and

whether it could be of better service to the university. The committee returned a

list of recommendations, including several suggestions about increasing the use

of electronic information systems, increased training for researchers to address

both research responsibilities and institutional procedures, and increasing staff

support for the human subjects protection program. In addition, the chair

specifically suggested designating 1 to 1.5 percent of each grant involving human

subjects to be earmarked as funding for the human subjects protection program.
Dr. Amdur suggested that the growth of multisite research projects would
require changes in IRB function and structure. Because many HSR projects
depend on data from many different sites, the current system of review by each
local IRB creates an administrative burden that may discourage valuable HSR

projects. He suggested testing a central IRB to review multisite HSR studies.
APPENDIX B
131Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.General Discussion Following Presentations
In additional general discussion, committee member Lisa Iezzoni mentioned
experiences where different IRBs from different institutions are involved and

return inconsistent assessments. Several participants agreed that this is not

uncommon and must be resolved by negotiation on a case-by-case basis.
In discussions of problems turning on what party has a claim to data, either
for gaining or for withholding access, several participants asked to whom the data

belonged. Committee member Adele Waller explained that, as a legal matter,

disputes over how to handle data between different institutions cannot be resolved
simply by determining ownership of the data. She continued that several parties
typically have legitimate rights and responsibilities pertaining to the data,

distinctions that the concept ﬁownershipﬂ is unable to capture, and that no single

party has ownership.Research Institute IRB Chairs
Research institutes that are separate from universities carry out a great deal
of HSR. When such research is federally funded, these institutions are subject to

the Common Rule. Some research institutes have multiple project assurances
5through the OPRR in which they have agreed to comply with the Common Rule

for any human subjects research. The research institutes that participated in the

workshop are not affiliated with health care organizations such as integrated

health care systems or health maintenance organizations (HMOs), so they do not

face the issue of distinguishing HSR from quality improvement or business

functions. Because research institutes do not carry out clinical care or payment,

all of their activities would be research.
The first presenter was Dr. Tora Bikson, senior social scientist and IRB
chair at RAND. She was followed by Dr. Steven A. Garfinkel, an IRB chair and
health services researcher at Research Triangle Institute (RTI).
RAND's multiple project assurance agreement stipulates that the institution
will be guided by the ethical principles in the Belmont Report (Belmont, 1979)
and will adhere to federal regulations regarding human subjects protection for all
research involving human subjects regardless of sponsorship. RTI also follows

the Common Rule in all human subjects research.
Identifying Specific Studies as HSR
Dr. Bikson noted that the organizational unit that carries out a study cannot
be viewed as an indication of whether the study is HSR. Various parts of
5An ﬁassuranceﬂ is an agreement or contract between an institution and the OPRR, on
behalf of the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The assurance stipulates the
methods by which the institution will protect the welfare of research subjects in
accordance with the regulations. An MPA is a type of assurance designed for institutions
that engage in large amounts of health-related research. An MPA can be approved for 5-

year intervals.APPENDIX B
132Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAND, including the health research program, but also for example, the
education program and the criminal justice program, carry out HSR studies but

they are reviewed by the same IRB. As noted above, RAND requires all its

research involving human subjects to be in accord with the common rule and to

be reviewed by its IRB.
Dr. Garfinkel said that RTI does surveillance, cost and use studies (for
example, an evaluation of Oregon's Medicaid Reform Project), program

evaluation, and outcomes assessments. RTI also does coordination of clinical

trials and epidemiological work. In the former areas, it works with medical

records and insurance enrollment and claims (as well as interviews and tissue

specimens). RTI actually maintains three IRBs, two of which include physicians.

The HSR proposals go to the third IRB, which does not include physicians, for
review.Determining Which HSR Qualify Studies as Exempt
The committee heard that RAND has implemented an on-line system to
ensure that there is appropriate IRB review of all protocols. The IRB is notified

whenever a project receives an internal funding account numberŠin fact,

assigning such a number automatically triggers a message to the investigator

containing a brief screening questionnaire about the project. If the screener

indicates that the project might require IRB review, a more detailed questionnaire
then helps the investigator explore alternatives of exemption from IRB review,
expedited review, or full review (
Figure 2-2
). The on-line system may indicate
that a project would be exempt from IRB review if it will use only anonymous or

public use datasets or de-identified data sets if neither RAND nor any another

party on the contract has access to the identifiers. Dr. Bikson emphasized that the

system is designed to be inclusive, that is, to send any borderline cases to IRB

members for specific attention. In less clear situations, the IRB chair and/or

selected members would have to decide whether the particular project could be

exempt. Examples of borderline situations where an IRB member would have to

examine the project to decide whether further IRB review might be needed

include projects that will use anonymous or nonsensitive primary data gathered

through surveys, interviews or other methods requiring a direct interaction with
subjects; projects that gather data from public officials or candidates; or
intervention research that is anonymous and without risk.
Determining Whether Information Is Identifiable in Assessing Risk of
DisclosureDr. Bikson noted that the determination of whether identifiable information
will be involved remains challenging, and it is important to realize that

identifiability could enter the process at various points, from subject selection to

data combination to subject compensation. She reminded participants that

information may be directly identifiable (e.g., a Social Security number) but may

also beAPPENDIX B
133Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 2-2 
RAND's system for identifying reviewable research. SOURCE: Adapted from slide presented by Dr. Tora Bikson at the
Workshop on Institutional Review Boards and Health Services Research Data Privacy.
APPENDIX B
134Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.identifiable by inference from the combination of several data fieldsŠ
identifiability by inference is therefore one of the key concerns of privacy in

research utilizing databases. She suggested a general rule used by RAND that

may be of interest to others: if sorting data according to any variables produces

subsets with ten or fewer members, then these individuals will be at risk for

identifiability by inference.
Dr. Bikson, seconded by several participants, commented that researchers
often would strongly prefer to work with de-identified data, but that even if they

request such data and supply de-identifying algorithms to providers, they may

receive data complete with identifiers because the provider lacked time and staff

to remove identifying fields.
Dr. Garfinkel commented that when RTI researchers collect data from
surveys and claims, they are often required to produce public use files as part of

the product. He noted that in the course of producing such files, they have

likewise had to work at the problem of determining which fields may lead to

identifiability or at least increase the risk of unintended disclosure of personal

information.Weighing Importance of the Research Relative to Risk
Dr. Garfinkel explained that when RTI plans to produce a public access file,
it informs respondents that their data will be kept confidential, by which it means

that data will not be released in an identifiable form. He reported that in RTI's

experience, informing respondents that their data will be included in a public use

file, even though not in identifiable form, will needlessly lower the response rate.
He observed that the scientific benefit of a study could be seriously impaired by
unnecessarily alarming individuals about their privacy in the consent form.
Ensuring That Identifiable Information Is Protected During the Study
Dr. Bikson said that RAND's IRB includes a three-person privacy team. The
team, includes an information resource specialist (who specializes in security
measures such as encryption and creating codes to substitute for identifying
data), a data librarian (who specializes in rules and practices for dealing with very

large datasets acquired from other organizations), and a network specialist (who

specializes in conditions and limitations of safe data transfer over the network).

These IRB members help design and implement data safeguarding plans

commensurate with the level of risk for various protocols. Dr. Bikson emphasized

that data safeguarding includes maintaining physical control of the data especially

while in transit and that the risk of physical access to data by unauthorized parties

is sometimes overlooked even while more sophisticated technical security

measures may be attended to.
Beyond physical delivery, Dr. Bikson continued, the treatment of datasets to
be merged and manipulated is important to preserve data integrity and also to
protect subject privacy. RAND's suggested procedure calls for first replacing any
APPENDIX B
135Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.direct identifiers with codes. The file linking the code to the subject's identity is
then encrypted and stored separately from the encoded data file. Then when

another dataset is obtained, it is possible to regenerate the link file, replace direct

identifiers in the new file with the subject codes, and merge the coded files.
Dr. Bikson noted that because physical and technical protections are not
sufficient, RAND has implemented procedural protective measures. These

procedures include annual reviews for all projects, including inactive projects,

until such time as the direct identifiers and link files have been destroyed and any

remaining data that might be identifiable by inference have been eliminated or
altered so that identities cannot be inferred.
Dr. Garfinkel discussed briefly some situations in which beneficence may
require breach of confidentiality. RTI would consider such a breach in cases of

subjects exhibiting suicidal ideation or intent. Child abuse is another difficult

area, and the reporting of cases may be required in some states. Dr. Garfinkel

described an RTI project on child abuse in which researchers review records from
county social services with varying reporting laws. Since the laws differ by
locale, RTI designed a uniform national guideline and consent form and then

asked local interviewers to inform RTI when they were in danger of differing from

local laws.Dr. Garfinkel said that in some studies they receive coded data, for example,
Medicare enrollment data with ID codes but no names or addresses, so the

investigators can track costs and utilization by each subject without knowing the

identity of these individuals. In other instances, Dr. Garfinkel noted, they might

receive files of names and addresses for the purpose of contacting individuals.
When they make a contact, they first ask permission from the individual to
continue the project and to do a data linkage, thus obtaining an ﬁex post factoﬂ

consent (or dropping the individual from the study if this is what the individual

prefers).Enforcement of Procedures to Protect Confidentiality
Dr. Bikson said that RAND has observed that networked, distributed, and
backed-up digital environments together pose new types of threats to privacy.

Some researchers, for instance, may not realize that taking a diskette with backup
files home to work on a personal computer that is connected to a Digital
Subscriber Line (DSL) line (which is on all the time) can create a serious security

breach. Such examples suggest that the role of technical experts may be

underappreciated, and new technologies to protect privacy may yet be unexplored

or insufficiently exploited. She concluded that policy control must be developed

to replace physical oversight to ensure privacy protection, because it is in many

cases impossible, and surely impractical, to observe directly whether researchers

carrying out electronic manipulations are conforming to data protection rules.
APPENDIX B
136Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Additional Recommendations by Presenters
Dr. Bikson observed that professionals in other areas of study already have
gained long experience in the types of privacy concerns that HSR is now facing,

so researchers in health services might learn from, for example, researchers in the

criminal justice system.
Dr. Garfinkel reaffirmed the importance of health services researchers'
having the freedom to work with their IRBs to modify standard consent and

confidentiality language as appropriate for the particular study in question.
Dr. Garfinkel also commented on the distinct issue of studies using tissue
specimens (although not the primary focus of this project), saying that

requirements for informed consent for tissue storage are as yet misunderstood by

some researchers. In addition, such research raises issues of how to communicate
storage provisions on the consent form. The consent form separates stages of
consent, requesting the candidate to consider and consent separately to

participation in the study, to provision of the specimen, and then to allowing the

specimen to be stored for later use.
Commercial, Nonaffiliated IRBs
Although the traditional model of an IRB envisions a board closely
associated with a particular institution that draws its membership from the

institution and surrounding community, there are also nonaffiliated or
freestanding IRBs that provide review services for a fee. For many, the bulk of
their business involves clinical trials, but some also review health services

research. Some nonaffiliated IRBs regard their niche as providing consultative

services primarily to relatively small institutions that do not have MPAs and

therefore might find the support of an in-house IRB review to be difficult. Dr.

Angela Bowen, chief executive officer of Western Institutional Review Board

(WIRB) attended the workshop and spoke about WIRB.
Determining Which HSR Studies Qualify as Exempt
A central feature of WIRB's approach is its commitment to making
individual, specific, informed consent a part of all human subjects research it

sees.Several health services researchers pointed out that since it is not uncommon
for HSR protocols to utilize databases containing on the order of hundreds of

thousands or even millions of records, it would be difficult to design a workable

individual informed consent associated with a particular research protocol. Dr.

Bowen replied, however, that protocols of this type rarely, if ever, go to

commercial IRBs, so WIRB has not experienced that particular problem.
APPENDIX B
137Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Determining Whether Information Is Identifiable in Assessing Risk of
DisclosureLike other IRBs, the WIRB committee struggles with determining whether
data will be identifiable. In reviewing protocols for potential privacy risks, it

considers data to be identifiable if there is any link between the data and the

subject's identity, in which case, again, it would insist on informed consent by the

subject.General Discussion Following Presentation
Several participants raised questions about how nonaffiliated IRBs can take
into account the values and attitudes of the community in which the research is

conducted. Dr. Bowen explained that nonaffiliated IRBs can develop solid

relationships with clients, especially repeat clients, so they work closely with the

local institutions. Other discussion addressed the accountability of a nonaffiliated

IRB, since it does not report directly to an institution, and Dr. Bowen noted that
commercial IRBs are audited regularly by the FDA and OPRR.
HEALTH CARE PRODUCTS AND SERVICES INDUSTRY
Many health care organizations carry out a spectrum of activities that
involve the secondary analysis of personal health information. The spectrum

ranges from health services research to operations. Representatives of several
types of organizations that are largely concerned with the delivery of health
servicesŠthat is, operationsŠalong with research functions spoke about their

experience in the review of HSR by IRBs.
Pharmaceutical Manufacturer's Epidemiological Research
Dr. Harry Guess, executive director of epidemiology at Merck Research
Laboratories, discussed epidemiological surveillance of drugs and vaccines as
carried out within a pharmaceutical company. The purpose of these studies is to

assess the efficacy and safety of the product in clinical trials and the safety of the

product in actual postmarketing use. Much of the epidemiological analysis

utilizes previously collected data.
Identifying Specific Studies as Research under the Regulations
Dr. Guess explained that in most cases, although not federally funded,
pharmaceutical company epidemiological work will be under the purview of the

Common Rule, either because it is subject to regulation by the Food and Drug

Administration or because it is done in conjunction with a university or other

organization that requires it.
APPENDIX B
138Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ensuring That Identifiable Information Is Protected During the Study
Dr. Guess observed that the approaches used to protect confidentiality of
data in research sponsored by pharmaceutical companies differ by type of data. In

the case of adverse event reporting, he explained, the company may be unable to

avoid knowing the identity of the patient or the physician because one of these

individuals actually called in the report. Such information is subject to additional
levels of security. The reports to regulatory agencies do not identify patients or
physicians. In clinical trials, however, he said that the identity of the participants

is generally not given to the Merck officials at all, but rather is replaced by a code

at each study site. For protection of privacy, he concluded, Merck must therefore

rely on the IRBs and investigators at each study site, since the identifiable

information generally is not transmitted to Merck. He continued that for other

potentially identifying information, such as birthdates, Merck typically requests

that only ranges be reported whenever possible. Finally, Dr. Guess noted that

Merck audits study sites to make sure they are in compliance with FDA

regulations and the FDA also conducts inspections.
Enforcement of Procedures to Protect Confidentiality
The situation of records research at Merck was of particular interest at the
workshop because of the affiliation of Merck with Medco, a pharmacy benefit

management company. In the discussion after the presentation, participants
inquired about the degree of separation between the Merck research databases and
the Medco administrative and pharmacy usage databases. Dr. Guess said that

federal trade law requires the two branches of the company to be unambiguously

separate with regard to inside information. Thus, when other divisions of Merck

wish to utilize data from Merck-Medco for research, they must negotiate a

purchase of access to the data as any other research organization would.
Intermountain Health Care
Intermountain Health Care is a not-for-profit integrated health care delivery
system, including hospitals and clinics in four states and tertiary services in a
larger area. The organization has strongly promoted electronic medical records

since the 1950s. Dr. Brent James and Mr. Morris Linton of Intermountain Health

Care participated in the workshop.
Identifying Specific Studies as HSR
Dr. James began with the persistent problem of distinguishing the activities
of HSR from operations, since Intermountain Health Care (IHC), unlike the

research foundations, does both. He explained that IHC views these activities as

encompassing a continuum ranging from health care operations performance

assessment,
APPENDIX B
139Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to records review or epidemiological research, to clinical research. Then, in this
view, confidentiality protection also forms a continuum (
Figure 2-3
).Dr. James said that the clinical research end of the spectrum is overseen by
an IRB, and confidentiality concerns pertaining to clinical research would also be

reviewed by the IRB. The hospitals in the IHC system that do the most research

have an MPA and shared IRB structure. Investigations and analyses on the health

care operations end of the spectrum that do not meet the definition of ﬁresearch,ﬂ

do not fall under the purview of IRB oversight. Here Dr. James observed that

when IRBs go beyond their original role of protecting human subjects from
direct harms due to research, they may tend both to cause confusion and to
neglect their primary mission. Finally, Dr. James noted that just as the vast

majority of uses of patient data occur in the course of health care operations, so

also the vast majority of breaches of confidentiality occur in operations (indeed

he said that all the known privacy violations in IHC have occurred in health care

operations, none in research).
Determining Which HSR Studies Qualify as Exempt
Dr. James explained that IHC has an Information Security Committee, which
it believes may be similar to the privacy boards described in the proposed rule.

This committee is constituted similarly to an IRB, consisting of community

members as well as line administrators and scientists (including computer
specialists). The committee oversees and coordinates IRB functions in the
organization. It also determines whether projects from the area in the middle of

the health care operations and research spectrum should proceed to seek IRB

review.Ensuring That Identifiable Information Is Protected During the Study
Dr. James continued that the Information Security Committee generates and
recommends data security policies to the Board of Trustees of the company. The

committee then helps implement the policies and procedures throughout the
organization.Enforcement of Procedures to Protect Confidentiality
Dr. James said that, first, all IHC employees must sign a confidentiality
agreement, which must be renewed every two years, and then comply with a

ﬁneed-to-knowﬂ policy limiting who has access to which data. The company also

tracks data access with automatic electronic logs and has designed the elec- tronic

records system to ensure that identifiable portions are accessible only to

designated employees. IHC terminates employment because of privacy

infractions.APPENDIX B
140Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 2-3 
Intermountain Health Care's approach to operations: research spectrum. SOURCE: adapted from a slide presented by Dr. Brent
James at the Workshop on Institutional Review Boards and Health Services Research Data Privacy.
APPENDIX B
141Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dr. James expects the user authentication problem to be addressed much
more effectively in the future with, for instance, biological log-ons
1 rather than
passwords to restrict access.

Additional Recommendations by Presenter
Dr. James noted that IHC believes that patients as well as providers should
be able to view their own records and add comments (although nothing can be

changed or deleted). With rare exceptions, IHC-covered patients have this

access.Regarding patient perception of privacy, Dr. James observed that many
types of professionals within a health system generate and use patient information

and that patients understand that many professionals, as well their own

physicians, will need access to their medical records. It is important to be

sensitive to patients' perceptions, however, so when it is necessary to contact the

patient for a research project or other purposes, the contact should be initiated by a

professional who would be, and would be perceived by the patient as being,

reasonably expected to have access to the patient's records.
Finally, Dr. James suggested that truly de-identifying a health care record is
impossible if there is any link to any potentially identifying information. Hence,

the way to minimize confidentiality breaches is to control access to the link that

leads to identifiability. He suggested further that a record is identified only when a

human being sees it, so that if a computer program links records using

identifiable data but returns a nonidentifiable output, then that would not

constitute a privacy violation.

Pharmacy Benefit Management Company
Ms. Jennifer Low and Dr. Fred Teitelbaum of Express Scripts discussed
privacy and confidentiality in the context of pharmacy benefit management.

Express Scripts is a pharmacy benefit management (PBM) company, serving

various types of clients including insurers, unions, health care organizations, and

employersŠany type of organization, in short, that wishes to contract for a
1Biological log-ons, also called biometric identifiers, would permit a user to have access
to a file based on some recognizable and unique feature. In Wiederhold's on-line glossary,

(http://www-db.stanford.edu/pub/gio/CS99I/security.html#BIOMETRIC) biometricidentifiers are explained as follows: are more reliable than passwords. Biometric

identifiers: voice prints, signature dynamics, keystroke dynamics, hand measurements,

finger prints, face recognition. The pattern of the iris in a person's eye is also a candidate

for making a unique identification. Biometric identifiers are difficult to forge, but the

equipment needed to read them is awkward and forbidding. The person being identified

must cooperate for instance be willing to speak or write a specific expression clearly or be

scanned by a camera in a well-lighted space. Voice recognition is probably the easiest

technique to integrate into computer workstations. The voice pattern can also be recorded

on a smartcard, which can be linked securely to its owner. That card can contain

passwords, that are easily handled by the networks that verify access privileges.
APPENDIX B
142Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.pharmacy benefit. Among other things, the company provides pharmacy network
management, claim adjudication services, and drug utilization review and also

functions as a mail service pharmacy.
Identifying Specific Studies as HSR
Ms. Low and Dr. Teitelbaum both observed that, as members of a PBM
company, it is difficult if not impossible for them to distinguish HSR from

operations. Express Scripts conducts internal analyses of data to improve

operations (e.g., plan design, but also formulary decisions and assessment of
outcomes), although results are published whenever possible. However,
confidentiality standards (which include the protection and ultimate purging of

identifiable data) apply when such data are first used to create the research data

set.Ms. Low explained that, especially when it was smaller, the company
regarded itself as a pharmacy and thus bound by professional standards and law

without need for additional policy. As the size and scope of its operations

increased, the company has undertaken more formal policy development. She

also said that the company's primary means of ensuring that its appropriate
authorization to use data on patients is by asking the plan sponsor (i.e., the
managed care organization, employer, etc.) to obtain authorization from

individual plan participants.
Determining Whether Information Is Identifiable in Assessing Risk of
DisclosureDr. Teitelbaum reported that Express Scripts has instituted increasingly
stringent policies of limiting internal access to data.
Ensuring That Identifiable Information Is Protected During the Study
Dr. Teitelbaum described processes of data use: the data are typically kept in a
de-identified format, with a cross-reference for identification stored separately

and securely. De-identification of the data includes not only the removal of

names but also, for example, the use of age rather than date of birth and the use

of only the first three digits of the zip code.
Dr. Teitelbaum continued that the company is in the process of instituting a
privacy board to ensure that it does follow appropriate and effective procedures

for maintaining confidentiality. Its practices regarding data retention vary

according to state law (typically two to three years for prescriptions) or Employee

Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) (six to seven years), but de-identified

data may be kept indefinitely.
APPENDIX B
143Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Maintenance Organizations and Research
Mr. Andrew Nelson, executive director of HealthPartners and president of
the HMO Research Network, offered some perspective on the amount of HSR

that occurs in the managed care industry.
Mr. Nelson reported that the fraction of HMOs that formally and regularly
engage in research is relatively small (Nelson et al., 1998). There are 1,315

licensed managed care organizations, 24 of which have formal research programs

doing public domain research. Of the 24 HMOs that are active in research 13

established the HMO Research Network. Mr. Nelson also noted that many of
these HMO-based research organizations follow the Common Rule whether the
funding source would require it or not.
Mr. Nelson said that, like many observers, he has noted that many IRBs are
busy to the point of being overwhelmed and that increasing demands on them also

decrease the satisfaction of what is, in many cases, voluntary work. He offered

for consideration ten recommendations to help ease the overall problem of
properly protecting confidentiality in HSR without unduly stressing IRBs. The
first six address recommendations what institutions need; the last four are

external to the research HMO:
1. A framework to define the intersection between research and quality
improvement.
2. An internal auditing process.

3. Training and educational programs.

4. Individual data access and confidentiality certification for anyone who
may have access.
5. Internal and external data access policy as a broad foundation for data
privacy.6. Information technology policy defining how to apply privacy protections.

7. Encouraging academic institutions to incorporate research ethics and
research subjects protections into their curricula,
8. Development ready-to-use tools for HSR investigators to apply.

9. Asking IRBs to apply the Common Rule regardless of the funding source
of the study.
10. Increasing government involvement to include education as well as
oversight of IRBs.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS OF DATA PRIVACY AND
MINORITY GROUPS
Dr. William Freeman, IRB chair at the Indian Health Service, highlighted
some issues of particular importance in research involving minority populations.

He concentrated on American Indian, Alaska Native, Canadian First Nations,
APPENDIX B
144Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Inuit, and Kanaka Maoli or Native Hawaiian groups. Dr. Freeman emphasized
that he has not seen any specific instance of harm to minority groups due to HSR,

but the potential for privacy violation exists. He noted further that the potential

harm may affect not only the individuals and groups that might be subjects, but

also the research enterprise because if a group participates in research and regards

the privacy of the group or individual members to have been violated, then any
researcher approaching that group or perhaps other groups, as well, will not be
able to secure cooperation.
Levels of Privacy Concerns
Dr. Freeman pointed out that HSR usually addresses large sets of data in
which individual subjects may have little in common and are difficult to identify.

He suggested that in local, small, minority groups the situation is quite different,

with serious implications for privacy. First, he noted, the groups mentioned are

often relatively small and isolated communities whose members are well known
to one another, so the privacy of individuals within the group may be much more
difficult to protect than the privacy of an individual in a large city with a diverse

population. At the same time, a second type of privacy concern can affect such

populations. Because the minority group in question may have strong

intracommunity ties and be distinct from the surrounding culture or cultures in

significant respects, its members are likely to place a high value on the integrity

of the group. In this context, privacy may refer to the group as a whole rather than

to individuals.Strategies for Enhancing Both Privacy Protection and Trust
Dr. Freeman reaffirmed that both physical and electronic data security are
very important and frequently not given adequate attention in rural areas. He also
pointed out that data fields that might appear at first sight not to be identifying in a
large population could lead to the identification of one or a few individuals in a

small community. He suggested that the way to avoid such mistakes would be to

include in the protocol review, consultation with individuals knowledgeable

about the particular culture or group in question. He also suggested that in some

cases the use of formal, individual contractsŠin which the researchers promise

not to attempt to identify any individual and to notify the IRB if an individual

may have been identified inadvertentlyŠmay help build the trust of the

community in the research project.
General DiscussionIn the discussion after the presentation, several participants raised the
questions of what is an appropriate role for the community in the research process
and of how to involve affected parties in the community when there is no

cohesiveAPPENDIX B
145Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.group and therefore no generally accepted spokesperson (though many, of course
volunteering for that role, with divergent views). Although a definitive answer did

not emerge, several participants suggested that it is generally possible to speak

with several groups when there is no single representative.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND PRODUCTS
Mr. Lawrence Dietz of AXENT Technologies, an attorney and market
research analyst specializing in information security, briefed the committee on

market and technical trends in data security.
Web access security products are becoming increasingly necessary for
security maintenance and enhancement as more organizations wish to store,

retrieve, and exchange information via intranet. Although the products are
emerging, it is not yet clear what the costs may be of providing full servicing for
them.Regarding public key infrastructure (PKI), the industry and researchers are
very enthusiastic, and some observers believe the HIPAA and several laws in the

European Union to be driving the market to develop PKI products.
2 Market
adoption of PKI is, however, proceeding only slowly, especially in the United
States. This may be due at least in part to the fact that the process of integrating
PKI with individual legacy applications is very labor intensive. One reason

integration is difficult is that it is so complex; indeed, a PKI encryption device

may be asked to solve a wide variety of problems including authentication,

access, and authorization. The development and market penetration of smart

cards and other portable platforms for utilizing databases via PKI seems to be

much further advanced in Europe than in the United States, although unresolved

questions about cross-border privacy protection remain.
As the technology of Web-integrated systems becomes more ubiquitous and
easier to use, it is also becoming more difficult to defend from outside attack

(Dietz, 2000). Internal and external filtering techniques can be viewed as

necessary in any operation utilizing electronic records, since it would be critical
to minimize any time when the system is not available. Filtering systems, for
example, would be able to detect a pattern when a denial-of-service attack is

launched from multiple points requesting the same data at the same time and also

can guard against local systems being co-opted from the outside to serve as

launching points for such an attack (also described as ﬁbeing used as zombiesﬂ).
2A public key infrastructure is a system for managing and distributing public keys and
digital certificates to authenticate different usersŠthat is, to ensure that the asserted
identity of a given user in fact corresponds to user. (In face-to-face interactions, one person
can ﬁauthenticateﬂ himself to another by presenting a document such as a driver's license
or a passport. By telephone, a speaker can authenticate himself to another person by virtue
of a familiar voice. In cyberspace, however, some other mechanism is needed to provide

authentication among parties that do not know in advance that they need to interactŠthat
mechanism is PKI.) PKIs are an essential component of secure electronic
communications, but also raise important concerns for privacy (see for example, Brands,
1999).APPENDIX B
146Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cost pressures are of course resulting in both specific and general trends.
Specifically, many or perhaps most organizations are installing virtual private

networks, enhancing security relative to standard internet e-mail while also saving

money. More generally, many organizations are exhibiting a marked preference

to hire services, that is, to contract out to meet their information technology

needs, rather than to purchase products and train in-house support; this practice

has corresponding security risks as more people have access to electronic records

while being less invested in the culture of the organization.
In the future, additional work on security will likely be required at the small
office and home office level, a point that often arises in consideration of

academic researchers who deal with secure data but often work at home.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS OF DATA PRIVACY AND
MINORS3Federal regulations on human subjects include special provisions that apply
when subjects are of minor age (45 CFR 46 Subpart D). The contract describing

the IOM's project included an agreement that the committee would consider

measures for protecting personally identifiable health information that pertains to

children if any different conditions should be deemed desirable, and, in

particular, would consider the desirability of requiring projects involving children

always to undergo full IRB review. For background on these matters, the

committee commissioned a paper on protecting the data from health services

research in minors. The paper was presented in draft form at the workshop and

appears in full as appendix C of the (IOM, 2000) report.
There are three basic issues that further complicate the question of how to
conduct research involving minors that meets high ethical and scientific

standards:heterogeneity of the population in question,

 arising from proxy consent, and

changing interests and risks affecting the subjects.
The heterogeneity of the subject population arises from the intersection of
the legal definition of the term ﬁminorﬂ with the developmental process of

maturation from infancy to adulthood. The law recognizes any person under the

age of majority, for most purposes 18 years old, as a child, but the maturation of a

person from infancy through the age of majority is a dynamic process,

encompassing a very wide range of capacities, interests, concerns, and also risks.
The law recognizes that children do not have the decision-making capacity
of adults and addresses this fact through beneficent paternalism. In the case of

medical or research interventions, beneficent paternalism requires that consent

for the intervention be made by an adult proxy, in most cases the child's parent

(s).3This section is based on a presentation by Dr. Ross Thompson, developmental
psychologist and author of the commissioned paper author.
APPENDIX B
147Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The question of uncoerced and informed consent to participate in research brings

with it problems when subjects are adults, and proxy consent brings further

complications. In some cases, the adult proxy may have interests that differ from,

or even conflict with, those of the child. A further complication arises when the

child does reach the age of majority: if an adult has given proxy consent for data

on the child to be examined in research, is this consent still valid when the child

reaches adulthood, or must consent be sought anew?
The maturation of children not only means that the category ﬁchildrenﬂ is
heterogeneous, as described above, but also that as a particular individual

matures, the interests of this individual change and the changes themselves are

complex. The lawŠand most peopleŠreadily recognize that research on children

involves special risks, which must be taken into account and do not apply to adult

subjects. The risks, concerns and areas of vulnerability of children do not,

however, necessarily diminish inversely with an increase in age and body mass;

indeed, some risks increase. Risks that may increase as the child matures include

vulnerability to embarrassment, fear of exposure, and concern for violations of

privacyŠjust the risks most likely to be associated with health services research.
In the discussion after the presentation, participants raised several additional
points. In consideration of protecting privacy, some features of children as

subjects increase the difficulty of de-identifying data. For example,

hospitalization is rare for children, so even within a large sample of children, data

on hospitalization or very high medical bills may effectively identify one or a

small number of individuals. Another special problem is that the effect of the

identification of individual children might have additional impact on other family

members, since the mother may then be identified as well.
Participant Gerald S. Schatz pointed out that the difficulties associated with
proxy consent are further intensified in the case of children who are wards of the

state, and proxies who are government agencies and liable to be overburdened or

to prefer not to see problems.
INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS OF DATA PRIVACY
STANDARDS4Questions and issues of protecting privacy and personally identifiable health
information have arisen in nation states around the world and in regard to the

transfer of data across international borders. The contract describing the IOM's

project included an agreement that the committee would compare the privacy

protections contained in international conventions for personally identifiable

health information used in research with the principles and best practices

developed in this study. For background on these matters, the committee

commissioned a paper comparing international approaches to protecting the

privacy of4This section is based on a presentation by Ms. Bartha Maria Knoppers, professor of
international law.
APPENDIX B
148Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.data from health services research. The paper was presented in draft form at the
workshop and appears in full as appendix D of (IOM, 2000) report.
The Organization for Economic cooperation and Development (OECD)
published Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of

Information in 1989, which included eight basic principles on the collection, use,

and holding of personal data; these are further distilled here into four core

principles pertaining to data protection, including the creation of statutory

protections, transparency of data processing, additional protections for sensitive

data, and the rights of individuals to claim enforcement of rules on data
protection. The concept of privacy and the principle that individuals ought to be
secure from improper interference in privacy are also mentioned in other

international agreements including the United Nations 
Universal Declaration 
(1948) and 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(1966); the
European Convention on Human Rights (1955); the Council of Europe's

Convention for the Protection of Individuals, with Regard to Automatic

Processing of Data 
(1981), Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine 
(1997), and subsequent recommendations; the World Health Organization's

Declaration on the Promotion of Patient's Rights in Europe 
(1994) and 
Directiveon the Protection of Individuals 
(1995); the World Medical Association's 
RevisedDeclaration of Lisbon on the Rights of the Patient 
(1995); and the European
Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies' 
Ethical Issues of Health Care
in the Information Society 
(1999).Turning to the internal or domestic arrangements in selected nation states,
the United Kingdom and other Common Law countries such as Australia and New

Zealand recognize the protection of privacy under Common Law, although the

law can be modified or clarified by statute. Privacy under the Common Law is an

aspect of the liberty of a citizen, and if this liberty is infringed upon so as to cause

harm, the citizen can pursue legal action. As an exception to the general

protection of privacy, however, a medical practitioner may be required to disclose

certain information in court if called for by the public interest. Australia also
follows Common Law with some statutory exceptions, one of which provides
that medical records are considered the property of the private medical

practitioner, but not of the public health facility.
By contrast, the legal systems of continental nation states did not develop
under Common Law, but follow the Napoleonic Code and variations. Rather than

being an aspect of liberty that might be harmed, privacy in this system is viewed

as a right in and of itself, which means that a citizen need not show that an

infringement of privacy caused harmŠan infringement of privacy is sufficient

for legal action regardless of whether harm followed. In France, the

confidentiality of medical records is further protected by being treated as an

obligation of result, which means that not only what is heard or seen is protected

by law, but also what is understood, and the body of law that protects the
information from disclosure is the penal code.
In the domestic legal systems of individual nation states, the Common Law
versus civil code contrast is again the basic distinction. The United Kingdom's

British Medial Association has recently affirmed that any disclosure should be
APPENDIX B
149Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.anonymous and minimized to the degree possible and that patients should be
informed of how data about them may be used. Australian law includes several

sets of principles and guidelines, that call for the entity in possession of a record

containing personal information to use the information only for the purpose for

which it had been collected unless either the subject consents or another use is

mandated by other law. France has recently undergone two important
developments pertaining to the protection of the privacy of health information in
its legal system. The first was a statute regulating the use of data for research,

that provided significant new oversight mechanisms, and second was a decree

regarding the use of data in the process of reimbursement.
At the conclusion of the presentations, the committee again thanked all the
participants for their effort to provide information and insight, and encouraged

anyone wishing to comment further or submit written materials to feel free to do

so through the study director.
APPENDIX B
150Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCESAmdur, Robert, Speers, Marjorie A., and Bankert, Elizabeth. IRB Triage of Projects that Involve
Medical Record Review. In press.
Applebaum, Paul S. Threats to the Confidentiality of Medical RecordsŠNo Place to Hide. JAMA.
2000 Feb 9; 283(6):795Œ796.
Association of American Medical Colleges. AAMC Comments on The Recommendations of the
Secretary of Health and Human Services on the ﬁConfidentiality of Individually Identifiable

Health Information.ﬂ AAMC Testimony Presented to the Senate Labor and Human

Resources Committee. 1997 Nov 10.
Belmont 1979. The Belmont Report. Office of the Secretary. Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the
Protection of Human Subjects of Research. The National Commission for the Protection of

Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. 1979 April.
Bradburn, Norman M. PopulationŠBased Survey Research. Presentation Done at National Bioethics
Advisory Commission. 2000 Apr 6.
Brands, Stefan. Rethinking public key infrastructures and digital certificatesŠbuilding in privacy.
Thesis of Stefan Brands. 1999 Sep 4: 304 pages.
Buckovich, Suzy A., Rippen, Helga E., and Rozen, Michael J. Driving Toward Guiding Principles: A
Goal for Privacy, Confidentiality, and Security of Health Information. Journal of American

Medical Informatics Association. 1999 MarŒ1999 Apr 30; 6(2):123Œ133.
Department of Health and Human Services, and Office of the Secretary. Standards for Privacy of
Individually Identifiable Health Information; Proposed Rule. Federal Register. 1999 Nov 3;
64(212):59918.
Dietz, Lawrence. Information Warfare Poses New Threats: Are You Ready? Internet Security
Advisor. 2000 MarŒ2000 Apr. 30:8Œ10.
Etzioni, Amitai. Medical Records. Enhancing Privacy, Preserving the Common Good. Hastings
Center Report. 1999 MarŒ1999 Apr 30:14Œ23.
APPENDIX B
151Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GHPP (Health Privacy Working Group). Best Principles for Health Privacy. Health Privacy Project;
Institute for Health Care Research and Policy, Georgetown University. 1999. Available

[online] http://www.healthprivacy.org/latest/Best_Principles_Report.pdf
.Goldman, Janlori, and Hudson, Zoe. A Health Privacy Primer for Consumers EXPOSED. Health
Privacy Project. Institute for Health Care Research and Policy. Georgetown University.

Washington, DC. 1999 Dec. Available [online] 
http://www.healthprivacy.org/resources/exposed.pdf.Gostin, Lawrence O., Lazzarini, Zita; Neslund, Verla, and Osterholm, Michael T. The Public Health
Information Infrastructure A National Review of the Law on Health Information Privacy.

JAMA. 1996 Jun 26; 275(24):1921Œ1927.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Committee on Regional Health Data Networks and Molla Donaldson,
and Kathleen N. Lohr, editors. Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and

Privacy. 1994. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Committee on Health Services Research: Training and Work Force
Issues and Marilyn J. Field, Robert E. Tranquada and Jill C. Feasley, editors. Health

Services Research: Work. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 1995.
IOM (Institute of Medicine) Committee on the Role of Institutional Review Boards in Health
Services Research Data Privacy Protection. 
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services
Research. 
Forthcoming. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
ISPE (International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology). Data privacy, medical record
confidentiality, and research in the interest of public health. [Web Page]. 1997 Sep 1.
Available at: 
http://www.pharmacoepi.org/policy/privacy.htm
.JHITA (Joint Healthcare Information Technology Alliance). Advocacy Paper: Medical Records
Confidentiality Legislation [Web Page]. Available at: 
http://www.jhita.org/medical.htm
.Lo, Bernard, and Alpers, Ann. Uses and Abuses of Prescription Drug Information in Pharmacy
Benefits Management Programs. JAMA. 2000 Feb 9; 283(6):801Œ806.
Lowrance, William W. Privacy and Health Research: A Report to the U.S. Secretary of Health and
Human Services. 1997 May.
Nelson, Andrew F., Quiter, Elaine S., and Solberg, Leif I. The State of Research Within Managed
Care Plans: 1997 Survey. Health Affairs. 1998 JanŒ1998 Feb; 17(1):128Œ138.
NRC (National Research Council). Committee on Maintaining Privacy and Security in Health Care
Applications of the National Infrastructure, Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics and Applications, and National

Research Council. For the Record. Protecting Electronic Health Information. Washington,

DC: National Academy Press. 1997.
NRC (National Research Council) Panel of Confidentiality and Data Access, George T. Duncan,
Thomas B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, editors. Private Lives and Public Policies

Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statistics. 1993.
O'Brien, Dale G., and Yasnoff, William A. Privacy, Confidentiality, and Security in Information
Systems of State Health Agencies. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 1999; 16

(4):351Œ358.
OPRR, National Institute of Health. Intitutional Review Board (IRB) Guidebook, 1993 [Web Page].
1993. Available at: 
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/oprr/irb/irb_guidebook.htm
.PhRMA. PhRMA Policy Papers: Twin Goals: Privacy and Progress [Web Page]. Available at: 
http://www.phrma.org/issues/goals.html.APPENDIX B
152Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Shalala, Donna. Confidentiality of Individually Identifiable Health Information, Recommendations of
the Secretary of Health and Human Services, pursuant to section 264 of the Health Insurance

Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. 1997 Sep 11.
Wiederhold, Gio. Traveling the Electronic Highway: Glossary Maps, Encounters, Directions. Terms
relevant to Internet Computing. 1998 Jan.
Wolf, Leslie E. and Lo, Bernard. Practicing Safer Research Using the Law to Protect the
Confidentiality of Sensitive Research Data.
APPENDIX B
153Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
154Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADDENDUM A WORKSHOP SPEAKERSAPPENDIX B
155Robert Amdur, M.D.

Associate Professor and Associate
Chairman for Clinical Affairs
Department of Radiation Oncology
University of Florida Health SciencesCenterArthur Anderson, M.D.

Fort Detrick, U.S. Army

Chief, Department of ClinicalPathology and Office of Human
Use and EthicsU.S. Army Medical Research
Institute of Infectious DiseaseTora Bikson, Ph.D.

Senior Behavioral Scientist
Chair, IRB

RAND
Angela Bowen, M.D.
President
Western Institutional Review Board
Lawrence Dietz, Esq.
Market Intelligence Director
AXENT Technologies, Inc.

William Freeman, M.D., M.P.H.

Director, I.H.S. Research Program

Chair, Headquarters I.H.S. IRB

Rockville, MD
Steven A. Garfinkel, Ph.D.

Associate Director
Health Services and Policy ResearchProgramResearch Triangle Institute
Harry Guess, Ph.D.
Chief, Epidemiology
Merck
Brent James, M.D.
Vice President for Medical Research
and Continuing Medical EducationIntermountain Health CareProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
156James Kahn, M.D.
Institute for Health Policy Studies
Department of Medicine,
University of California, SanFranciscoS. Angela Khan

Institutional Coordinator, Research
ReviewInstitutional Review Board
University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio
Bartha-Maria Knoppers, J.D.
Professor, Faculty of Law

Senior Researcher, C.R.D.P.

Legal Counsel, McMaster Gervais
University of Montreal
Morris Linton, JD
Senior Council
Intermountain Health Care
Jennifer Low, Esq.

Associate General Counsel
Express Scripts, Inc.Andrew Nelson
Executive Director, HealthPartners

President, HMO Research Network
Minneapolis, MN
Thomas Puglisi, Ph.D.
Director, Division of Human Subjects
ProtectionsOffice for Protection from ResearchRisksU.S. Department of Health andHuman ServicesFred Teitelbaum, Ph.D

Vice President

Outcomes Research and CostManagementExpress Scripts, Health ManagementServicesRoss A. Thompson, Ph.D.

Professor
Department of Psychology
University of NebraskaProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADDENDUM B WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTSAPPENDIX B
157Olga Boikess
NIMH
Brian Brown
National Naval Medical Center
Institutional Review Board
Ruth Bulger
USUHS
Donna T. Chen

Southeastern Rural Mental HealthResearch Center, University of

Virginia
Angela Choy
Institute for Health Care Researchand PolicyGeorgetown University
Sarah ComleyCarrie Crawford
National Naval Medical Center
Institutional Review Board
Trenita Davis
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Institute of Dental andCraniofacial ResearchNancy Donovan
U.S General Accounting Office
(GAO)
Gary B. Ellis
Office for Protection from ResearchRisksNational Institutes of Health
John P. Fanning

Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Planning and EvaluationMichael Fitzmaurice
Agency for Healthcare Research andQualityProtecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
158Ellen Gadbois
National Bioethics Advisory
CommissionOlga Garcia
Office of Management and Budget
Felix Gyi
Chesapeake Research Review, Inc.

Stephen Heinig
Association of American Medical
CollegesTom Hogan

The Blue Sheet
Julie Kaneshiro
National Institutes of Health
Richard A. Knazek

National Institutes of Health
Eric Larson
General Accounting Office

Richard Levine
USUHS
Joanne Lynn

RAND
Margaret Matula
National Institutes of Health
Laurie Michel
Merck
Mary Otto
Knight RidderShannon Penberthy
Association for Health ServicesResearchDouglas Peddicord
Washington Health Advocates

Joan Porter
ORCA
Maryann Redford
National Institutes of Health
Patricia M. Scannell
Washington University School of
MedicineGerald S. Schatz
National Institutes of Health
Amy Schwarzhoff
Chesapeake Research Review, Inc.

Ann Skinner
Johns Hopkins School of PublicHealthStuart F. Spicker

Massachusetts College of Pharmacy,
BostonMiron Straff
National Research Council
Bernard Talbat

National Institutes of Health
Ron Warren
Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
Protecting the Health Services Research
Data of Minors
Ross A. Thompson, Ph.D.
There are many issues relevant to the confidentiality, security, and privacy
of personally identifiable health information (PHI) used for health services
research purposes. These include (1) the nature of the confidentiality protections

of privately funded health services research studies (which are not generally

subject to institutional review board [IRB] approval), (2) the purposes for which

the data were originally gathered, (3) the purposes for which they are used in

secondary reanalysis, (4) the nature of the consent procedures originally used and

the confidentiality assurances that are part of the consent process, (5) protections

of the data while the study is under way, and (6) who the relevant actors and

agencies fundamental to such procedures are (e.g., hospital IRBs, insurance

companies managed care providers, physicians researchers).
These are difficult issues that are relevant to the PHI of all research
participants, regardless of developmental stage. For example, problems of
confidentiality emerge in very large databases when health events of extremely
low frequency are studied and data relevant to these particular cases can easy lead

to their identification. The steps that can be taken to ensure the confidentiality of

health data such as these are unlikely to vary significantly depending on whether

the health events beset adults or infants (e.g., a multiply challenged baby in the

neonatal intensive care unit).
However, when children are research participants, there may be more unique
risks to the confidentiality and privacy of their PHI and special concerns in the

secondary analysis of their health data. This paper is devoted to framing the
issues associated with protecting the health services research data of minors
APPENDIX C
159Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in light of how the PHI of minors is commonly treated in health services
research. In brief summary, these include the following issues:
 population. Within the broad population
of legally defined ﬁminors,ﬂ research studies document considerable

variability in developing judgment, self-understanding, and psychosocial

functioning. This means that:
  the capacities of children and youth to assent to the uses of their PHI and to
meaningfully understand assurances concerning confidentiality, privacy, and

research risk develop considerably with increasing age, with adultlike

capabilities evident early in adolescence;
  the psychological risks posed by the inappropriate disclosure of minors' PHI
(e.g., perceived privacy violations, feelings of embarrassment or humiliation,

threats to their medical or legal interests) change complexly with

development but, by late childhood, approximate the risks experienced by

adults;  collected PHI, older children and adolescents may be concerned about access
to health data collected when they were younger and have a strong interest in

giving independent consent to its use.
These considerations are relevant to all minors, especially to adolescent
populations who can in some jurisdictions consent independently of their

parents to certain forms of medical treatment (e.g., substance abuse or

mental health treatment).
 constitute a uniquely vulnerable population because of their limited
rights under the law and their limited capacities for autonomous decision

making. This means that special provisions are needed to ensure their

protection from research risks, which include, but extend beyond, parental

proxy consent on their behalf.
  Problems in proxy consent arise from (1) fundamental difficulties in
distinguishing the interests of children from those of their parents or other

custodians, (2) the fact that consent also involves accepting provisions for

control over research materials, knowledge of research findings, and

conditions governing children's elective withdrawal from research

participation in which parents' and children's interests may also differ, and

(3) lack of clarity about whether proxy consent endures for the entire course

of the research investigation, including longitudinal or secondary analyses,

regardless of children's developing capacities (and interests) in asserting and
protecting their own rights as research participants as they mature.
  Special considerations in biomedical data result from the uniquely sensitive
nature of such data, and the potential immediate and longer-term

implications of PHI for children in the context of family dynamics. These

require immediate
APPENDIX C
160Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.determinations about who has access to, and control over, children's PHI that
take into consideration life-course concerns for children.
Taken together, it is clear that the health information of minors should be
considered very differently from the PHI of adults in a manner that reflects their

developing capabilities and a life-span consideration of children's interests.
A CASE ILLUSTRATION
These issues related to protection of the research data of minors are not
exclusive to PHI. To illustrate, consider the following hypothetical case study

(based on actual published research):
A research team inaugurates a large, longitudinal study of children's social and
emotional adjustment in the 1970s. This research enlists a representative sample
of more than 2,000 children in the early gradeschool years from a large urban
population. Passive consent procedures are used (i.e., parents receive a letter
describing the nature of the study and are asked to contact the investigators if

they wish their child NOT to participate). The children are assessed annually on
six occasions after the study begins, with assessments including measures of
peer relationships, self-perceptions, academic competence, and emotional
functioning.Fifteen years after the study begins, a new researcher joins the team with
interests in the prediction of child maltreatment. After obtaining IRB approval,
the names and other identifying information of children in the original research
are matched against the state's child abuse registry, after permission to do so is
obtained from state officials. This results in a large sample of children identified
as having been abused or neglected when the original research was in progress.
Furthermore, the social service agencies for counties in the area are contacted

and invited to participate in the research by sharing the child protective services
case records of the identified children in the sample. Based on these records, the
timing, type, chronicity, and severity of maltreatment is determined. Careful
efforts are taken to ensure the confidentiality of all research materials.
As a consequence, a uniquely informative investigation of the antecedents and
correlates of child maltreatment using a prospective longitudinal design with a
large, representative sample results. Matched subsamples of maltreated and
nonmaltreated children are compared to address fundamental questions about the
impact of the experience of abuse or neglect, and its timing and severity, on
various measures of psychosocial and emotional adjustment in childhood.
A number of questions are raised by this case illustration that are also
relevant to the protection of health services research data by minors:
  Given the sensitive nature of the secondary analyses (and potential
perceptions of privacy invasion), were the researchers ethically obligated to

seek permissionAPPENDIX C
161Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.from families in the study when the investigation later turned to the
prediction of child maltreatment? Or did the original consent procedures

apply to the secondary data analysis that also involved accessing confidential

state records?
 the initial use of parental passive consent proceduresŠrather than active
consent, in which the parent must contact the researchers to consent

volitionally after having been informed about the research purposesŠalter

the ethical obligation to seek further consent after the research team began to

investigate more sensitive issues? Or were original consent procedures
adequate regardless of whether passive or active consent was used?
  Because a significant proportion of the children originally enlisted into the
study had reached the age of majority before the secondary analyses began,

were the researchers ethically obligated to contact them for permission to use

data gathered during their minority? Or were the original consent

procedures, involving parents but not children, still sufficient at this later
period?  Without opportunities for further informed consent, was it possible for the
participant families or children (now, in some cases, young adults), to

protect themselves against the potential risks involved in the secondary

analyses of these data in concert with protected (and confidential) state

records?ISSUES TO CONSIDER
There are no easy answers to these questions, but posing them thoughtfully
is essential to consider judgments about how the needs and rights of minors can

be protected in health services research data that may be subjected to secondary

analysis. There are additional considerations, discussed below, that add further
complexity to thinking about any potential special ethical review requirements of
research involving minors.
Children as a Heterogeneous Population
Although the term ﬁchildrenﬂ is commonly used in these contexts to refer to
all persons below the age of majority, it is instructive to realize that the term
encompasses infants, preschoolers, gradeschool children, and adolescents within a
single conceptual umbrella. Although the umbrella may be sufficient for legal

purposes, it ill-fits the heterogeneity of capabilities, interests, and needs

characterizing the population it covers.
With respect to the reflective judgment required for informed consent, for
example, there is considerable research evidence that by early adolescence, young
people are capable of making informed consent decisions about medical
treatment and research participation that are comparable in quality to those of

adults (Abramovitch et al., 1995; Abramovitch et al., 1991; Lewis et al., 1978;

Melton et al., 1983; Ruck et al., 1998; Ruck et al., 1998; Weithorn, 1982, 1983;

Weithorn and Campbell, 1982). At somewhat earlier ages (i.e., during the

gradeschool years), children's informed consent capabilities are more uneven or
APPENDIX C
162Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.inconsistent, although their judgment can be strengthened through the use of
simple interventions, such as providing short, educational information about

rights and prerogatives as a research participant (Abramovitch et al., 1995; Rau

and Fisher, 1999). Thus, the capacities of children to assert an active, responsible

voice in judgments concerning their research participation increases significantly

with age, with mature competence reached well before the legal age of majority,
but with the capacity for mature consent strengthened through age-appropriate
educational interventions.In a somewhat comparable manner, the psychological risks to which children
are vulnerable also change significantly with age. Moreover, these risks change in

complex ways: some decrease with increasing age, others increase as children

mature, and still others remain essentially stable over the course of development

(Thompson, 1990a, b, 1992). This challenges the prevailing assumption that

children become less vulnerable in research contexts as they mature. For

example, although children become progressively less prone with increasing age
to becoming distressed, overwhelmed, or disorganized in research settings
because of the development of emotional and behavioral self-regulation and

coping skills, children become 
more susceptible to other risks from their research
participation as they mature. These include susceptibility to threats to self-

concept and self-esteem (sometimes arising from performance evaluation),;

vulnerability to feelings of shame, embarrassment, or humiliation (sometimes

from concerns about the improper disclosure of personal information); and

concern about expressed or implied social comparison evaluations. Likewise,

although children become progressively less prone to being deceived or coerced

by research procedures as they develop more mature and insightful judgment

about the motives of other people, they also become more vulnerable to concern

about perceived privacy violations in the use of their research data. Indeed, for
many adolescents, concerns with personal privacy extend to the disclosure of
personal information, such as their research data, even to parents (see Wolfe,

1978).There are several implications of this developmental analysis of research
risk:  The psychological risks associated with research participation and deriving
from the imroper disclosure of research data vary as minors mature, but do

not necessarily decrease linearly with increasing age. For some risks,

vulnerability increases. Moreover, children's vulnerability to the research

risks most pertinent to adults increases sharply over time; these include

perceived violations of privacy, the embarrassment and humiliation that may

derive from inappropriate disclosure of personal health data, and some of the

tangible consequences of unwarranted disclosure (e.g., difficult family
processes or compromised medical or legal circumstances; see below).
  Estimating the nature of the research risks to which children are vulnerable is
thus a developmentally graded assessment, and in longitudinal research these

risks may change as children mature over the course of the investigation. In

other words, the research risks relevant to an investigation that was

inaugurated when children were preschoolers are not necessarily the same as

thoseAPPENDIX C
163Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.relevant by the time the same children have become adolescents. This means
that a revised riskŒbenefit calculus becomes necessary as longitudinal

research proceeds (Thompson, 1992).
  In the secondary analysis of data (as with longitudinal data), the constellation
of risks to which children are vulnerable is also likely to change with the

passage of time since the original data were gathered. In addition, older

children and adolescents, like young adults, are likely to feel much

differently about the uses of data gathered when they were very young than

they were capable of feeling at the time these data were initially obtained.
Concerns over personal privacy, threats of embarrassment or humiliation,
and more tangible concerns related to the potentially inappropriate disclosure

of research data now become personal issues (whereas formerly they were

addressed on behalf of the child through parental proxy consent procedures).
Any assessment of the ethical responsibilities of researchers should take
these developmentally changing concerns into consideration.
Children as a Uniquely Vulnerable Population
A longstanding tradition of special protections for children and youth in
research derives from the special configuration of child, parental, and state

interests related to children's research participation. Within moral theory, the

unique characteristics of children account for their limited self-determination and

the beneficent paternalism they receive from others (Baumrind, 1978; Melton,
1987). Their limited experience and immature reasoning capabilities together
mean that although children (as persons before the law) are entitled to some of

the rights of privacy and self-determination granted to adults, their capacities to

exercise these rights are limited. They are limited, in part, because of the

responsibilities entrusted to others to safeguard their welfare. As a consequence,

adults (especially parents) make fundamental decisions concerning the research

participation of their offspring, exercising proxy consent on behalf of children

and making other decisions concerning research on behalf of their children's

interests. Moreover, the state also assumes a special interest in the child's well-

being, independently of the authority of parents, because of its responsibility

under the 
parens patriae 
doctrine. This is one reason why the ethical review of
research protocols involving children by state-appointed agencies (e.g., IRBs) is
typically more searching, even though parents also exercise proxy consent on
behalf of their offspring.
This means that children are almost uniquely powerless social actors in
decisions concerning their research participation and the disposition of their

research materials. Although children's assent is encouraged by existing federal

regulations, it may be difficult for them to dissent meaningfully from research
participation not only because of limitations in judgment, but also because their
invitation to participate typically occurs in a context of prior parental permission,

institutional support (whether the institution is a school, childcare center,
APPENDIX C
164Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.hospital, or other setting), and adults' interests in furthering the research
enterprise (Abramovitch et al., 1991). For the same reasons, children's social

power to resist research procedures that they find unduly distressing,

psychologically invasive, or coercive may also be quite limited. Furthermore,

children experience limited social power not only over decisions concerning their

research participation but also over other elements of the research process, such
as the disclosure of research data and assurances concerning the disposition of
research materials, their withdrawal from research participation after the study

has begun, and obtaining the benefits (if any) of research participation. Each of

these ordinary prerogatives of the research participant is exercised instead by

adults as proxies for the child.
Of course, in most cases, adults (especially parents) make decisions in the
interests of children. However, it is unwise to assume that the interests of parents

and offspring are always identical in these situations and that the motives

underlying parental consent are always consistent with children's interests.

Recognizing this, the federal regulations governing research with children

(Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS], 1991) not only require

special review considerations in studies involving children, but also encourage
the child's assent to research participation when children are capable of doing so
meaningfully. (Indeed, in 1978 the National Commission for the Protection of

Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research recommended that a

child's objection to research participation constitute a 
binding 
restriction except in
extraordinary circumstances and that the assent of children age 7 and older be

required for their research participation. These provisions were not, however,

incorporated into the final DHHS regulations.) These provisions seem to reflect

the following: (1) children's unique needs and social vulnerability mandate

special consideration in the ethical review of research, (2) adults (usually parents)

must exercise proxy consent on behalf of children, but (3) proxy consent alone

cannot be the only assurance that children are not subject to unreasonable risk.

These provisions raise further the question of whether, when data gathered on an
earlier occasion are enlisted later into new research purposes (e.g., secondary or
longitudinal analyses), children should be capable of making their own,

independent decisions concerning access to and the disposition of their research

materials if they have developed sufficiently mature judgment to do so.
Problems in Proxy Consent
Just as there is value in recognizing that parents usually make thoughtful
judgments concerning the research participation of their offspring, there is value

also in recognizing the circumstances in which proxy consent does not necessarily

protect children's interests. When parents derive financial benefit, access to

services, or other personal rewards from the research participation of offspring

for example, proxy consent may not adequately protect children's interests.
(Indeed, philosopher Paul Ramsay, 1970, 1976, 1977 has argued that 
any nontherapeutic research with children is morally impermissible because even
APPENDIX C
165Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.proxy consent inevitably confounds adults' interests with those of children.) In
abusive or adversarial parentŒchild relationships, adults may be motivated to deny

permission if children's research participation might contribute to the detection of

maltreatment, substance abuse, or other parental problems. With respect to

medical research (e.g., PHI), proxy consent by parents may be problematic in

situations when biological assessments of offspring are needed to evaluate the
medical condition of another family member (e.g., in genetic screening studies or
DNA analysis of tissue samples), or parents may be motivated to conduct risk

assessment (presymptomatic) testing of offspring for disorders that are not

immediately relevant to the child's well-being (e.g., Huntington's disease).
Potential problems in proxy consent are even more apparent when consent is
given not by a biological parent, but by a representative of a government agency

when children are wards of the state (see National Bioethics Advisory

Commission, 1998). In these circumstances, inappropriate incentives may result

in considerable pressure for children to participate in research studies that may
not be in their best interests.
In some situations, adolescents may be hesitant to obtain parental consent
for medical treatment of sensitive conditions (e.g., substance abuse or mental

health problems) because of privacy concerns. Current legal policies in many

states recognize this in allowing adolescents to consent independently to certain

forms of treatment without parental consent. This raises important issues
concerning the confidentiality of medical records arising from treatment and
adolescents' control over the disclosure of this information to family members and

others outside the family. Likewise, behavioral researchers have long recognized

that parental consent may be an impediment to research participation by older

children and adolescents in research studies of sensitive topics (e.g., sexuality,

drug or alcohol use) in which parental consent is also likely to violate the privacy

interests of youth. In these circumstances, confidentiality and the control over

access to research data must also be carefully considered.
The potential problems of proxy consent are magnified somewhat by two
additional considerations. First, consent also typically includes accepting

provisions for and assurance of responsibility for many other aspects of research

participation in which parents and children's interests may not be identical. These
include, for example, provisions governing access to the research data gathered
from children, issues of privacy and confidentiality of research materials,

children's knowledge of the results of the research inquiry, and conditions

governing children's elective withdrawal from research participation. In certain

situations, the decisions of parents may be influenced by factors different from

those relevant to children's needs and interests.
Second, consent is often assumed to endure for the duration of the research
investigation. As noted earlier, this may be problematic in longitudinal studies or

in the secondary analysis of original data that occurs at which children have
matured to an age when their own independent judgments concerning the
disposition of their research data are relevant. Children's independent consent is

importantAPPENDIX C
166Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not only to respect their increasing maturity concerning judgments about research
participation (and their rights as research participants), but to enable them

independently to protect their prerogatives as research participants by

participating in a consent process in which provisions about confidentiality and

privacy, risks and benefits, freedom to withdraw and access to research findings

are discussed.In light of these considerations, it becomes apparent also why many research
scientists believe that passive consent procedures are inappropriate to research

involving children (e.g., Fisher, 1993). In passive consent, parents receive notice

of a research study in which their children will participate unless the parent

contacts the investigator to prohibit participation. By contrast, active consent

procedures require the parent's volitional consent before children can participate
in research. The fundamental problem with passive consent procedures is the
assumption that parents who do not respond have assented to research

participation when, in fact, they may have failed to receive relevant information,

it may have been lost or misplaced after it was received, or parents may have

otherwise neglected to indicate their objections to their child's research

involvement. Passive consent is also problematic because entailed in the consent

process is the acceptance of many other provisions governing research

participation (e.g., provisions concerning disclosure, confidentiality, and

protection of research data; conditions governing children's withdrawal from

research participation; assurances concerning risks and benefits from research

involvement; and guarantees concerning penalties owing to the failure to

participate in research) for which active, not passive, consent is necessary. Active
consent is especially important in situations where parents are acting as proxies in
protecting their children's needs and interests.
For similar reasons, blanket research consent provisions incorporated into
insurance and consent-to-treatment documents that permit PHI (and, quite often,

the PHI of family members) to be used for secondary research purposes may be

equally inappropriate from the perspective of research ethics. Without clear

information concerning the nature of the secondary research purposes and

relevant assurances concerning privacy and confidentiality, it is difficult for an

individual to know what he or she is consenting to. Moreover, when such blanket
consent is requested at the time of medical treatment, these circumstances may
make it very difficult to decline.
Special Considerations in Biomedical Data
The need for parental proxy consent and children's assent, the
developmentally graded risks faced by children owing to the inappropriate

disclosure of research data, and the growing capacities for personally informed

consent that emerge as minors mature are considerations shared by behavioral and

biomedical researchers who enlist children into their studies. There are, however,
a number of concerns that are more specific to health services research data, such
as those used for secondary research purposes, because of the broader

implicationsAPPENDIX C
167Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the data for children and their families (see, generally, National Bioethics
Advisory Commission, 1999). These make considerations associated with the

control and dissemination of PHI especially germane, particularly when data are

collected and/or used by agencies not usually governed by the Common Rule.

These issues can be illustrated by considering the genetic testing of children and

adolescents.With the recent significant advances in knowledge generated by the Human
Genome Project, the challenges posed by the uses and potential misuses of

personal genetic information have received increased attention. Genetic testing of

children and youth can occur for many reasons, as in genetic screening or

pedigree analyses (e.g., to trace the family history of a disease) or in DNA

analysis of tissue samples for research or therapeutic purposes. As knowledge of
the human genome increases, it is likely that genetic testing of children will
increase in the years to come. Whatever the reasons that testing initially occurs,

genetic testing may yield information of a sensitive nature for children and

adolescents, such as the discovery of an inherited vulnerability, possibly for a

stigmatizing (e.g., mental illness, alcoholism) or life-threatening disease (e.g.,

Huntington's disease, cancer).
There are immediate and long-term implications of the knowledge yielded
by genetic testing of children and adolescents that are directly relevant to the

dissemination and confidentiality of the results of their testing. In the immediate

context, knowledge of inherited vulnerabilities can be distressing and confusing,

especially given the uncertain, probabilistic prognostic implications of this

information (indeed, most adults are unlikely to grasp the indeterminate
implications of a genetic marker for an inherited disorder). This requires sensitive
considerations of whether children and youth are permitted access to their testing

results, conditions under which this information is provided, and the availability

of support and guidance to help ensure that youth respond constructively (e.g., by

enlisting pathology-preventive behavioral practices, if possible) rather than

nonconstructively (e.g., through personally abusive practices or the development

of depressive or anxious pathology) to the news that they have an inherited

vulnerability (Gardner et al., 1992). This might involve enlisting a fellow health

care professional, a trusted extended family member, or an adult friend, to discuss

distressing health care findings with an adolescent when immediate family

members may not be the most suitable counselors, perhaps because of their own

conflicts or interest or owing to family dissension.
These considerations lead to a series of important questions. Who else is
allowed access to the information yielded by a child's or an adolescent's genetic

testing? Who decides if, when, and how the young person is provided with this

knowledge? To what extent are the youth's preferences to knowŠor not knowŠ

the results of the test determinative at the time the testing is conducted or in the

future? To what extent does a child or adolescent have control over whether this
information is shared with family members or with others outside the family?
There is value in creative avenues for protecting children while also ensuring that

their privacy and self-determination are safeguarded. One research
APPENDIX C
168Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.team, for example, protected adolescents' ﬁright not to knowﬂ the results of
genetic test for Huntington's disease, but also put the testing results in a registry to

which youth would have direct and exclusive access after age 18 (see Fisher et

al., 1996).These questions are important because of their relevance to the potential
extended implications of the information yielded by genetic testing. In a long-term

context, knowledge of inherited vulnerabilities can have implications for

employment, insurability, and health care coverage that may be based on an

accurate or inaccurate understanding of the broader implications of markers
within the genotype for inherited disorders. This raises similar questions about
the control of the information yielded by a young person's genetic testing and the

importance of guarding against the risks inherent in the unwarranted (and

unwanted) disclosure of personal health information such as this, especially for

institutions not typically governed by the Common Rule. Importantly, PHI

improperly disseminated during a child's minority can have longer-term

implications for that person's well-being after he or she has become an adult.
The secondary analysis of health care data adds further questions to these.
This arises, in part, because as children mature to majority age, they may be

entitled to an active role in decisions concerning the use of their original testing

results. Furthermore, the interests that governed initial parental proxy consent to

genetic testing may be much different from those governing the young adult's
personal concerns about the dissemination of this information. This suggests that
procedures governing the uses of PHI obtained from minors must be considered

within a life-span context for the individual. The consent processes and

assurances that occurred at the time a child was initially tested may not generalize

to later conditions in which the adolescent or young adult can better represent her

or his own interests and preferences, and may have an interest in doing so.
CONCLUSIONSA central challenge in considering the ethics of research with children is the
juxtaposition of the interests of children, their parents, and the research

community within the context of children's limited decision-making capabilities

and our cultural commitment to beneficent paternalism on their behalf (e.g.,
Koocher and Keith-Spiegel, 1990). When considering how best to protect the
health services research data of minors, especially in the context of the secondary

analysis of these data, the issues become especially complex because of the

changing developmental needs and interests of minors over the course of the

investigation, which may be very different at the time of the secondary analysis

of data than they were at the time the data were originally gathered (and consent

procedures were originally instituted). These problems are encountered, in

somewhat different ways, by behavioral researchers who conduct longitudinal

studies in which children's involvement in research is maintained through their

increasingly active participation in decision-making on their behalf as they

mature. In biomedical research most relevant to PHI, however, the challenges are
APPENDIX C
169Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.additionally complicated because family needs can be confounded with children's
needs, the dissemination of children's PHI can create family conflict, health care

institutions may or may not be governed by traditional procedures associated with

protection from research risks, and the inappropriate disclosure of children's PHI

can have lifelong implications for children that affect them well after they have

reached the age of majority.
With respect to the practices of IRBs in their review of research protocols
involving children, several kinds of questions are warranted.
  Do research procedures undergo a more searching examination when children
are research participants, particularly with respect to assessing in a

developmentally graded manner the potential risks of their research

participation? IRBs assume a special responsibility to children as research

participants and cannot assume that parental proxy consent will always

safeguard children's interests.
  Are active parental consent procedures used when children are below the age
of majority? Are consent procedures sufficiently specific and clear that

parents can make reasonable judgments concerning the nature of the research

procedures and the uses of research data?
  Do research procedures provide for children's assent to research participation
independent of parental consent? Are these procedures appropriate to the

child's age and conducted in a manner that avoids undue incentives or

pressure on the child? Do these procedures attempt to provide information to

children, suitable to their understanding of their rights concerning the privacy

and confidentiality of the information yielded by research, their freedom to

withdraw from participation, and related prerogatives? (Some IRBs require
documentation of the proportion of children who do not assent to research
procedures and who seek to withdraw from participation once the research

has begun.)  With older children and adolescents, do research procedures provide for their
active participation in the process of research consent, recognizing the

maturity of their independent judgment?
  When research is longitudinal in nature or when secondary analyses of
previously collected data are conducted, is a follow-up IRB review needed to

determine whether additional consent procedures are required from the

children who participated in the original research or from their parents? Are

there new dimensions of potential research risk arising from the fact that the

children are now older or from changes in research purposes or goals?
  When sensitive data (e.g., the results of biomedical assessments) are
obtained, is thoughtful consideration devoted to questions such as (1) who

has access to this information, (2) whether, and under what circumstances,

the child or adolescent is informed about testing results; and (3) provisions

for the child to obtain direct access to this information, and control over its

dissemination, after reaching the age of majority?
As a general rule, it is valuable to consider the protection of health services
research data for minors within a life-span context, taking into consideration the
APPENDIX C
170Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.longer-term implications of decisions made early on behalf of the child, as well
as the child's own preferences and goals (Fisher, 1997). Procedures that respect

children's immediate and long-term interests in the privacy, confidentiality, and

protection of their PHI, in the context of respecting their rights to age-appropriate

self-determination, are especially warranted.
REFERENCESAbramovitch, R., Freedman, J. L., Henry, K., and Van Brunschot, M. (1995). Children's capacity to
agree to psychological research: Knowledge of risks and benefits and voluntaries. 
Ethics and
Behavior, 
 5, 
25Œ48.
Abramovitch, R., Freedman, J. L., Thoden, K., and Nikolich, C. (1991). Children's capacity to
consent to participation in psychological research: Empirical findings. 
Child Development, 
62, 
1100Œ1109.
Baumrind, D. (1978). Reciprocal rights and responsibilities in parentŒchild relations. 
Journal of
Social Issues, 34, 
179Œ196.
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) (1991). 
Code of Federal Regulations. Protection
of Human Subjects. 
45 CFR 46, Subparts A and D. Washington, DC: U.S.Government
Printing Office.
Fisher, C. B. (1993). Integrating science and ethics in research with high risk children and youth.
Social Policy Report of the Society for Research in Child Development, 7, 
1Œ27.Fisher, C. B. (1997). A relational perspective on ethics-in-science decisionmaking for research with
vulnerable populations. 
IRB: A Review of Human Subjects Research, 19, 
1Œ4.Fisher, C. B., Hoagwood, K., and Jensen, P. S. (1996). Casebook on ethical issues in research with
children and adolescents with mental disorders. In K. Hoagwood, P. S. Jensen, and C. B.
Fisher (Eds.), 
Ethical Issues in Mental Health Research with Children and Adolescents. 
Pp.135Œ266. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gardner, W., Thompson, R. A., and Smith, M. G. (1992, April). 
Genetic Counseling About Risks of
Chronic Diseases: Developmental Perspectives on Adolescents' Best Interests and Legal
Rights. 
In E. J. Susman (chair), 
Ethical Issues and the adolescent: Research, Health Care,
and Social Policy. 
Symposium conducted at the meeting of the Society for Research on
Adolescence, New Orleans, LA.
Koocher, G. P., and Keith-Spiegel, P. C. (1990). 
Children, Ethics, and the Law. 
Lincoln, NE:
University of Nebraska Press.
Lewis, C. E., Lewis, M. A., and Ifekwunigue, M. (1978). Informed consent by children and
participation in an influenza vaccine trial. 
American Journal of Public Health, 68, 
1079Œ
1082.Melton, G. B. (1987). The clashing of symbols: Prelude to child and family policy. 
AmericanPsychologist, 42, 
345Œ354.
Melton, G. B., Koocher, G. P., and Saks, M. J. (Eds.) (1983). 
Children's Competence to Consent. 
NewYork: Plenum.
National Bioethics Advisory Commission (1998). 
Research Involving Persons with Mental Disorders
That May Affect Decisionmaking Capacity. 
Rockville, MD.
National Bioethics Advisory Commission (1999). 
Research Involving Human Biological Materials:
Ethical Issues and Policy Guidance. 
Vol. 1. 
Report and Recommendations of the National
Bioethics Advisory Commission. 
Rockville, MD.
Ramsay, P. (1970). 
The Patient as Person. 
New Haven: Yale University Press.
APPENDIX C
171Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ramsay, P. (1976). The enforcement of morals: Nontherapeutic research on children. 
Hastings Center
Report, 
August, 21Œ30.
Ramsay, P. (1977). Children as research subjects: A reply. 
Hastings Center Report, 
April, 40Œ42.
Rau, J.-M. B., and Fisher, C. B. (1999). 
Assessing and Enhancing the Research Consent Capacity of
Children and Youth. 
Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, Fordham
University, New York.
Ruck, M. D., Abramovitch, R., and Keating, D.P. (1998 a). Children's and adolescents' understanding
of rights: Balancing nurturance and self-determination. 
Child Development, 64, 
404Œ417.
Ruck, M. D., Keating, D. P., Abramovitch, R., and Koegl, C. J. (1998 b). Adolescents' and children's
knowledge about rights: Some evidence for how young people view rights in their own
lives. 
Journal of Adolescence, 21, 
275Œ289.
Thompson, R. A. (1990a). Vulnerability in research: A developmental perspective on research risk.
Child Development, 61, 
1Œ16.Thompson, R. A. (1990b). Behavioral research involving children: A developmental perspective on
risk. 
IRB: A Review of Human Subjects Research, 12, 
1Œ6.Thompson, R. A. (1992). Developmental changes in research risk and benefit: A changing calculus of
concerns. B. Stanley and J. E. Sieber (Eds.), 
Social Research on Children and Adolescents:
Ethical Issues. 
(Pp. 31Œ64) . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Weithorn, L. A. (1982). Developmental factors and competence to make informed treatment
decisions. Pp. 85Œ100 G. B. Melton, 
Legal Reforms Affecting Child and Youth Services 
NewYork: Haworth.
Weithorn, L. A. (1983). Children's capacities to decide about participation in research. 
IRB: A Review
of Human Subjects Research, 5, 
1Œ5.Weithorn, L. A., and Campbell, S. B. (1982). The competency of children and adolescents to make
informed consent treatment decisions. 
Child Development, 53, 
1589Œ1598.
Wolfe, M. (1978). Childhood and privacy. Pp. 175Œ222 I. Altman and J. F. Wohlwill (Eds.), Children
and the Environment. New York: Plenum.
APPENDIX C
172Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
Confidentiality of Health Information:
International Comparative Approaches
Bartha Maria Knoppers, J.D.
Although the concept of the confidentiality of personal medical data is well
accepted by the general public and by health professionals, the detailed practice
is under potentially serious attack by governments that want access in order to
combat fraud or serious crime or to improve efficiency of services, by big
business that wishes to improve its competitive edge or reduce its costs by
utilizing detailed personal data in order to focus the promotion of its products

and services, and by health care organizations that do not keep their security
measures up to the state of the art required by the information processing
facilities available and the attacks on personal medical data.
1A brief comparative overview of international and national developments on
the confidentiality of health information over the last half century must of needs

cover (1) the right of privacy, (2) medical confidentiality 
per se, 
and (3) the
protection of personal data. Together they overlap and sometimes commingle.
Whether understood as a property or liberty interest,
2 privacy continues to
develop the zone of personal intimacy free from public scrutiny. Medical

confidentiality arises from both the nature of the information concerned and the

fiduciary character of the physician/patient relationship. It has seen a movement

towards greater patient as opposed to professional control of health information.

Finally, the recent appearance of personal data protection laws not only shields

the individual from the powers of informatics but also provides a measure of

security and personal control. Privacy, confidentiality, and personal data

protection are inseparable when touching upon health information.
INTERNATIONAL
In 1948, the United Nations adopted article 12 of the 
UniversalDeclaration, which upholds the protection against ﬁarbitrary interference with
[one's] privacy, family, home or correspondenceﬂ and ﬁattacks upon [one's] honor

and1Barber, B., ﬁPatient Data and Security: An Overviewﬂ (1998) 49 
International Journal
of Medical Informatics, 
19 at 25.
2Le Bris, S., and B.M. Knoppers, ﬁInternational and Comparative Concepts of Privacyﬂ
in Rothstein, M. (ed.) 
Genetic Secrets 
New Haven: Yale University Press, (1997) 418Œ
448.APPENDIX D
173Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.reputation.ﬂ This same right is also found in the 1955 European Convention on
Human Rights, although the possibility of State ﬁinterferenceﬂ... ﬂfor the

protection of healthﬂ was specifically foreseen as a possible exception. Although

the right to privacy was further strengthened by its inclusion in the 1976 United

Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, it was both the

Council of Europe's 1981 Convention for the Protection of Individuals with
Regard to the Automatic Processing of Data which considered health data as
ﬁspecialﬂ, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

(OECD's) 1989 
Guidelines for the Protection of Privacy and Transborder
Flows that established the modern parameters for the principled regulation and
security of medical data. The eight OECD principles are: (1) collection

limitation; (2) data quality; (3) purpose specification; (4) use limitation; (5)

security safeguards; (6) openness; (7) individual participation; and (8)

accountability. The 1981 Convention, in particular, established exceptions for

data banks for statistics or scientific research purposes as well as the rules for

record linkage.The last decade has also witnessed an increasing emphasis on patient
autonomy and patient's rights. Thus, according to the World Health Organization,

all health status information should remain confidential even after death (art.

4.1), Declaration on the Promotion of Patient's Rights in Europe). 
Concurrentwith this expanding ambit of confidentiality is that of the notion of identifiability
through personal data. The 1995 European Community 
Directive on the
Protection of Individuals 
(with regard to the processing of personal data and on
the free movement of such data) defines personal data as ﬁany information

relating to an individual or identifiable natural person ﬁ(data subject); an

identifiable person is one who can be ﬁidentified, directly or indirectly, in

particular by reference to an identification number or to one or more factors

specific to his physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social

identity.ﬂ (art. 2.a).
It was however, the 1997 Council of Europe's Convention on Human Rights
and Biomedicine that included a new corollary right: ﬁthe right not to be informed

about health informationﬂ within the concept of respect for private life and the

right to information. In a sense, privacy in the health sector once associated with
the property of medical records, then as a right of ﬁsecrecyﬂ (i.e., not to be
personally identified or ﬁprocessedﬂ without consent), has now been extended to

cover the sphere of personal intimacy through not being informed of one's own

health data.
In that same year, the Council of Europe also adopted Recommendation R97
(5) on the Protection of Medical Data. Three articles bear mention here:
Article 1. An individual shall not be regarded as ‚identifiable' if identification
requires an unreasonable amount of time and manpower.
Article 3.1. The respect of rights and fundamental freedoms, and in particular of
the right to privacy, shall be guaranteed during the collection and processing of
medical data.APPENDIX D
174Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Article 7.2. In particular, unless other appropriate safeguards are provided by
domestic law, medical data may only be communicated to a person who is
subject to the rules of confidentiality incumbent upon a health care professional,
or to comparable rules of confidentiality, and who complies with the provisions
of this recommendation.The status of a Council of Europe's convention is that of an international
treaty, and it is binding on signatory states. The first article cited above again

takes up the challenge of defining identifiability in a computerized society, thus

adding the proviso ﬁrequiring an unreasonable amount of time and manpower.ﬂ

The second makes explicit the link between privacy and medical data (which

according to another article includes genetic data). The third limits the persons

who can receive such data to health professionals or those ﬁwith comparable rules

of confidentiality.ﬂ This latter requirement resonates with the ﬁextraterritorialityﬂ

approach of the 1995 European Community Directive mentioned earlier, which is

binding on countries within the European Union (EU).
According to the Directive, not only must all 15 member States establish
legislation that conforms with its standards, but personal data cannot be

transferred from an EU country to a non-EU recipient country unless the

protections in the recipient country are deemed to afford ﬁadequate levels of

protectionﬂ (art. 25.1).
The processing of health data is not distinguished from that of other
personal data but the exemptions provided for under article 8 are certainly

relevant:Where processing of the data is required for the purposes of preventive
medicine, medical diagnosis, the provision of care or treatment or the

management of health care services, and where those data are processed by a
health professional subject under national law or rules established by national
competent bodies subject to the obligation of professional secrecy or by another
person also subject to an equivalent obligation of secrecy.
Finally in 1999, the European Group on Ethics in Science and New
Technologies issued an opinion ﬁ
Ethical Issues of Health Care in the Information
Society.ﬂ3 Not only are the eight principles broader than the OECD data
principles, but participation and education have been added to the traditional list.
The group calls for a clear statement on rights and duties related to personal
health data in the information society at a European level. Indeed, the opinion

asserts that1. A directive on medical data protection is desirable within the framework
of the current Data Protection Directive to address particular issues arising

from the use of health data;
2. A European patient's charter covering the above aspects, possibly by
means of a recommendation, should be adopted.
3The principles are (1) privacy, (20) Confidentiality, (3) Principle of ﬁlegitimate
purpose,ﬂ(4) consent, (5) security, (6) transparency, (7) participation, and (8) education.
APPENDIX D
175Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In short, there are four well-established core information principles
concerning personal data protection in Europe: 1) statutory protection; 2)

transparent processing; 3) special protection for sensitive data, and, 4)

enforcement rights for individuals. Nevertheless, a recent study for the OECD on

ﬁData Protection in Trans-Border Flows of Health Research Data,ﬂ while

supportive of self-regulatory codes of conduct (especially where there is scrutiny
by a data protection authority and eligibility for funding), emphasizes the need
for more consolidation.
4 Within the area of sensitive data, health information is
increasingly being singled out as being in need of specific statutory protection in

spite of the application of the four core principles through a web of legal

instruments. Nowhere is this trend more evident however than in national

legislation.NATIONALUnited Kingdom
In the United Kingdom (UK), confidentiality is afforded both Common Law
and statutory protection. Beginning with the Common Law, ﬁ[i]t is generally
thought that the action of breach of confidence is now a 
sui generis 
action finding
its roots in principle of equity, contract, property and tortﬂ Kennedy and Grubb,

1998; (p. 497),). The obligation of confidence arises both from the context in

which the information is communicated to the doctor and from the nature of that

relationship. Furthermore, ﬁimportant public interests favor confidentiality where

personal information is communicated in circumstances in which it is clear that

the recipient is expected to respect the privacy of that informationﬂ (p. 502). In

order to succeed in an action for breach of confidentiality, a plaintiff would have

to show some form of injury (including mental distress) or economic loss (p.

514). Finally, contrary to Civil Law, a physician may disclose confidential

information in the courtroom due to the public interest in the administration of

justice, with the possibility that refusal could be considered contempt of court.
Common Law may be modified by statute. For example, the Data Protection
Act of 1998 includes in its core principles the duty to process fairly and lawfully
personal data. Sensitive data, defined as including health data, cannot be
processed in the absence of explicit consent unless they are necessary for medical

purposes or ﬁundertaken by a professional who in the circumstances owes a duty

of confidentiality which is equivalent to that which would arise if that person

were a health professionalﬂ (Schedule 3, sec. 8).
It should be noted that the Human Rights Act (1998) incorporates the
European Convention on Human Rights into UK law. This guarantees the right to
4Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
, Data Protection in
Transborder Flows of Health Research Data 
(STI: Health Policy Brief) 1999, at p.23; See
also Schwartz, P. ﬁEuropean Data Protection Law and Medical Privacyﬂ in Rothstein, M.
(ed.), supra, 
note 2, 392Œ417.
APPENDIX D
176Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.respect for privacy and family life. Superimposed on this, the previously
mentioned Data Protection Act of 1998 provides a framework of rights and

principles governing the use of electronic or structured paper records, including

fair processing. Nevertheless, in spite of the core principles found therein, the law

does not specify when confidential information should and should not be

disclosed to others, in research or most other activities. Thus, decisions must be
made according to Common Law on a case-by-case basis even when a research
project has been approved by a Research ethics committee and authorized by a

health authority.
5It also bears noting that in 1999, the British Medical Association (BMA)
reiterated its request for statutory intervention to clarify the law in respect of the

confidentiality of medical information in both the private and the state sector.
6The general principles put forward by the BMA follow:
  Information disclosed should be the minimum necessary to achieve the
objective and, whenever possible, anonymous.
  Patients should be made aware of the potential uses of their information and
be given an opportunity to object. Use of information for research is

currently accepted as long as it is carried out within the guidelines and

subject to monitoring by appropriately constituted research ethics

committees. The BMA strongly recommends that patients be made aware

that research is carried out and that it may involve the use of their records

unless they object.
Generally, the association maintains that although research constitutes a
justifiable use of personal health information, ideally it should use anonymized

data wherever possible. The information disclosed should be the minimum

necessary to achieve the objective. It may be possible to use pseudonyms or other

tracking mechanisms for information, which cannot be anonymized, thus ensuring

accuracy and minimizing the use of personal identifiers. Health professionals

must make reasonable efforts to ensure patients understand that their data may be
used in research unless they exercise their right to object. Identifiable information
should not be used for research purposes if the individual has
5Medical Research Council, 
Personal Information in Medical Research 
(Guidelines),1999, (s.2.2.5).
6British Medical Association, 
Confidentiality and Disclosure of Health Information, 
Oct. 14, 1999: 
Confidentiality: 
The principle of keeping secure and secret from others,
information given by or about an individual in the course of a professional relationship.
Disclosure: 
The revealing of identifiable health information to anyone other than the
subject. Personal health information: 
Any personal information relating to the physical or
mental health of any person from which that person can be identified. 
Anonymizedinformation: 
Information, which does not, directly or indirectly, identify the person to
whom it relates.
APPENDIX D
177Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.registered an objection. Nor should the contact details of potential participants in
research be passed to researchers without consent.
Moreover, in these recent guidelines, the BMA has taken the explicit
position that ﬁit is not ethically necessary to seek consent to the use of

anonymous information.ﬂ It also maintained the position that in addition to the

traditional duty of medical secrecy, ﬁthere is also strong public interest in

maintaining confidentiality so that individuals will be encouraged to seek

appropriate treatment and share information relevant to it.ﬂ These recent

guidelines repeated the concern already addressed in the 1997 Caldicott Report
over the management and security of flows of information through new
communication technologies. In short, the BMA maintains that the Data

Protection Act of 1998 cannot adequately protect medical information.
Recently, the Medical Research Council Key Principle B maintained:
When consent is impracticable, confidential information can be disclosed for
medical research without consent if it is justified by the importance of the study;
if there is no intention to contact individuals (except to seek consent) or reveal
findings to them, if there are no practicable alternatives of equal effectiveness;
and if the infringement of confidentiality is kept to a minimum
7With regard to this principle, the document notes that the ﬁdecision about
whether a study is sufficiently important is not for the investigator alone, but

must also be referred to a Local Research Ethics Committee for independent

assessment.ﬂ The techniques required for the use of personal health information

in research are encoding or anonymization ﬁso far as is reasonably possible.ﬂ

Anonymized data is understood as the equivalent of unidentifiable data, that are,

all information that could directly identify individuals has been irreversibly

removed.A recent case of the Court of Appeal (December 21,1999)
8 reversed a High
Court ruling
9 that the collection and sale of data on doctors' prescribing habits
breached confidentiality even when the data are anonymized. The case hinged on

the issue of implied consent to the use of anonymized data ﬁnot only by

commercial companies but for public interest purposes, including medical

research and statistics.ﬂ
10The Court of Appeal held that for breach of confidence to occur the
information must have: ﬁthe necessary quality of confidence about it; be imparted

in circumstances imparting an obligation of confidence; and, be an unauthorized

used of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it.ﬂ The

Court of Appeal held that due to anonymization ﬁ[t]he patient's privacy will have

been safeguarded, not invaded. The pharmacist's duty of confidence will
7Supra, 
note 5.8Source Informatics Limited, 
http://wood.ccta.gov.uk/courtser/judgeme.9R and the Department of Health (ex parte) 
v. Source Informatics 
[1999] All E R 185.
10Dyer, C., ﬁBMA's Patient Confidentiality Rules are Deemed Unlawfulﬂ (1999) 319
BMJ 1221.APPENDIX D
178Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not have been breached.ﬂ It is interesting to note that albeit 
in obiter, 
the Court of
Appeal suggested that such anonymized data would also not run afoul of articles

2(b) and 8 of the European Directive of 1995.
AustraliaﬁThe law relating to privacy in Australia is unsatisfactory. There is no
general common law or statutory right to privacy. Such general privacy laws as

exist have developed in a piecemeal fashion.ﬂ
11In Australia, as in the United Kingdom, medical practitioners have no
professional privilege.
12 Furthermore, any breach of confidence by a general
practitioner may lead to disciplinary offenses or to civil actions rising out of tort,

contract, or equity. There are also statutory provisions and guidelines imposing
the requirements of confidentiality, including circumstances that constitute
exceptions to confidentiality. An interesting position is that medical records are

the property of the private medical practitioner who can allow or deny access

(except for the Australian Capitol Territory).
13 The same does not hold for public
health facilities.
The Commonwealth Privacy Act 1988 applies to research on personal
information held by a Commonwealth agency. It establishes the fundamental

principle related to data protection, including special provisions related to the use

of identifiable personal information in medical research.
14 The Guidelines for the
Protection of Privacy in the Conduct of Medical Research of the National Health
and Medical Research Council (1998) not only require that each research project

be approved by an institutional ethics committee but also require the following:
2.3 The written protocol for the conduct of each medical research project should
state:(d) the reasons why personal rather than de-identified information is needed;
(e) why consent to the use of personal information cannot be obtained from the
individuals involved;(j) the safeguards that will be applied to protect personal information that will be
made available to other researchers or third parties.
11Chalmers, D., ﬁAustralia,ﬂ in Nys Herman, (ed.) 
International Encyclopedia of Laws:
Medical Law, 
Vol. 1 (Boston: Kluwer Law International, 1998) 1 at p. 79.
12Ibid. 
at p. 77: ﬁ in Victoria, Tasmania and the Northern Territory there is a privilege
contained in the relevant state legislation which allows a doctor to refuse to divulge
confidential information in Court proceedings unless the patient consents to the
disclosure.ﬂ13Breen v. Williams 
(1996) 70 ALJR 772.
14Excludes states and local government, as well as private agencies.
APPENDIX D
179Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Furthermore, the institutional ethics committee must weigh the public
interest in medical research against the public interest in privacy (art. 3.2). If

public interest in research substantially outweighs its interest in privacy, then the

research will not be considered a breach of the Privacy Act.
FranceArticle 9 of the French Civil Code proclaims the right to privacy. Protection
of health information, however, stems chiefly from the Penal Code (art. 226-13

and 14). This means that the sanction for breach is a criminal one, the information
transmitted by the patient being of a highly personal nature (
intuitu personae
).Furthermore, whereas most obligations of a physician are what are known as ﬁan

obligation of meansﬂ, medical secrecy is one of result. This is important since the

ambit of the medical secret extends beyond what is heard, observed, or confided

to what is understood. Thus, simple proof of breach is sufficient to constitute a

fault.15 According to the 1978 Law on Informatics, Records and Freedoms every
person has the right to object to the collection and storage of personal data and to

access to such data.
In a major statutory amendment in 1994 to the French omnibus data
protection law,
16 French legislators set out restrictions on the automatic treatment
of personal information for the purpose of health care research. This statute sets

up a new body of data protection oversight, establishes substantive principles for
data protection in medical research, and specifies important individual interests
that must be respected before personal information can be used in a health care

research project.ﬂ Each request to process information for medical research is to

be submitted first to the Consultative Committee on the Treatment of Information

in Research Health Care sector of experts, who are then to notify the National

Commission on Information and Liberties (CNIL).
17In 1995, the revised Code of Ethics for physicians increased the number of
articles treating medical secrecy with reference to the additional conditions

established by law for the protection of personal information. Disciplinary
sanctions are independent of any civil or penal ones. Finally, specific laws govern
not only the computerization of medical data, but also the gradual introduction of

the smart card in the healthcare system.
In addition to setting up a new body of oversight, the 1994 amendment
establishes important individual interests. Most important is a general

requirement that personal medical information that permits the identification of
individuals be encoded before transmission to a research project. Although there
are exceptions,15See generally, Gérard M., in 
International Encyclopedia of Laws: 
Medical Law,
ﬁFrance,ﬂ supra, 
note 11, pp. 1Œ160, at 138Œ146.
16Computerized Processing of Name-Linked Data for the Purpose of Research in the
Health Sector. Law No. 94-548.
17Schwartz P. M., ﬁEuropean Data Protection Law and Medical Privacyﬂ at pp. 403Œ404
in Genetic Secrets, Rothstein, M., (ed.), supra, 
note 2, 1997.APPENDIX D
180Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the law forbids the reporting of research results that permit the direct or indirect
identification of concerned parties. The law also grants individuals a right to

object to use of their data in any medical research project. Finally, treatment of

one's health care information in a research project generally requires the

individual to be personally informed of the nature of the transmitted data and his

or her right to access and correct the information the intended recipient of the
information and the end use (finalité) of the information.
18In France, the Consultative Committee on the Treatment of Information in
Research and Health Care is empowered by CNIL to receive requests from

researchers to use nominative information without consent, firstly, if notification

of the change of recipient of nominative information would be impracticable;

second, if the information is unknown to the person, and third, where the
information concerns a required notifiable condition. The only restriction is that
the data be coded.
19In 1997, the CNIL adopted Recommendation 97-008 on the treatment of
personal health data. This recommendation reiterates the obligation to maintain

confidentiality, and to inform the person of any transmission of information with

the possibility of objection and, finally, requires the anonymization of data for
any secondary uses. Where information systems involve ongoing follow-up and
updating, coding, encryption, or scrambling of the information is recommended.

In addition, adopting heightened security measures for medical data, the CNIL

can at any time verify the respect of these conditions. Yet, the commission

affirmed that in conformity with article 5 of the 1981 Convention on the

Automatic Processing of Data access to nominative medical data for proper

followup and the inclusion of such data for purposes of state social security

programs, for prevention strategies, or for statistics or research were not

precluded provided there is coding or anonymization.
CanadaMost Canadian jurisdictions have some form of privacy legislation in place,
either as part of freedom-of-information and protection-of-privacy legislation or
as a separate statute. However, in response to international developments (e.g.,

the 1995 European Directive) and to increasing public awareness and concern,

there have been recent developments in two main areas: the expansion of

legislative protection of personal information to include the private sector and the

development of comprehensive legislation specific to health information. The

federal Bill C-6 (formerly C-54)
20 is an example of the first; new health
information legislation in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta, and draft

legislation in Ontario, are examples of the second.
18Schwartz, 
ibid. at p. 404.19Art. 40-3, al. 2 of D. no. 95-682, 9 mai 1995, JO 11 mai.
20Bill C-6, Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, 2nd Sess.,
36th Parl., 1999, Part 1.
APPENDIX D
181Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The success of the Canada Health Infoway and similar projects under way at
the national and provincial levels will depend on the development of a

comprehensive and consistent legislative framework for the protection of

personal health information. The Final Report of the Advisory Council on Health

Infrastructure noted that ﬂa real danger exists that Canada could end up with

many different approaches to privacy and the protection of personal health
informationﬁ and recommended that harmonization of provincial and federal
approaches be encouraged and that ﬂall governments in Canada should ensure

that they have legislation to address privacy protection specifically aimed at

protecting personal health information through explicit and transparent

mechanisms.ﬂ
21 In addition, it recommended that privacy legislation applicable to
health information bind the public and private sectors.
22The legislative renewal program within Health Protection Branch Transition
is another relevant part of the current legal context. The review and proposed new

legislation include delineation of roles and responsibilities, division of powers,

risk management, scientific freedom, and safeguards for confidentiality and

privacy.23There is no discrete Common Law action for breach of privacy in Canada.
24Privacy is protected by a network of legislation, constitutional provisions, and

various aspects of Common Law. Health care providers have an obligation to

maintain the confidentiality of patient information as part of their duties of care

and fiduciary duties.
25 A breach of privacy may also be grounds for other types
of tort actions such as nuisance, trespass, libel, slander, defamation, assault, or

battery.26 If there is a contractual relationship between the provider and the
patient, a duty of confidence may be considered to be implied in the contract.
In a recent case involving counselling records, the Supreme Court of Canada
confirmed that section 8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms

provides protection for such confidential information and indirectly for the

therapeutic relationship.
27 In another case under the Charter, where a body
sample taken without consent or for medical purposes was used in criminal

proceedings,21Advisory Council on Health Infrastructure, 
Canada Health Infoway: Paths to Better
Health, 
Final Report (Health Canada Reports, February 1999), Chapter 1 at 5.2, 5.3.
22Ibid. 
at 5-3.
23Health Canada, 
Shared Responsibilities, Shared Vision: Renewing the Federal Health
Protection Legislation 
(Discussion Paper) (Ottawa: Health Canada, 1998) at 35Œ36; Health
Canada, 
National Consultations Summary Report: Renewal of the Federal Health
Protection Legislation 
(Ottawa: Health Canada, 1999).
24For a review of Canadian law relating to health information and privacy, see Marshall
M. and B. Von Tigerstrom, ﬁConfidentiality and Disclosure of Health Informationﬂ in
Downie J. and Caulfield T. (eds.), 
Canadian Health Law and Policy 
(Toronto:Butterworths, 1999) 143.25McInerney 
v. MacDonald, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 138.
26Fridman, G.H.L., 
The Law of Torts in Canada, 
vol. 2 (Toronto: Carswell, 1990) at
192ff; Klar, L.N., Tort Law, 
2d ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 1996) at 66Œ67.
27R. 
v. Mills [1999] S.C.J. No. 68 (QL) at para. 79Œ82.
APPENDIX D
182Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the Court held that the individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy in part
because of the relationship of confidence with the health care provider.
28QuebecAlthough not a legally recognized ﬁstate,ﬂ the province of Quebec was
chosen as an example of a comprehensive multilayered approach to the

confidentiality of medical data within Canada. Examining the normative

instruments according to their legal hierarchy, we have seen that the Canadian

Charter of Rights and Freedoms contains no explicit right to privacy but has been
interpreted as both a liberty interest (art. 7) and a right to be free from
ﬁunreasonable search and seizureﬂ (art. 8).
In addition to the Canadian Charter, which serves as the ultimate filter of the
constitutionality of all provincial and federal legislation, Quebec has its own

charter. This Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, which is of a quasi-

constitutional nature, contains a right to respect for private life (art. 5) and more
importantly the ﬁright to nondisclosure of confidential informationﬂ even in a
court of law, absent patient or statutory authorization (art. 9).
These provisions are buttressed by the Civil Code of Quebec, which since
1994 had a whole chapter with explicit provisions on the right to privacy as a

right of personality. Both the Charter and the Civil Code cover governmental as

well as private action.
The protection of personal information as well as access by the person is
further enshrined not only in two statutes covering personal data in both the

public and the private sectors
29 but also by the Act Respecting Health Services
and Social Services.
30 The latter further buttresses the confidentiality of health
information by requiring an explicit consent from the patient for access (art. 19).

In addition, the Code of Ethics of Physicians governs the physician whether in

hospital or private office and is a regulation pursuant to the act with force of law.

Finally, a 1992 decision of the Supreme Court of Canada maintained that the

right to information in the medical record was a personal right of the patient,

although the file remained the property of the hospital.
31Medical files in the office of the private physician are subject to the
Professions Code,
32 which requires all professional corporations to adopt a code
of ethics. As mentioned, the Code of Ethics of Physicians was adopted as a
regulation28R. 
v. Dyment, 
[1988] 2 S.C.R. 417; 
R. 
v. Dersch, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 768.
29Act Respecting Access to Documents Held by Public Bodies and the Protection of
personal information, R.S.Q., c A. 2.1; Act respecting the Protection of Personal
Information in the Private Sector, R.S.Q., cp. 39.1.
30Act Respecting Health Services and Social Services, R.S.Q., c. S. 4.2.
31McInervey 
v. MacDonald [1992] 2 R.S.Q. 138.
32Professions Code, 
R.S.Q. c. C.-26.
APPENDIX D
183Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.pursuant to law (art. 3.01) together with the Medical Act.
33 These reinforce article
9 of the Quebec Charter concerning the quasi-constitutional duty of professional

secrecy. Finally, article 35 of the Civil Code of Quebec, adopted in 1994,

enunciates the right to privacy of the person and also provides recourse to an

aggrieved patient in the case of treatment outside the public hospital.
As concerns research, consent (including record searches) must be free,
informed, and given in writing.
34 Such consent is valid only for the period of time
approved by the ethics committee (art. 19.1). An exception to this would be

situations in which the director of professional services authorizes access without

patient consent, according to the legislation governing access to documents held

by public bodies. The researcher would have to demonstrate that the following:
351. the intended use is not frivolous and the ends contemplated cannot be
achieved otherwise, and
2. such nominative information will be used in a manner that ensures
confidentiality.
These additional conditions of ethics approval and a determined period of
time for access for research were adopted into law in January 2000 following a

recent case in which access to the medical records was provided and several years

later the researcher wished to continue working with patient records. Due to the

merger of two hospitals, the records had been moved and the new director of

professional services considered that the consent was no longer valid. The Court

of Appeal however maintained that medical confidentiality was ﬁrelativeﬂ and

existed primarily to benefit the patient. Since one of the aims of the research in
question was to find the cause of susceptibility to manic depression and
schizophrenia, the researcher needed access to the records for the purposes of

familial recruitment.35IcelandOn December 17, 1998, the Icelandic Parliament adopted an Act on a Health
Sector Database, (Act 139/1998).
36 This act foresees the creation and operation
of a centralized database containing nonpersonally identifiable clinical data.

Companies can apply for a license to have access.
Article 7 of the act states that with the consent of health institutions or self-
employed health care workers, data derived from medical records may be

delivered33Medical Act 
R.S.Q. c. M.-9, art. 42.
34Civil Code, 
arts. 23, 24; 
Act to Amend the Act Respecting Health Services and Social
Services as Regards Access to Uses of Records, 
art. 19.1, adopted, January 2000.
35Parent c. Maziade 
[1998] RJQ 1444Œ1457.
36Act on a Health Sector Database, Act 139/1998, 
Iceland, 1998Œ1999, 
http://brunnur.stjr.is/interpro/htr/htr.nsf/pages/gagngr-log-ensk
APPENDIX D
184Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to the holder of the operating License (the ﬁLicenseeﬂ) for transfer into the Health
Sector Database. The same article provides that the process shall be subject to

conditions regarded as necessary by the Data Protection Commission at any time

and that personal identifiers shall be encrypted before transfer to the database so

that employees of the licensee work only with nonpersonally identifiable data.

Personal identifiers shall be encrypted by one-way encryption, which cannot be
traced back by using a cipher. The Data Protection Commission shall carry out
further encryption of personal identifiers using the methods that the commission

deems to ensure confidentiality best.
It is important here to underline the fact that it is employees of the health
institutions in question or self-employed health workers who prepare the data for

transfer to the database and not employees of the licensee.
Article 10 of the act states that the licensee is permitted to process the
clinical data in the Health Sector Database derived from medical records,

provided the data are processed and connected in such a way that they cannot be

linked to identifiable individuals. The article provides, furthermore, that the

licensee shall develop methods and protocols that meet the requirements of the

Data Protection Commission in order to ensure confidentiality in connecting data
from the Health Sector Database with data from a genealogical database and a
genetic database.The article furthermore provides that the licensee is not permitted to provide
information on individuals and that this should be ensured (e.g., by limitation of

access).The act contains detailed provisions on monitoring, which is entrusted to
three parties: (1) the Operating Committee, which shall monitor the creation and

operation of the database; (2) the Data Protection Commission, which is subject

to the Ministry of Justice and responsible for general surveillance of personal

privacy in Iceland; and (3) an Interdisciplinary Ethics Committee, which

monitors queries and research conducted using data from the Health Sector

Database.Finally, it is interesting to note that according to article 1.8, all data entering
the Health Sector Database are the common property of the Icelandic nation and

in the care and under the responsibility of the Minister for Health and Social

Security, acting for the Icelandic government. This applies both during the time

that the operating license is in effect and after its expiration.
It has been argued that this law is (not) in conformity not only with domestic
law (A Special Act on the Rights of Patients, [Act 74/1997; Reg. No. 227/1991 on

Medical Records and Compilation of Reports in Health Matters] pursuant to the

Act on Physicians and the Act on Health Service) but also with European

standards of data protection and with scientific freedom generally.
3737Arnardóttir, O.M. et al., ﬁThe Icelandic Health Sector Databaseﬂ (1999) 
6 European
Journal Health Law, 
307Œ362. For a critique of the database, see Roscam Abbing, H.,
ﬁCentral Health Database in Iceland and Patient's Rights,ﬂ (1999) 6 
European Journal of
Health Law, 363Œ371.
APPENDIX D
185Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.On January 22 the Ministry of Health and Social Security prepared the issue
of an Operating License for the Creation and Operation of a Health Sector

Database of nonidentifiable health information. The licensee is authorized to

convert information in the Health Sector Database with a genetic database with

the approval of the Data Protection Commission.
No genetic information or samples can be obtained for research purposes
without specific patient consent. It goes without saying, however, that any such

information found in the medical record would automatically be in the Health

Sector Database unless the patient has exercised the opting-out provision.
CONCLUSIONGiven the often eclectic if not confusing state of the law due to the combined
effect of privacy, medical confidentiality, and personal data protection, it is

difficult to draw any conclusions except perhaps to argue for the consolidation

and harmonization of health data protection. This situation occurs because
although the trends in all three sectors are welcome, their combined effect creates
uncertainty since it is not always clear which rules apply. Moreover, most

countries also provide for recourse to overarching constitutional protection, or in

the absence of such, to human rights legislation be it national or regional as in

Europe. Such consolidation and clarification including the ambit of legitimate

exceptions would not only be welcome but perhaps serve as a first step towards

an international ﬁcharterﬂ on health information.
Furthermore, we are now witnessing a further expansion of health
information protection and promotion in the emergence of the right not to know

and in the area of research in the move from coding or encryption to

anonymization. Both of these recent developments are not without implications,

the individual having been effectively removed from ongoing communication of
health information. Four questions remain: (1) What degree of informed consent
is required for the valid exercise of the ﬁright not to know.ﬂ (2) Will

anonymization although legally and ethically expedient, ultimately harm good

science? (3) In the long run, will both impede identification for follow-up for

proper medical treatment? (4) If so, have we unwittingly created a system of

overprotection of the individual to the detriment of population health through

prevention?Moreover, in this search for guidance and clarity, health information should
be distinguished from the sometimes-draconian overreach of personal data

protection often aimed at thwarting access by commercial bodies. The

indiscriminate application of this legislation when combined with the moral or

legal force of medical codes of ethics can indirectly harm individual health to say
nothing of blocking the state's legitimate role in health systems planning. The
majority of countries studied here cannot properly fulfill this latter obligation. In

the rush to promote individual privacy and autonomy with regard to health

information, we may have lost sight of the larger picture of the health of society

and that of future generations.
APPENDIX D
186Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
Biographical Sketches
BERNARD LO 
(Chair), is professor of medicine and director of the
Program in Medical Ethics at the University of California, San Francisco. He
chairs the End of Life Committee convened by the American College of
Physicians - American Society of Internal Medicine, which is developing

consensus recommendations for clinical care near the end of life. He directs the

national coordinating office for the Initiative to Strengthen the Patient - Provider

Relationship in a Changing Health Care Environment, funded by the Robert

Wood Johnson Foundation. He also directs the Ethics Core of the Center for

AIDS Prevention Studies at UCSF. Dr. Lo is a member of the National Bioethics

Advisory commission and of the Data Safety Monitoring Board for the AIDS

Clinical Trials Group at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

He is a member of the Institute of Medicine and chairs the IOM Board on Health

Sciences Policy. Dr. Lo has written more than 100 articles in peer-reviewed

medical journals, on such issues as decisions about life-sustaining interventions,

decision-making for incompetent patients, physician-assisted suicide, and ethical
issues regarding HIV infection. He is the author of 
Resolving Ethical Dilemmas: A
Guide for Clinicians, 
a comprehensive analysis of ethical dilemmas in adult
medicine. He is also a practicing general internist who teaches clinical medicine

to residents and medical students.
ELIZABETH B. ANDREWS, 
M.P.H., Ph.D., directs the Worldwide
Epidemiology Department at Glaxo Wellcome, based in Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina and Greenford, England. The epidemiology program

encompasses epidemiologic research on safety, natural history of disease, disease

burden,APPENDIX E
187Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and general descriptive epidemiology. She is currently president of the
International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology, an organization broadly

representative of government, industry, and academic researchers. Dr. Andrews

serves as adjunct associate professor of epidemiology at the University of North

Carolina (UNC) School of Public Health. She participates as a member of the

Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America Clinical Safety
Surveillance Committee and for three years chaired its Epidemiology
Subcommittee. She is a member of the editorial board of the journal

Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety. 
She serves on the governing board of
the UNC School of Public Health's Public Health Foundation. In addition, she

serves on the Advisory Panel on Research of the Association of American

Medical Colleges and the Data Privacy Working Group of the European

Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations. She also serves on the

Food and Drug Administration's Reproductive Health Drugs Advisory

Committee's Subcommittee on Pregnancy Labeling. Over the past two years, she

has testified on medical records confidentiality before the U.S. Senate and House

committees and the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics. Dr.

Andrews received her master's in public health and health policy and
administration and Ph.D. in epidemiology from the University of North Carolina
School of Public Health. Prior to joining Burroughs Wellcome in 1982, she

managed the Statewide Regionalized Perinatal Care Program and directed the

Purchase-of-Care Services for the State Health Department of North Carolina.
JOHN COLMERS 
is executive director of the Maryland Health Care
Commission (MHCC), an agency created through the merger of two existing

health regulatory commissions. MHCC is charged with health care reform

activities for the state, the development and adoption of a state health plan, and

the compilation and analysis of health care datasets, among other responsibilities.
Prior to the merger, Mr. Colmers was executive director of the Health Care
Access and Cost Commission (HCACC), one of the organizations in the merger.

The HCACC implemented many initiatives, including report cards providing

information on the quality and performance of health maintenance organizations

and standards for the operation of electronic health networks. Before this, Mr.

Colmers was the executive director of the Health Services Cost Review

Commission, overseeing Maryland's all-payer hospital rate setting system. Mr.

Colmers did undergraduate work at Johns Hopkins University, received his

master of public health from the University of North Carolina, and has returned to

Johns Hopkins University for doctoral study of health services research.
GEORGE T. DUNCAN 
is professor of statistics in the H. John Heinz III
School of Public Policy and Management and the Department of Statistics at

Carnegie Mellon University. His current research work centers on information

technology and social accountability, especially on confidentiality issues. He

chaired the Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access of the Commission on
Behavioural and Social Sciences and Education (CBSSE) Committee on National
APPENDIX E
188Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Statistics, which resulted in the report, 
Private Lives and Public Policies:
Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statistics. 
He chaired the
American Statistical Association's Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality. He

served on the American Medical Association's Expert Advisory Panel on Privacy

and Confidentiality. He has been editor of the Theory and Methods Section of the

Journal of the American Statistical Association. 
He is a fellow of the American
Statistical Association, an elected member of the International Statistical
Institute, and a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of

Science.JANLORI GOLDMAN 
directs the Health Privacy Project at Georgetown
University's Institute for Health Care Research and Policy. The project is

dedicated to ensuring that people's privacy is safeguarded in the health care

environment. In 1997, Ms. Goldman was a visiting scholar at Georgetown

University Law Center. In 1994, Ms. Goldman cofounded the Center for

Democracy and Technology, a nonprofit civil liberties organization committed to
preserving free speech and privacy on the Internet. Ms. Goldman also worked at
the Electronic Frontier Foundation in 1994. From 1986 to 1994, Ms. Goldman

was the staff attorney and director of the Privacy and Technology Project of the

American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). While at the ACLU, Ms. Goldman led

the effort to enact the Video Privacy Protection Act and led efforts to protect

people's health, credit and financial information, and personal information held by

the government. She was the legislative director of the Minnesota affiliate of the

ACLU from 1984 to 1986. Ms. Goldman has testified frequently before the U.S.

Congress and served on numerous commissions and advisory boards. Her

publications include ﬁA Federal Right of Information Privacy,ﬂ coauthored with

Jerry Berman and included as a chapter in 
Computers, Ethics, and Social Values 
(ed. Helen Nissenbaum, Prentice Hall, 1995); 
Privacy and Health Information
Systems: A Guide to Protecting Patient Confidentiality, 
coauthored with Deirdre
Mulligan (Foundation for Health Care Quality, 1996); ﬁProtecting Privacy to

Improve Health Care,ﬂ which appeared in 
Health Affairs, 
(November - December
1998); and 
Promoting Health/Protecting Privacy: A Primer, 
coauthored with Zoe
Hudson for the California Health Care Foundation and Consumers Union. The

Health Privacy Project also recently released two reports: 
The State of Health
Privacy: An Uneven Terrain/A Comprehensive Survey of State Health Privacy

Statutes and Best Principles for Health Privacy: A Report of the Health Privacy

Working Group.CRAIG WALTER HENDRIX 
is associate professor of medicine, Division
of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University

School of Medicine, where he is currently director of the Johns Hopkins'

University Drug Development Unit. He also holds joint appointments in

pharmacology and molecular sciences and epidemiology. He earned his M.D. at

Georgetown University School of Medicine followed by postdoctoral training at
Johns Hopkins Hospital. He is board-certified in internal medicine and infectious
diseases.APPENDIX E
189Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.His clinical research has focused on HIV epidemiology and prevention within
military populations and clinical pharmacology of antiretroviral drugs. Dr.

Hendrix is invited to lecture worldwide on HIV impact, prevention and

treatment. His university service includes membership on the Johns Hopkins

University School of Medicine institutional review board.
MARK C. HORNBROOK, 
a health economist by training, is an associate
director and senior investigator at the Kaiser Permanente Center for Health

Research (CHR). He leads the center's program in economic, social, and health

services research and is a member of the senior management team at CHR. His

current research focuses on payment systems for HMOs under private and public

health insurance programs. With support from the Health Care Financing

Administration, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and Kaiser Permanente,
he is developing morbidity-based risk assessment models to adjust payments to
health plans to counter selection bias. He is also developing and simulating a new

risk contracting payment system for Medicare based on competitive market

premiums rather than Medicare fee-for-service payments. Previously, with

support from Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Dr. Hornbrook developed health

care expense forecasting models using the SF-36 and the Medicare Current

Beneficiary Survey. Dr. Hornbrook directs the CHR Economics Core in

conducting a series of economic evaluations of several innovative disease

management, disease prevention, and health care delivery programs related to

long-term care of frail elderly, smoking cessation, cancer screening, mental

illness, and childhood asthma, and other studies as well. Dr. Hornbrook received a

master's degree in economics from the University of Denver in 1969 and a Ph.D.
in medical care organization, with emphasis in health economics, from the
University of Michigan in 1975. Currently, Dr. Hornbrook chairs the Scientific

Review and Evaluation Board of the Health Services Research and Development

Service, Department of Veterans Affairs. He also is a member of the Measures

Council of the Foundation for Accountability. He was named a fellow in the

Association for Health Services Research in 1996.
LISA I. IEZZONI 
is professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and
codirector of research in the Division of General Medicine and Primary Care,

Department of Medicine, at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. She

received her degrees in medicine and health policy and management from

Harvard University. Dr. Iezzoni has conducted numerous studies for the Agency

for Health Care Policy and Research, the Health Care Financing Administration,
and private foundations on a variety of topics, including the use of clinical data to
predict hospitalization costs and patient outcomes, comparing severity of illness

across teaching and nonteaching hospitals, evaluating the utility of severity

information for quality assessment, identifying complications of care using

administrative data, and using information from hospital data systems to predict

patient clinical and functional outcomes. She has published and spoken widely on

measurement of the severity of illness and has edited a textbook on risk

adjustmentAPPENDIX E
190Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for measuring health care outcomes. A 1996 recipient of the investigator Award
in Health Policy Research sponsored by Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, she is

studying disability policy issues relating to mobility impairments. Dr. Iezzoni is

on the editorial boards of major medical health services research journals, and she

serves on the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics and the Board of

Directors of the National Forum for Health Care Quality Measurement and
Reporting.DONALD KORNFELD 
is associate dean of the Faculty of Medicine of the
Columbia University College of Medicine, and professor of psychiatry and

attending psychiatrist at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital. He served for six years

as chairman of the Institutional Review Board at the N.Y. State Psychiatric

Institute and since 1991 has been Chairman of the Columbia Presbyterian
Medical Center Institutional Review Board. He is director of the Consultation/
Liaison and Behavioral Medicine Service at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical

Center and was a member of the first ethics committee established there. He has

published on a wide variety of psychiatric problems and ethical issues related to

medicine and surgery. He is a fellow of the American Psychiatric Association and a

past president of the American Psychosomatic Society.
ELLIOT STONE 
has been executive director and Corporate Eexecutive
Officer of the Massachusetts Health Data Consortium since it was established in

1978 as a private, nonprofit corporation. The consortium is a neutral setting for

the collection and analysis of large health care databases. The consortium

publishes annual reports on hospital prices, utilization, and communities' hospital

dependency to a broad constituency of health care organizations and business
coalitions, and provides data and technical support to health services researchers.
In 1994, Mr. Stone organized the Affiliated Health Information Networks of New

England project to improve the state's electronic health care information

infrastructure among health plans and providers through standards required by the

federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability. Mr. Stone served on the

Institute of Medicine's Committee on Regional Health Data Networks, which

published Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure and Privacy. 
Hewas a member of the Committee to Study National Cryptography Policy for the

National Research Council and the National Academy of Science's Computer

Science and Telecommunications Board and provided financial support for the

NRC study 
For the Record: Protecting Electronic Health Information.
PETER SZOLOVITS 
is professor of computer science and engineering in
the Michigan Instutute of Technology (MIT) Department of Electrical

Engineering and Computer Science and director of the Clinical Decision-Making

Group within the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science. His research centers on

the application of artificial intelligence (AI) methods to problems of medical

decision making and design of information systems for health care institutions

and patients. He has worked on problems of diagnosis, therapy planning,
execution,APPENDIX E
191Protecting Data Privacy in Health Services ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and monitoring for various medical conditions; computational aspects of genetic
counseling; controlled sharing of health information; and privacy and

confidentiality issues in medical record systems. His interests in AI include

knowledge representation, qualitative reasoning, and probabilistic inference. His

interests in medical computing include Web-based heterogeneous medical record

systems, lifelong personal health information systems, and design of
cryptographic schemes for health identifiers. He teaches classes in artificial
intelligence, programming languages, medical computing, medical decision

making, knowledge-based systems, and probabilistic inference. Professor

Szolovits has been on the editorial board of several journals, has served as

program chairman and on the program committees of national conferences, and

has been a founder of and consultant for several companies that apply AI to

problems of commercial interest, including W3Health, which develops Web-

based solutions for connecting the health care community. He served on the

Committee on Maintaining Privacy and Security in Health Care Applications on

the National Information Infrastructure, which produced the NRC report 
For the
Record.ADELE A. WALLER, 
J.D., is a partner and member of the Health Law
Group with the Chicago law firm of Bell, Boyd and Lloyd. A substantial portion

of her practice involves advising clients on legal issues related to health

information technology. Ms. Waller has spoken extensively on health information

technology law issues for organizations such as the American Bar Association,

the American Health Lawyers Association, American Health Information

Management Association, University Health System Consortium, Association for
Health Services Research, and the Healthcare Information Management Systems
Society. She has published numerous articles and book chapters on health

information technology law topics. Ms. Waller serves on the Board of Directors

of the American Health Lawyers Association, chairs its annual Health

Information and Technology Conference, and served in the leadership of its

Health Information and Technology Substantive Law Committee from 1994 to

1999. She is a member of on the Editorial Advisory Board of CCH Compliance

and of the Editorial Board of Aspen Publishing's 
Managed Care Law Manual. 
Ms. Waller is a member of the adjunct faculty of the University of Illinois at

Chicago and has been an adjunct faculty member for the Health Law Institute at

the Loyola University of Chicago School of Law.
APPENDIX E
192