DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/9958Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data:Report of a Workshop74 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-07180-2 | DOI 10.17226/9958Christopher Mackie and Norman Bradburn, Editors; Committee on NationalStatistics, National Research CouncilImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Access to andConfidentiality of Research DataReport of a Workshop
Committee on National StatisticsChristopher Mackie and Norman Bradburn, EditorsCommission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. ¥ Washington, D.C. 20418NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Instituteof Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for
their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. SBR-9709489 between the National Acad-emy of Sciences and the National Science Foundation.  Any opinions, findings, conclu-

sions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and donot necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support forthe project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-07180-1Additional copies of this report are available from National Academy Press, 2101 Constitu-tion Avenue, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.eduPrinted in the United States of America.Copyright 2000 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Suggested citation:  National Research Council (2000).  Improving Access to and Confiden-tiality of Research Data:  Report of a Workshop.
  Committee on National Statistics, Christo-
pher Mackie and Norman Bradburn, Eds.  Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The
National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achieve-
ments of engineers.  Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engi-

neering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of
policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the respon-
sibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical
care, research, and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medi-
cine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both

Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf
are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS1999-2000JOHN E. ROLPH (Chair), Marshall School of Business, University ofSouthern CaliforniaJOSEPH G. ALTONJI, Department of Economics, Northwestern University
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, Department of Statistics, University ofPennsylvaniaJULIE DAVANZO, RAND, Santa Monica, California
WILLIAM F. EDDY, Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University
HERMANN HABERMANN, Statistics Division, United Nations, New York
WILLIAM D. KALSBEEK, Survey Research Unit, Department ofBiostatistics, University of North CarolinaRODERICK J.A. LITTLE, School of Public Health, University of Michigan
THOMAS A. LOUIS, Division of Biostatistics, University of Minnesota
CHARLES F. MANSKI, Department of Economics, NorthwesternUniversityEDWARD B. PERRIN, Department of Health Services, University ofWashingtonFRANCISCO J. SAMANIEGO, Division of Statistics, University ofCalifornia, DavisRICHARD L. SCHMALENSEE, Sloan School of Management,Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyMATTHEW D. SHAPIRO, Department of Economics, University ofMichiganANDREW A. WHITE, DirectorImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiAcknowledgments
The Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) appreciates the time,effort, and valuable input of the many people who contributed to the
workshop on confidentiality of and access to research data and to thepreparation of this report.  We would first like to thank those who made

presentations, which, along with the background papers prepared for the
workshop, helped identify many of the key issues in this area. The comments
made by attendees contributed to a broad-ranging exchange of ideas that is
captured in this summary report.  We are also thankful for the additional

input provided by participants on early report drafts.  Thanks are due espe-

cially to Norman Bradburn, former CNSTAT member, who as workshop
chair provided valuable advice during the planning stages and the leadership
necessary for conducting a successful workshop.  The agenda for the work-

shop was developed in consultation with Richard Suzman, director of behav-
ioral and social research at the National Institute on Aging, whose input was
essential in identifying workshop objectives.Particular appreciation is due to those who worked to organize the work-shop and prepare this report. Christopher Mackie served as study director for
the workshop.  He led the planning of the workshop, worked to ensure its

successful conduct, prepared the report drafts, and revised the report in re-
sponse to comments from reviewers and workshop participants.  Tom Jabine,

who served as consultant to the committee, offered valuable guidance on the
agenda, the selection of  appropriate presenters, and the preparation of this

report.  He and Heather Koball, research associate in CNSTAT, contributed

significantly to our work with a paper on the practices of organizations thatImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiACKNOWLEDGMENTSdistribute public-use data, which was presented at the workshop and is sum-marized in this report.  The extra time, guidance, and input of the CNSTAT

subcommittee for the workshopÑThomas Louis, Roderick Little, and CharlesManskiÑfurther enhanced the workshopÕs outcome and this report.  Miron
Straf, former CNSTAT director, was responsible for early project develop-
ment and workshop planning.  CNSTAT staff members Terri Scanlan and

Jamie Casey were responsible for all of the details involved in organizing the
workshop and preparing this report.  Rona Briere edited the final draft.

Eugenia Grohman, associate director for reports in the Commission on Be-
havioral and Social Sciences and Education, guided the report through the
review process, final editing, and publication.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proce-
dures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National Research
Council.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and

critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.
The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect
the integrity of the deliberative process.We thank the following individuals for their participation in the review ofthis report:  William F. Eddy, Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon Uni-

versity; Amitai Etzioni, Department of Sociology, George Washington Uni-
versity; Jack Feldman, Center for Health Affairs/Project HOPE, Bethesda,
MD; Olivia Mitchell, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania; and Rich-
ard Rockwell, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research,
University of Michigan.Although the individuals listed above provided constructive commentsand suggestions, it must be emphasized that responsibility for the final
content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the
institution.Norman Bradburn, Workshop ChairImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixContents
PREFACExi
1INTRODUCTION1

2THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF5

3ETHICAL AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS ASSOCIATED
WITH DATA DISSEMINATION18
4ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR LIMITING DISCLOSURE
RISKS AND FACILITATING DATA ACCESS29
5CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES37

REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY51

APPENDIXES53

A   WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS55

B   WORKSHOP AGENDA58
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
The workshop summarized in this report was convened by the Commit-tee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) to promote discussion about
methods for advancing the often conflicting goals of exploiting theresearch potential of microdata and maintaining acceptable levels of confi-
dentiality.  The primary sponsor of the workshop was the National Institute

on Aging (NIA), but additional funding was received from the Agency for
Health Care Policy and Research; the Bureau of Labor Statistics; the National
Library of Medicine; the Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security
Administration; and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  Sponsors voiced

a common desire to develop research programs aimed at quantitatively as-
sessing the risks of reidentification in surveys linked to administrative data.Sponsors also stressed the importance of demonstrating and weighing thevalue of linked data to research and policy.  Prior to the CNSTAT workshop,

NIA funded a preworkshop conference, organized through the University of
Michigan, to illustrate this valueÑparticularly as it applies to research onaging issues.  The workshop was designed to advance the dialogue necessary

for federal agencies to make sound decisions about how and to whom to
release data, and in what cases to allow linkage to administrative records.
Sponsors were interested in improving communication among communities
with divergent interests, as well as the decision-making frameworks for guid-
ing data release procedures.This report outlines essential themes of the access versus confidentialitydebate that emerged during the workshop.  Among these themes are the
xiImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tradeoffs and tensions between the needs of researchers and other data userson the one hand and confidentiality requirements on the other; the relative
advantages and costs of data perturbation techniques (applied to facilitate
public release) versus restricted access as tools for improving security; and the
need to quantify disclosure risksÑboth absolute and relativeÑcreated byresearchers and research data, as well as by other data users and other types of
data.The workshop was not designed to produce policy recommendations.However, this report does summarize areas of discussion in which common
ground among some participants emerged.  For example, a subset of partici-

pants endorsed the idea that both access and confidentiality can benefit from
(1) more coordination among agencies regarding data release procedures and
creation of data access outlets, (2) increased communication between data
producers and users, (3) improved quantification of the disclosure risks and
research benefits associated with different types of data release, and (4) stricter
enforcement of laws designed to ensure proper use of restricted access data.Finally, the report anticipates the direction of future CNSTAT projects.Future work will likely address evolving statistical techniques for manipulat-
ing data in ways that preserve important statistical properties and allow for
broader general data release; new, less burdensome ways of providing re-
searchers with access to restricted data sets; and the role of licensing coupled
with graduated civil and criminal penalties for infringement.Norman Bradburn, Workshop ChairxiiPREFACEImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Introduction
In October 1999, the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT), inconsultation with the Institute of Medicine, convened a 2-day workshop
to identify ways of advancing the often conflicting goals of exploiting theresearch potential of microdata and preserving confidentiality.  The emphasis

of the workshop was on longitudinal data that are linked to administrative
records; such data are essential to a broad range of research efforts, but can
also be vulnerable to disclosure.  Administrative data are collected to carry out

agency missions and constitute the majority of agency data.  An additionalÑ
much smallerÑamount of data is collected specifically for research and other
public purposes.  It is sometimes feasible and useful to merge the latter data

with the more extensive administrative records.CNSTAT has had an active history working in the area of data confiden-tiality and access, culminating with the panel study that produced the volume
Private Lives and Public Policies:  Confidentiality and Accessibility of Govern-

ment Statistics (National Research Council and Social Science Research Coun-cil, 1993).  That study resulted in a series of recommendations for advancing

researchersÕ access to data without compromising the ability to protect the
confidentiality of survey respondents.  This workshop brought together sev-

eral participants from that study and many others representing various com-
munitiesÑdata producers from federal agencies and research organizations;
data users, including academic researchers; and experts in statistical disclo-
sure limitation techniques, confidentiality policies, and administrative and
legal procedures.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAKEY ISSUESThe development of longitudinal data sets linked to health, economic,contextual geographic, and employer information has created unique and
growing research opportunities.  However, the proliferation of linked data

has simultaneously produced a complex set of challenges that must be met to
preserve the confidentiality of information provided by survey respondents
and citizens whose administrative records are entrusted to the government.
Unprecedented demand for household- and individual-level data, along with
the continuing rapid development of information technology, has drawn in-
creasing attention to these issues.  Technological advances have rapidly im-

proved the range and depth of data; opportunities to access, analyze, and
protect data have grown as well.  However, technology has concurrently cre-

ated new methods for identifying individuals from available information, of
which longitudinal research data are but one of many sources.Longitudinal files that link survey, administrative, and contextual dataprovide exceptionally rich sources of information for researchers working in
the areas of health care, education, and economic policy.  To construct such

files, substantial resources must be devoted to data acquisition and to the
resolution of technical, legal, and ethical issues.  In most cases, requirements

designed to protect confidentiality rule out the type of universal, unrestricted
data access that custodiansÑand certainly usersÑof such databases mayprefer.Several modes of dissemination are currently used to provide access toinformation contained in linked longitudinal databases.  Dissemination is

typically restricted either at the source, at the access point, or both.  Products
such as aggregated, cross-tabulation tables are published regularly and made
available to all users, but of course offer no record-level detail.  This type of

data does not support research into complex individual behavior.  Public-use

microdata files, on the other hand, offer detail at the individual or household
level and are available with minimal use restrictions.  However, producers of

microdata must suppress direct identifier fields and use data masking tech-
niques to preserve confidentiality.  Additional methods, such as licensing

agreements, data centers, and remote and limited access, have been developed
to limit either the types of users allowed access to the data, the level of data
detail accessible by a given user, or both.  Restricted access arrangements are

generally designed to provide users with more detail than they would get from
a public-use file.It is within this context that the workshop participants debated the keyissues, which can loosely be organized at two levels.  The first is the tradeoff

that exists between increasing data access on the one hand and improvingImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION3data security and confidentiality on the other.1  To examine this tradeoff, it is
necessary to quantify, to the extent possible, disclosure risks and costs, as well
as the benefits associated with longitudinal microdata and with linking to
administrative records.  Decisions about what types of data can be made

available, to whom, and by what method hinge on the assessment of these
relative costs and benefits.  Researchers typically appeal for greater access to

unaltered data, while stewards of the data are understandably often more
focused on assessing and minimizing disclosure risk.At the second level of discourse, participants discussed alternative ap-proaches to limiting disclosure risk while facilitating data access.  Given that

all longitudinal microdata require some protections, the compelling question
is which approach best serves data users while maintaining acceptable levels
of security.  The choice reduces essentially to two options:  (1) restricting

accessÑphysically limiting who gets to see the data, or (2) altering the datasufficiently to allow for safe broader (public) access.  Other elements, such as
legal deterrents, also come into play.  Workshop participants articulated in

detail the merits and relative advantages of alternative approaches.  Their

arguments are summarized in this report.WORKSHOP GOALSAs noted above, a central objective of the workshop was to review thebenefits and risks associated with public-use research data files and to explore
alternative procedures for restricting access to sensitive data, especially longi-
tudinal survey data that have been linked to administrative records.  Doing so

requires considering the impact on each group involvedÑsurvey respondents,data producers, and data usersÑof measures designed to reduce disclosurerisk.  Presenters from the academic community reviewed the types of research

that are enhanced, or only made possible, by the availability of linked longitu-
dinal data.  Participants also identified and suggested methods for improving
current practices used by agencies and research organizations for releasing
public-use data and for establishing restricted access to nonpublic files.  The

overarching theme was the importance of advancing methods that maximize
the social return on investments in research data, while fully complying with
legal and ethical requirements.1Early on in the workshop, a participant clarified the distinction between ÒprivacyÓ and
Òconfidentiality.Ó  Privacy typically implies the right to be left alone personally, the right not to
have property invaded or misused, freedom to act without outside interference, and freedom
from intrusion and observation.  In the context of research data, confidentiality is more rel-
evant.  The term refers to information that is sensitive and should not be released to unautho-
rized entities.  It was suggested that confidentiality implies the need for technical methods of

security.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAThe workshop, then, was designed with the following goals in mind:¥To review the types of research that are enhanced, or only made pos-sible, using linked longitudinal data.¥To review current practices and concerns of federal agencies and otherdata producing organizations.¥To provide an overview of administrative arrangements used to pre-serve confidentiality.¥To identify ways of fostering data accessibility in secondary analysis.¥To assess the utility of statistical methods for limiting disclosure risk.To date, efforts to address these themes have been hindered by inadequateinteraction between researchers who use the data and agencies that produce
them and regulate their dissemination.  Researchers may not understand and
may become frustrated by access-inhibiting rules and procedures; on the other
hand, agencies and institutional review boards are not fully aware of how
statistical disclosure limitation measures impact data users.  The workshop

brought the two groups together to help overcome these communication
barriers.REPORT ORGANIZATIONWorkshop topics were organized into the following sessions:  (I) linked
longitudinal databasesÑachievements to date and research applications, (II)legal and ethical requirements for data dissemination, (III) procedures for
releasing public-use microdata files, and (IV) procedures for restricted access
to research data files.  This report is structured slightly differently to focus on
themes as they emerged during the workshop.  Chapter 2 outlines the tradeoff

between data access and confidentiality.  Presentations on the research ben-

efits of linked longitudinal data are summarized, along with discussions of
disclosure risk assessment and quantification.  Chapter 3 reviews presenta-

tions that addressed ethical and legal aspects of data dissemination, as well as
discussion on the role of institutional review boards.  Chapter 4 summarizes

participantsÕ assessments of competing approaches to limiting disclosure riskand facilitating user access; the focus is on two primary competing ap-
proachesÑdata perturbation and access limitation.  Agency and organization
practices are the subject of Chapter 5.  In adition, two appendices are pro-

vided:  Appendix A is a list of the workshop participants; Appendix B is the

workshop agenda.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52The Data Access, Confidentiality Tradeoff
This chapter presents participantsÕ views on the workshopÕs overarchingthemeÑthe balancing of data protection needs and requirements
against the benefit of access to linked longitudinal data.  Academic
researchers were understandably more vocal about improving data detail and
access, while data stewards were more concerned about security and protec-
tion of confidentiality.  The lines between the two communities are not always

clearly drawn, however.  For instance, most federal agencies are accountable

for both functions, protecting the interests of data subjects through proce-
dures that ensure appropriate standards of privacy and confidentiality, and
facilitating responsible dissemination to users (National Research Council
and Social Science Research Council, 1993).It is impossible to specify a universally applicable optimal tradeoff be-tween data access and data protection.  The value of data-intensive research is

highly variable, as are mission, operation, and data production across agen-
cies.  The panel that produced the report 
Private Lives and Public Policiesrecognized this variability and did not advocate trying to identify such a
tradeoff (National Research Council and Social Science Research Council,
1993).  However, workshop participants expressed general optimism about

the possibilities for developing tools that would enhance, on a case-by-case
basis, the ability to increase data access without compromising data protec-
tion or, conversely, to increase confidentiality without compromising data
access.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAROLE OF LINKED LONGITUDINAL MICRODATAIN RESEARCH AND POLICYThe nation faces a range of increasingly complex policy issues in suchareas as social security, health care, population aging, changing savings pat-
terns, advancing medical technology, and changing family structure.  Ad-

dressing these issues will require increasingly sophisticated data and behav-
ioral modeling.  Microdata sets, such as those from the Health and Retirement

Study (HRS), offer the most promising means of answering specific questions
such as how social security interacts with pensions and savings in household
efforts to finance retirement, how social security age eligibility requirements
affect retirement rates and timing, and how changes in out-of-pocket medical
expenses affect utilization of federal programs.Survey data sets, particularly those linked to administrative records, fa-cilitate a broad spectrum of research that can shed light on such questions,
and that could not otherwise be reliably conducted.  Additionally, linking to

existing information can streamline the data production process by reducing
the need to duplicate survey activities.  Linking of survey and administrative

data has the potential to both improve data quality and reduce data produc-
tion costs.Research Benefits of Linking Survey and Administrative DataResearchers attending the workshop expressed the view that data linkingopens up a wide range of research and modeling options.  Richard Burkhauser

of Cornell University presented his paper (coauthored by Robert Weathers,
also of Cornell), ÒHow Policy Variables Influence the Timing of Social Secu-rity Disability Applications,Ó to lead off the opening session.  His presentation
focused on how the HRS made his study possible.  Burkhauser and other

participants praised the HRS, calling it a clear Òcase studyÓ of the potential oflinked longitudinal data to advance policy-oriented social science research.For his application, Burkhauser was able to model the effects of socialsecurity on economic behavior, including retirement decisions.  This type of

analysis follows in the tradition of economic research conducted during the
1970s that used the Retirement History Survey and the Exact Match File,
which actually linked Current Population Survey data to Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) and social security records.1  In the opinion of several partici-
1These data stimulated significant research in the 1970s and set the agenda for the 1980s.However, during the 1980s, budget cutbacks, combined with the emerging emphasis on confi-dentiality, affected the ability of the Social Security Administration and other agencies to pro-duce and disseminate new data.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF7pants, the HRS files, along with new data sets from other sources, such as theDisability Evaluation Study, will be the key inputs for models that will allow
researchers to address policy questions about household savings patterns,
social security solvency, worker retirement patterns, and other issues that
require accurate and detailed financial information.The HRS longitudinal data set follows about 22,000 persons aged 50 andabove and their spouses; data are collected every other year.  With the consent

of participating individuals, survey data are linked to social security earnings
histories and also to some employer pension plan data.  Linked records that

allow identification at as low as the state level are maintained internally.  The
HRS is available in a public use-form, and with linkages to social security and
pension information under restricted conditions.  Access to geocoding is also

restricted; to gain such access, a researcher must go through an institutional
review board with a research plan and data protection provisions.  Firm-level

data have been linked as well, and while access to Medicare data has not yet
been authorized, work on associated data collection processes and restricted
access protocols is in progress.  Multiple linkages are also permitted, typically

under even more restricted conditions.The HRS also provides detailed survey informationÑsome of it retro-spectiveÑabout the health conditions and work patterns of respondents.However, it is the linkage to administrative records that is exceptionally valu-
able for policy research.  Linking to social security data allows researchers to

construct earnings histories and to determine each personÕs potential disabil-ity benefits.  Past earnings are available to predict potential future earnings for

cases in which individuals have not yet applied for benefits.  Linking HRS data

with administrative records and geographic information allowed Burkhauser
and Weathers to answer questions that could not otherwise have been an-
swered.  For instance, the authors were able to estimate how disability allow-

ance rates affected the timing and rate of application for benefits.  Likewise,

they were able to estimate the behavioral impact of expected benefit level,
expected earnings, gender effects, and policy variables.Linking to administrative records can improve data accuracy as well asdata scope by giving researchers access to information that individuals may
not be able to recall or estimate accurately in a survey context.  Survey data

can be biased as a result of flaws in respondent memory or understanding of
measurement concepts.  For instance, the HRS is linked to social security files

containing lifetime earnings data that would be virtually impossible for re-
spondents to recall or even find in records.  Similar situations arise with

regard to medical records.  Also, survey data are devalued if they fail to cap-

ture variability of parameters accurately, since this variability is central to
modeling efforts and, in turn, the ability to answer policy questions.  HRS

linkages introduce accuracy and detail to the data that are particularly con-
structive for modeling savings incentives, retirement decisions, and other dy-Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAnamic economic behavior.  The authors concluded that the HRS was a clear
example in which the potential research benefits of linking were sufficiently
large that the Social Security Administration could justify approving the link-
ing proposal with minimal controversy.Also in the first session, Rachel Gordon of the University of Illinois atChicago presented a second example illustrating the benefits of data linking.
Her research investigates the impact of community context on child develop-
ment and socialization patterns, as well as the impact of the availability of
child care on parentsÕ work decisions.  By having access to a National Longi-
tudinal Survey of Youth (NLS-Y) file with detailed geographic codes for sur-
vey respondents, Gordon was able to add contextual data, such as the avail-
ability of child care, for the neighborhoods in which respondents lived.
GordonÕs application highlights the tradeoff between data precision and dis-closure risks.  Access to census tract-level geocoding permits more sensitive

construction of community and child care variables central to the study but
could, under certain conditions, greatly increase the indentifiability of indi-
vidual NLS-Y records.During the general discussion, participants cited other aspects of linkingthat increase data utility.  Linking makes it possible to get more out of isolated

data sets that would otherwise have limited application.  The process can

increase the value of data sets, reduce data collection redundancies, and im-
prove data accuracy in a cost-effective manner, and provides added flexibility
to meet unforeseen future research needs with existing data sets.  For ex-

ample, if the Census BureauÕs Survey of Income and Program Participationcould be linked to administrative tax return records, income data would likely
be more accurate and the cost of the survey decreased.  Robert Willis of the

University of Michigan also made the point that this type of linking reduces
response burden.  If survey designers know that links can be made to admin-
istrative data, they can limit the length of questionnaires.The benefits of linked data extend beyond social science research, whichwas the focus of this workshop.  Robert Boruch from the University of Penn-
sylvania pointed out, for example, that linking records is essential for ran-
domized field trials in the social sector (crime, welfare, education).  J. Michael

Dean from the University of Utah Medical Center reiterated these points for
medical research, observing that there is no way to conduct high-quality clini-
cal trials in many different areas without the capacity for linking; the same can
be said of work in criminal justice.Linking also facilitates research on infrequent events, such as rare dis-eases, that affect only a small percentage of the population.  In such cases,

working from general sample data does not provide adequate sample sizes for
target groups.  Population-based data, which are very expensive to collect, are

often required.  Linking can, in some instances, provide a much less costly

substitute.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF9Assessing and Articulating the Social Value of ResearchRobert Boruch noted in his presentation that 20 years ago, despite inter-agency agreements to link data sources at the IRS, the Census Bureau, and
other agencies, examples of the benefits of linking were few and far between.
In contrast, current research, as represented by workshop presentations in
Session I, demonstrates the extent to which this landscape has changed.  Yet

several researchers expressed concern that it seems easier to discuss the risks
associated with data provision than to communicate the benefits convinc-
ingly.  They suggested that researchers have done a poor job of publicizing the

value of their work.  Boruch summarized the view, noting, 
ÒWe do not sellsocial research well in this country, and that is part of the reason why at least
a half dozen large private foundations are trying to understand how to do that
job better.ÓOf course, it can be difficult for agencies and organizations to assess thevalue of their data without carefully tracking the numbers and types of users,
as well as information on those being denied access.  The panel that produced

Private Lives and Public Policies explicitly recommended establishing proce-
dures for keeping records of data requests denied or partially fulfilled.  This

recommendation could be expanded to encourage full documentation of data
usage.  Developing archives and registries of data performance may serve as

an effective first step toward fostering understanding by both the public and
policy makers of the extent to which data-intensive research provides key
information.Research Impact of Data Alteration Versus Access RestrictionAlternative methods for reducing statistical disclosure risks were discussedat length.  At the most general level, the options fall into two categories
Ñdataalteration and access restriction.  The discussion of these approaches is de-

tailed in Chapters 4 and 5.  On balance, researchers participating in the work-

shop expressed a preference for monitoring the behavior of scientists over
altering the content of data sets to permit broader distribution.  They favored

licensing agreements, data enclaves, and the like over perturbation methods.
They also advocated the use of legal remedies (discussed in Chapters 3 and 4)
whenever possible as a nonintrusive (to rule-abiding researchers) alternative
that rewards responsible data use.Researchers expressed serious concern about the impact of statistical dis-closure limitation techniques that distort variable relationships and that may
have an unanticipated (or even anticipated) impact on modeling results.  The

perception among leading researchers appears to be that altered or, more
specifically, synthetic data can solve some problems, but are inadequate for
the majority of cutting-edge work.  Regardless of its accuracy, this perception
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAimplies that such data may be less likely to be used, which damages the re-search enterprise.  Sophisticated data perturbation also increases the method-

ological knowledge researchers must have to understand data, utilize them
legitimately, and produce interpretable results.Several researchers cautioned that, although they would rather live withthe burden of limited access than deal with synthetic data, data centers and
other limited access arrangements do impose costs on research.  To the extent

that data centers favor large-budget research projects, less well-funded disci-
plines can be prevented from accessing important data resources.  Also, an

important reason for accessing a data set is to replicate findings of other
researchers.  Typically, programs used to create data files must be designed in

such a way that they can be shared by others wishing to replicate work.  When

researchers must repeat the entire data acquisition process, documentation
and replication become more cumbersome.  Additionally, one participant

noted that when projects must be approved by agencies that host data, the
potential is created for censorship, as well as milder forms of restriction aris-
ing from a lack of familiarity with the scientific literature.Participants also raised the issue of research timing as it relates to policyrelevance.  The benefits of research can be dampened when data acquisition is

arduous and results are delayed.  For instance, it took Burkhauser and Weath-

ers 2 years to gain access to restricted data required for their analysis.  Access-

ing previously linked data will become less time-consuming if data centers are
able to streamline their procedures effectively.At data enclaves, researchers must typically submit programs to centerstaff who then perform the necessary data processing steps.  For Burkhauser

and Weathers, this meant enlisting HRS staff to merge the data sets, run the
programs, and produce output that could then be rechecked.  The length of

this iterative process depends on the turnaround time from the data center
and the number of adjustments and resubmissions required by the researcher.
This process can appear burdensome and inefficient to researchers accus-
tomed to having access to detailed data, doing the coding, and creating extract
files themselves.  These researchers argue that one must understand the pro-

cess of research to assess the effectiveness of a remote access program.Another indirect consequence, noted by Rachel Gordon, of limiting ac-cess to small-area geographic codes for survey respondents is that doing so
may conceal demand by researchers for better data of one type or another.  If
researchers know, for example, that they can link contextual information, this
type of work will be done, and in the process, the type of information of
interest to the research community will be revealed.  This feedback can in turn

be used by producing agencies and organizations to make funding and alloca-
tion decisions.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF11THE CONFIDENTIALITY PROTECTION CONSTRAINT:ASSESSING THE RISKSIn addition to estimating the value of data access, efficient and balancedpolicy requires accurately assessing the disclosure risks (and associated social
cost) posed by microdata and linking.2  Risk of disclosure is affected by nu-
merous data set characteristics.  Level of geographic detail is often the factor

cited first.  Small-area geocodes can make reidentification possible using basic

statistical techniques.  More advanced computer science methods, outlined

by Latanya Sweeney of Carnegie-Mellon University, can substantially increase
the power of reidentification techniques.  As the sample approaches its under-

lying population, the geographic unit must increase in size if a constant level
of protection is to be maintained.  Certain types of surveys, such as those for

people with rare medical conditions, maintain high sample rates from the
subpopulation from which they are drawn.  Likewise, geographic units must

increase in size with the number of variables that can be cross-referenced if
disclosure risk is to be held constant.In addition to detrimental effects on exposed citizens, disclosure eventscan negatively impact data-intensive research enterprises.  Several workshop

participants argued that more work is needed on assessing the impact of
disclosure (or perceived high risk) on survey participation.  If potential survey

participants observe instances of disclosure, or even perceive that confidenti-
ality is becoming less secure, it may become more difficult for data producing
organizations and agencies to enlist their cooperation.  Arthur Kennickell of

the Federal Reserve Board suggested that disclosure of individuals in the FedÕsSurvey of Consumer Finances might endanger the whole study, even if it were
just an annoyance for those involved.  Similarly, if potential survey partici-

pants believe that linking increases risks, or that all data about them are
available through linking, they may be less forthcoming with information and
their time.  A theme that emerged from the workshop was that advancing

access and confidentiality objectives requires cognizance of the relationship
between the perceptions of respondents and the ability to collect data.3  De-
veloping better methods for eliciting consent and educating the public about2The risk-cost relationship question was raised but not answered at the workshop.  Risk is a
function of both the probability of and the potential damage from disclosure.  Participants
acknowledged the need to assess disclosure risks; they were less certain about how best to
quantify harmÑthe true costÑthat results from disclosure.  This question requires additional
attention.3A report produced by the Panel on Privacy and Confidentiality as Factors in Survey Re-sponse (National Research Council, 1979) provides some evidence about respondent attitudes,indicating that promises about confidentiality and data security are often questioned by thepublic.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAthe real risks associated with survey involvement may be a cost-effective use ofresources.Absolute Versus Relative Risks Associated with Data Access and LinkingDiscussions of disclosure risk often emphasize the isolated probabilitythat identifiable information will be revealed about an individual from a sur-
vey or administrative data set.  CNSTAT member Thomas Louis of the Uni-

versity of Minnesota suggested recasting the debate: instead of comparing
risks with probability zero, one might consider how the probability of disclo-
sure changes as a result of a specific data release or linkage, or from adding (or
masking) fields in a data set.  In this context, the question becomes what

marginal risk is associated with an action.For cases in which the same data are available elsewhere, even if not in thesame form or variable combination, the added risk of releasing a research data
file may be comparatively small.  Given the current trend whereby more and

more data are becoming available, it may be reasonable to assume that the
marginal risk of releasing research data has actually diminished.  The validity
of this assumption is, at present, unknown since no one has estimated the risk
of disclosure as a function of survey inclusion conditional on the existence of
data available from other sources.  If security risks are rising rapidly in gen-

eral, the relative risk of scientific survey data may be decreasing.Robert Gellman, consultant, described the sensitive data that are avail-able from a wide range of sources.  Records such as driver
Õs licenses, voterregistration information, vehicle licenses, property tax records, arrest records,
and political contributions, to name a few, are readily available to the public
in many jurisdictions.  Additionally, marketers compile this information into

lists that are also available, often at low cost.  Companies have software de-

signed to locate, retrieve, and cross-reference information to construct de-
tailed consumer profiles and mailing lists.  For a given individual, these lists

may include name, address, age, date of birth, marital status, income, house-
hold size, number of credit cards, occupation, phone number, and even social
security number.  Much of this information is constructed from linkages

across sources.  However, these market-oriented data collectors are not typi-

cally building their products from longitudinal research data sources.Some participants argued that policy makers need to consider how rulesshould differ and how each should apply to different types of data.  There

appear to be far more recorded instances of breached confidentiality with
nonresearch data, or at least data used for nonresearch purposes.4  If this is
4In fact, though there have been numerous cases reported anecdotally in which proceduralrules governing data use were violated, there are no known cases in which a respondent washarmed as a result of disclosures from a research data set.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF13true, legislation designed to protect against data misuse, if not carefully con-structed, could extend unnecessarily to research data or, on the other hand, be
too lax to safeguard the public from commercial data abuses.Confusion over confidentiality risks associated with different types ofdata can inhibit the creation and productive exploitation of legitimate re-
search data.  The risks associated with participating in a well-designed and

well-conducted scientific survey may be very different from those posed by
marketing data; when these distinctions become blurred and all data produc-
tion activities are viewed homogeneously, the public is more likely to believe
that data endanger privacy.  Although survey data may not add much to the

danger, suspicions about data in general make collecting data more difficult,
which in turn constrains data-intensive research.J. Michael Dean pointed out the importance of comparing the risks posedby linked data against those posed by native data setsÑthat is, the originaldata from which the links were made.  In many cases, he argued, the native

databases are already sensitive and as such require adequate protection.  The

linking may create a combined data set that increases disclosure risks substan-
tially, but this is not always the case.  A disclosure incident occurring from a

linked data source is not necessarily caused by the linking; it might have
occurred from the stand-alone data as well.  Again, the marginal risk associ-

ated with the link needs to be evaluated, preferably against the research ben-
efit.  This evaluation requires assessing the extent to which stewards and users

of data sets are likely to be responsible for leaks.  It is necessary to assess how

likely people handling medical records or working at agencies are to be sources
of leaks relative to users of linked data.  Effort expended to protect the security

of data at the source versus at the linking phase should be proportional to the
relative disclosure risks posed at each point.  Unfortunately, such assessments

of relative risk have as yet typically not been made.It is also important to distinguish between organizationally linked data(such as the HRS) and individual user-linked data.  The enormous growth of
computing power and data availability is constantly changing the cost param-
eters of Òsnooping.Ó  To begin with, the prospective linker must have software
that can be expensive.  Some probabilistic matching programs can cost thou-
sands of dollars, while other types of data linking can be performed with tools
as simple as Microsoft Access.  The cost of linking is a deterrent, but this cost
varies significantly with the type of linking performed.  Latanya Sweeney

reported that she is able to identify individuals from a range of publicly avail-
able data sources using simple software in combination with creative meth-
ods.  However, her applications have thus far focused on localized geographic

data sources, and it remains to be seen how far computer science-based meth-
ods can go toward identifying individuals from national longitudinal surveys
linked to administrative records.The probability of being able to identify a record within a longitudinalImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAresearch database also depends on the snooperÕs objective.  Knowing whether
an individual is in a sample makes an enormous difference in terms of identi-
fiability (Juster, 1991).  For instance, a snooper can guess with much greater

certainty whether an individual is in a localized database of voter registration
records than whether an individual is in the HRS.  Of course, if the snooper is

simply trying to identify a random record, that is another matter altogether.5It is important to note that, for sample-based research data sets, a given level
of confidentiality can generally be obtained with less protection than is re-
quired for population-based data sources, such as voter registration records,
municipal registries, local censuses, and hospital administrative records.A related issue is the need to distinguish among different kinds of datausers.  At one end of the spectrum are individuals whose data use is motivated

by objectives other than disclosing identities intentionally; at the other end
are those with vested interests in doing just that.  The latter group may be

involved in marketing, conflict resolution, law enforcement, or a range of
other activities.  It may be presumed that researchers typically fall at the 
ÒsafeÓend of the spectrum, and that those seeking information on specific individu-
als are less likely to rely on research data than on other sources.6  However, the
extent to which this generalization holds is not known.Nonetheless, several participants expressed the view that access rulesmust be tailored to reflect risk levels posed by specific types of data users.
When access rules are set universally, they typically tend to protect against
the most dangerous users, limiting the ability to maximize the social return
on data.  It is highly unlikely that the same legal framework designed to

protect individuals from marketers, employers, or the media is appropriate
to apply to researchers and research data.  The risks and benefits involved are

not comparable.On the other hand, several participants indicated that it is no simple taskto regulate data access by class of user since traditional categories overlap, and
data users may work in multiple areas.  To establish clear rules and proce-

dures for researchers, these participants suggested first gaining a clearer idea
of who needs to be covered and in what way.  No one has adequately sorted
5This point also relates to the debate between Sweeney and Dean about the ease with whichdata sources can be linked.  The distinction between Sweeney
Õs positionÑthat linking is inex-pensive and requires only basic softwareÑand DeanÕsÑthat linking is difficult and expen-siveÑis at least partially tied to a snooperÕs objective.  Sweeney
Õs works suggests that it istechnically possible to quickly link records of some individuals from two large files; at the same
time, as Dean argued, building an accurate comprehensive linked data set from the two sources
may require many identifiers and a high degree of sophistication.6Similar arguments were advanced to support the view that regulating the behavior of datausers is more efficient than altering the data to allow broader access.  This discussion is re-
viewed in Chapter 4.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF15out how identification of the various players, even those in the research com-munityÑe.g., top researchers, all researchers, graduate studentsÑshouldwork.Quantifying Disclosure Risks and Costs, andResearch and Policy BenefitsAs suggested earlier, a fully informed data release policy requires quanti-tative estimates of the potential social costs and benefits associated with the
release.  Unfortunately, given case-by-case variability and uncertainty in the

process of scientific discovery, there is no obvious mechanism available that
can facilitate evaluation of the balance between disclosure risk and data util-
ity.  During Session III of the workshop, Sallie Keller-McNulty of Los Alamos

National Laboratory and George Duncan of Carnegie-Mellon University pre-
sented a paper that begins to define such an operational construct.Statistical disclosure risks are defined by the ability of snoopers to drawinferences from de-identified data; linking is generally part of this process.
The authorsÕ framework, represented in the diagram below, essentially at-
tempts to maximize data utility by minimizing necessary distortion, subject to
a maximum tolerable risk constraint.Data utility is a function of usefulness for statistical inference, and may bereflected in bias, variance, or mean square error characteristics inherent in the
data.  Options for maintaining tolerable risk include restricting data detail,

restricting access to the data, or a combination of the two.  Identifying an

optimal data access strategy involves a difficult maximization problem since
the parameters are not constant.In their presentation, Duncan and Keller-McNulty emphasized restric-Disclosure RiskOriginal DataMaximumTolerable
RiskReleased  Data No DataData UtilityImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAtive data release as opposed to restricted data accessÑspecifically (1) datamasking and (2) synthetic data.  A goal of their work is to quantify disclosure
risk and data utility, distinguishing between identity disclosure (e.g., associat-
ing the name of a respondent with a piece or pieces of released information)
and attribute disclosure (e.g., estimating an attribute value associated with an
individual).  Keller-McNulty discussed how proponents of the framework

might identify important parameters of the process intended to measure risk
and data utility generically.  Full utilization of their framework would entail

comparison of statistical properties of raw versus perturbed data.  The even-

tual goal would be to allow choices in setting parameters that would maxi-
mize the tradeoff between data utility and risk and thereby avoid distorting
data more than is necessary.The authors reviewed the algebra of some simple univariate examplesthat illustrate the framework for assessing risks associated with data dissemi-
nation strategies.  Their conclusions pointed broadly to the need to (1) extend

their univariate examples to more realistic settings, and (2) develop risk and
utility measures that are a function of the masking parameters and other
matrix factors used to create synthetic records.  Finally, the authors noted that

a multitude of possible dissemination strategies exist; level of masking and
extent of synthetic iteration are specific to data set and application.  In no case

will the optimal tradeoff imply 100 percent disclosure prevention.Latanya Sweeney was discussant for the Keller-McNulty and Duncan pre-sentation.  She has analyzed technical protections and risks from a computa-

tional science perspective, and is concerned with identifying optimal modes
of releasing information so that inferences can be controlledÑagain in anenvironment where information about individuals is increasing at an expo-
nential rate.  It should be noted that Sweeney
Õs comments were directed to-ward a broad class of information and not specifically toward longitudinal
research databases.  This broadened focus provided essential context within

which the relative risks of different types of data could be discussed.SweeneyÕs computational approaches to assessing risk involve construct-ing functions that relate hierarchical data aggregation to data security.  Work-

ing at the cell level, she has developed algorithms designed to balance the
tension between the usefulness of data, as measured by the degree of aggrega-
tion (i.e., number of variables collapsed), and protection of anonymity.  The

matrix mask described by Keller-McNulty and Duncan could be used as a
general representation for the hierarchical aggregation.  Sweeney
Õs methodstructures disclosure limitation into a generalized hierarchy in which variable
suppression would typically be at the top.  The algorithms compute how

much a field is distorted as it is moved up the hierarchy toward suppression.
Sweeney then computes a Òprecision metricÓ for a particular combination of
data based on how far the variables must move up the table to obtain a given
level of security.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DATA ACCESS, CONFIDENTIALITY TRADEOFF17In principle, one can obtain a given level of risk while minimizing re-quired data distortion for each field and without resorting to uniform cell
suppression.  In computer programs such as DataFly, which generalizes val-

ues based on a profile of data recipients, and u-ARGUS, a similar program
used by Statistics Netherlands, statistical disclosure limitation methods are
used that do make data safer but less specific and the overall statistical rela-
tionships within the data set less accurate.  The key is finding optimal levels of

distortion across data set fields and exploiting tradeoffs between specificity
and anonymity protection.  Applying her techniques to u-ARGUS and

DataFly, Sweeney concluded that the former tends to underprotect the data,
while the latter tends to overdistort.A central message of SweeneyÕs presentation was that an incredible rangeof resources can be directed toward cracking data security, yet technology can
also offer solutions to those charged with producing and protecting data.  In

the future, sophisticated cryptographic techniques may be implemented.  For

example, researchers may be able to use cryptographic keys to access and link
data.  In this way, agencies could monitor access to the data and make the

results of program runs anonymous.  While such techniques are visions of the

future, technological solutions, in SweeneyÕs view, already offer greater pro-tection than legislative approaches, which tend to lag behind real-time needs
and reflect outdated technological capabilities.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.183Ethical and Legal Requirements Associated
with Data Dissemination
Session II of the workshop was structured to provide an overview of theethical and legal issues related to data dissemination.  Mary Ann Baily,

Institute for Ethics, American Medical Association, presented a paper,commissioned for the workshop, titled ÒRegulating Access to Research Data
Files:  Ethical Issues.Ó  Donna Eden, Office of the General Counsel, U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services, outlined her assessment of recent
and prospective legislative developments.  Finally, Thomas Puglisi of the Of-

fice for Protection from Research Risks (OPRR), National Institutes of Health,
provided an overview of the role of institutional research boards (IRBs).ETHICAL ISSUESMary Ann Baily described underlying ethical issues raised by the use ofmicrodata, especially longitudinal data that are linked to administrative
records.  In so doing, she articulated the conflicting rights and obligations of

data subjects, producers, and users, and the role of government in providing
a structure within which these conflicts can be resolved.Baily outlined positions at both extremes of the policy debate over dataaccess, then made the case for pursuing a middle groundÑstriking a balance
between the right to be left alone and the obligation to cooperate in the
pursuit of communal goals.  She discussed activities that are essential to set-

ting appropriate limits on data use and the organizational framework re-
quired to carry out these activities.  She concluded with observations on the
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ETHICAL AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH DATA DISSEMINATION19problem of translating societal recognition of a moral right to privacy intoenforceable public policy.Cases For and Against Unrestricted Access to Microdata for ResearchIn fields such as health care, education, and economic policy, researchbased on microdata can illuminate the nature of social problems and the
effects of public and private actions taken to ameliorate those problems.
Members of society, including data subjects, can benefit from more efficient
use of their pooled funds (such as tax dollars and health insurance premi-
ums).  Researchers themselves benefit as well, in terms of advancing research

programs and fulfilling career goals.Given these benefits, and given that the costÑoften publicly fundedÑofdeveloping databases is high, it may be asked why databases should not be
made widely available to all.  Such a policy would maximize benefits, and any

costs associated with the additional access could be charged to users when
appropriate.The primary objection to a policy of unrestricted access arises from thepotential effect on data subjects, since disclosure of personal information can
be harmful.  Disclosure of such information may result in being arrested for a

crime, being denied eligibility for welfare or Medicaid, being charged with tax
evasion, losing a job or an election, failing to qualify for a mortgage, or having
trouble getting into college.  Disclosure of a history of alcoholism, mental

illness, venereal disease, or illegitimacy can result in embarrassment and loss
of reputation.  Less directly, research results based on personal data can cause

harm by affecting perceptions about a group to which a person belongs.Even in the absence of such concrete effects, disclosure can be seen as aharm in itself, a violation of the fundamental right to privacy, derived from
the ethical principle of respect for individual autonomy.  Informational pri-

vacy has been defined as Òthe claim of individuals, and the societal valuerepresenting that claim, to control the use and disclosure of information
about themÓ (Fanning, 1998:1).  Gostin (1995:514) highlights the importance
of respect for privacy to the development of a sense of self and personhood:
ÒIt is difficult to imagine how, in the absence of some level of privacy, indi-viduals can formulate autonomous preferences, or more basically, develop
the capacity to be self-governing.Ó  A lack of respect for privacy makes people
reluctant to trust others with personal information; for example, they may
conceal sensitive information needed by their physicians to provide effective
treatment.Those who argue for recognition of a strong right to informational pri-vacy claim that access to data about individuals should require their explicit
consent.  Advocates of this position may acknowledge the research potential

of personal information databases developed by public and private entities;Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAmany accept the use of such data for socially useful research if the data areaggregated or otherwise processed to prevent identification with a specific
person.  They maintain, however, that if the data are personally identifiable,

researchers must persuade the data subjects to agree voluntarily to each use.
To holders of this view, then, the appropriate policy is no access to personally
identifiable data without explicit, informed consent.1Restricted Access:  What Limits Are Appropriate?
Since unrestricted access can cause harm to individuals and also conflictsdirectly with respect for individual autonomy, it is not an appropriate policy.
On the other hand, requiring explicit, informed consent for any access to
personally identifiable data is also problematic.  On a practical level, having to

obtain meaningful informed consent for every use of data would make much
valuable research prohibitively expensive.  Meeting this requirement would

be costly not only to the research enterprise, but also to data subjects, who
would have to spend time submitting to the process.On a philosophical level, such a policy is focused solely on an individualright and ignores individual responsibilities.  The right to informational pri-

vacy has never been considered absolute.  Governments must collect personal

information to function, and members of society have a civic duty to cooper-
ate.  For instance, the U.S. Constitution requires that there be a decennial

census.  Governments require research results to determine areas in which

policy action is needed and what form it should take; additional research is
needed to determine whether policies have been effective.  Research is also an

essential element in the support of individual civil rights and the right to a fair
trial.  Moreover, private organizations must be able to produce research re-

sults to carry out their roles effectively.  Individuals cannot refuse to provide

personal information to private entities such as educational institutions,
health care delivery organizations, and employers unless they are willing to
forego education, health care, and employment.In some cases, research can be done on data collected from volunteers,but in others, unacceptable bias would result.  Moreover, if data collected

from voluntary subjects for one purpose should later become essential for an1Informed consent is defined in Private Lives and Public Policies as 
Òa personÕs agreement toallow personal data to be provided for research and statistical purposes.  Agreement is based on
full exposure of the facts the person needs to make the decision intelligently, including any risksinvolved and alternatives to providing the dataÓ (National Research Council and Social ScienceResearch Council, 1993:23).  See Chapter 3 of the same report for a full description of the
terminology, as well as of the historical development and use of informed consent and notifica-tion procedures.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ETHICAL AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH DATA DISSEMINATION21unforeseen but even more beneficial purpose, obtaining individual consent tothe new use may be impossible, or at least prohibitively expensive.For the above reasons, it is unreasonable to allow individuals completeauthority to control whether and on what terms they participate in socially
important research.  Therefore, a balance must be struck between the right to

be left alone and the obligation to cooperate in the pursuit of societal goals.
According to Baily, the appropriate policy is somewhere in between unlimited
access to personally identifiable data and access only with explicit informed
consent, with the chosen policy being supported by sufficient security to main-
tain confidentiality.  The difficulty is in reaching agreement on just where the

point of balance exists in a particular context.  For instance, the appropriate

policy is likely to be different for research databases than for other types of
data, such as hospital records and marketing information.Establishing and Enforcing Appropriate LimitsBaily suggested that three kinds of activities are inherently part of impos-ing appropriate limits on access to microdata:¥Weighing of relative benefits and costs
ÑFirst, data managers must de-velop information on the benefits associated with research use of personal
data and the harm that could result from granting access.  This activity in-

cludes investigating the attitudes of data subjects.  Both benefits and costs

may vary significantly in different contexts.  The benefits must then be

weighed against the costs to determine access policy, with guidance from and
accountability to the community as a whole through democratic institutions.¥Maintenance of confidentiality
ÑData managers must be able to en-force whatever limits are established.  It is impossible to eliminate the possi-

bility of improper use entirely, but security measures must be adequate to
protect legitimate privacy interests.  This requires developing information on

the risk of misuse in each case, given the nature of the data and their potential
uses, and tailoring security measures accordingly.  There must also be effec-

tive sanctions for violations of confidentiality policies, aimed at preventing
improper use, not merely punishing those responsible after misuse occurs.¥Public education/notification/consent
ÑData managers must informdata subjects about information policy and obtain their consent to use of the
data when appropriate.  Decisions about what people must know, how they

should be told, and when consent rather than simple notification is morally
necessary are complex, however.  It is generally agreed that respect for privacy

requires openness about the existence of databases containing personal infor-
mation and the uses made of the data, regardless of whether explicit consent is
required for every use.  In practice, however, principles of fair information

practiceÑsuch as those that form the basis for the federal Privacy Act ofImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATA1974Ñare surprisingly ambiguous.2  There appears to be acceptance, if not
explicit acknowledgment, of the fact that personal data will be collected, some
of it without subjectsÕ explicit, freely given consent.
In clarifying the obligations of data managers to inform and seek consentfrom data subjects, it is useful to think in terms of three levels.  There should

be a base level of education about the role of data and research in making
society run well.  The goal is to make sure people understand that information

about them is collected and used, with confidentiality safeguards, as a matter
of routine, and that it is their civic responsibility to accede to this in exchange
for medical progress, an effective educational system, protection of their civil
rights, and so on.  This level implies a category of 
ÒordinaryÓ research uses
producing substantial social benefits with a low risk of harmful disclosure.
For research in this category, there is no obligation to notify data subjects
about each use or to seek explicit consent, although there should be a way for
subjects to learn what research is being done with the data if they wish to do
so.The second level pertains to research uses that differ substantially fromthe routine, making it reasonable to notify data subjects and provide justifica-
tion for the use.  For example, a new hypothesis about the cause of an illness

might lead to new analysis of old data that promises significant benefits with
little risk.  Alternatively, a significant change in the underlying benefit/cost

picture might lead to new kinds of research or new interest in variables not
previously examined.The third level pertains to uses for which explicit, informed consent isrequired.  A research use might fall into this category because the potential for

harm is significantly greater relative to societal benefits, or because the degree
of actual or perceived harm varies substantially across individuals.  Uses for

private rather than social benefit also fall into this category.The above categories suggest a way to think about informing potentialparticipants of current and future uses of the data.  The immediate research

goals could be explained, and the participants could be informed that the data2These principlesÑas set forth by Alan Westin and cited by George Duncan in Chapman(1997:336)Ñare as follows:  (1) there must be no secret personal data record-keeping system;
(2) there must be a way for individuals to discover what personal information is recorded and
how it is used; (3) there must be a way for individuals to prevent information about them thatwas obtained for one purpose from being used or made available for other purposes withouttheir consent; (4) there must be a way for individuals to correct or amend a record of informa-
tion about themselves; and (5) an organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminatingrecords of identifiable personal data must ensure the reliability of the data for their intendeduse and must take reasonable precautions to prevent misuses of the data.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ETHICAL AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH DATA DISSEMINATION23might also be used for routine socially beneficial research in the future, withconfidentiality safeguards and without further notification.  An important

issue to be addressed is where the linkage of survey data (especially longitudi-
nal data) to administrative records falls along this spectrum.  Can confidenti-

ality safeguards and accountability be effective enough, and the risk of harm
to individuals low enough, to allow most such linkages to be considered Òrou-tineÓ or 
ÒordinaryÓ research uses in the sense discussed above?
Concluding RemarksBaily concluded her presentation by offering the following assessment:¥There is consensus on the existence of a right to informational privacy,but not on the extent to which policies should go to protect that right or on
how to implement such policies in practice.  In a pluralistic society, translat-

ing a moral right into enforceable policy is a political problem; inevitably, no
one is entirely satisfied with the result.¥It is easier to reach an agreement most people can live with if peopleunderstand that the goal is a practical compromise among competing moral
visions, not the triumph of their own point of view.  Also, the process of

achieving compromise must both be and be perceived to be one in which
there is ongoing democratic accountability for what happens as a result.¥Finally, it is easier to agree on change when the existing situation isunsatisfactory to nearly everyone, so that there is much to gain from an im-
proved system.  At present, personal privacy, even in highly sensitive areas

such as medical information, is far less protected than most people realize.
The opportunity exists to both improve safeguards on the use of data and
increase access to data for socially useful research if the right policies are
instituted.RECENT AND PROSPECTIVE LEGISLATIONDuring her presentation, Mary Baily asserted that implementation of ef-fective access and confidentiality policies requires carefully constructed social
mechanisms.  Paramount among these is a consistent national legal frame-

work, designed to indicate to both data producers and users what standards
are appropriate and to aid in imposing sanctions for misuse.  The need for

such a framework, which does not now exist, is a recurrent theme in the
literature on privacy and data use.  Confirming Baily
Õs assessment, DonnaEden provided an overview of recent and prospective legislative develop-
ments.  Speaking primarily about health data, Eden observed that coordi-

nated federal privacy legislation to protect health records does not yet exist.
This is somewhat of a surprise, given that Congress has been working to enactImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAcomprehensive privacy legislation in health and other areas for many years.In fact, in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
of 1996, Congress set an August 1999 deadline for the enactment of privacy
legislation to protect health records, and provided that if that deadline were
not met, the Secretary of Health and Human Services would be required to
issue regulations to protect the privacy of certain health data.Consensus on privacy legislation has not been forthcoming; instead, pro-tections are based on a piecemeal system that originates from both federal and
state levels.  The primary laws governing data access are the Freedom of

Information Act, the Privacy Act, privacy and confidentiality laws specific to
individual agencies or purposes, and state laws.  The wide variability in stat-

utes governing access to administrative records nationwide makes it difficult
for researchers and others to understand applicable rules.  Laws dictate what

data can be collected, the linkages that can be made, and the protections that
are required for data use.Bills are pending that would regulate federal statutes applying to largedatabases, including proposals to mandate copyright protection for some.
The first major component of legislation pertaining to health information is
directed toward encouraging adoption of standards, particularly in the elec-
tronic context, to replace an array of currently existing formats.  HIPAA

requires the Secretary of Health and Human Services to adopt standards de-
veloped by organizations accredited by the American National Standards In-
stitute whenever possible.  The legislation requires that all health care infor-

mation transmitted by health plans, clearinghouses, and those providers who
conduct business using electronic transactions comply with these standards
within 24 months (or, for small health plans, 36 months) of their formal
adoption by the Secretary.Standardization is slated to include the creation of unique national iden-tifiers for health care providers, health plans, employers, and individual pa-
tients that will technically facilitate linkages across sources.  This practice will
ensure that different variablesÑfor example, for diagnosis and proceduredataÑare coded identically across data sets.  The standard for  individual
patient identifiers is on hold until comprehensive privacy protections are in
place.  One of the major gaps in current HIPAA requirements is that the

standards will not apply to exactly the same data when those data are held by
employers, some insurers, and government agencies.HIPAA also requires the adoption of standards for the security of infor-mation transmitted or maintained electronically, and for electronic signa-
tures used in standard health care transactions.  The Department of Health

and Human Services will issue compliance and enforcement requirements to
provide assurance that, if information is misused, there will be redress.  This

move toward standardization will clearly impact researchersÕ data collection
efforts, particularly with regard to the types of data that can be linked.  Stan-
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ETHICAL AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH DATA DISSEMINATION25dardization will make reading of medical records much easier, and shouldsignificantly simplify the mechanics of data matching and analysis.Because Congress failed to enact comprehensive health privacy legisla-tion, the Secretary of Health and Human Services is now required to issue
privacy regulations.  These regulations will be based on recommendations for

privacy legislation prepared by the Secretary for Congress in 1997.  Statutory

language requires that the privacy regulations address (1) recognition of the
rights of individual subjects, (2) procedures designed to enforce those rights,
and (3) the uses and disclosures permitted.  There is as yet no clear adminis-

trative mechanism or funding to activate the provisions, which may create
additional delays.  Moreover, since the new privacy standards will be issued as

regulations, not as a statute, state privacy laws will not be preempted; all
existing federal statutes, such as the Privacy Act and the Public Health Act,
also remain in place.At this point, it is unclear how effective these efforts to control the uses ofdata and protect individual confidentiality will be.  Uncertainty about effects

on access and the potential for disclosure will persist until legislation is for-
mulated.  Eden reviewed several current circuit court cases that indicate pos-

sible directions the privacy legislation may take.Under HIPAA, individual data subjects have some limited rights andprotections.  The statute provides both criminal and civil penalties for disclo-

sure of data in violation of the various standards, along with very limited
monetary penalties.  Many of the workshop participants expressed the view

that these rules need to be strengthened and criminal penalties stiffened.  The

Freedom of Information Act gives the public certain rights to data held by the
federal government.  Federal, state, and local governments authorize them-

selves to use data for basic operations and particular social purposes.  Re-

searchers and data collectors have very few explicit legal rights to data.In conclusion, Eden offered her assessment of practical resolutions forcurrent issues.  Given that the prospects for passage of comprehensive privacy

laws appear to be remote, she envisions a continued piecemeal approach to
legislation.  The potential for practical solutions may be greatest in the areas

of copyright law and contracts.  The Internet offers a wide range of possibili-

ties for creating instant contracts and user agreements.  Eden predicted a

broad expansion in the use of click-on and other technology-facilitated agree-
ments, most of which offer the promise of enforceability through existing
contract law.  Additionally, these mechanisms do not require special recogni-

tion by Congress of a separate private right of action.  Agreement violators

can be taken directly to state or, in certain cases, federal court.  In some states,

data subjects have the right to take legal action against a secondary user or
licensee if terms and conditions are violated.As noted earlier, a number of participants expressed skepticism about theability of privacy laws to keep pace with technology and to effectively targetImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAindividuals and groups that pose the greatest risk to data security.  The pro-
tection offered by HIPAA, as well as by regulations that will be adopted under
this legislation, is limited by its restriction to health plans, clearinghouses, and
those providers who conduct business electronically.  Eden noted that the

Secretary of Health and Human Services is on record as supporting the need
for comprehensive federal legislation in this area.ROLE OF INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARDSThe IRB is the most direct regulatory link between researcher and re-search data.  Thomas Puglisi presented a paper coauthored by Jeffery Cohen,

also of OPRR, titled ÒHuman Subject Protections in Research Utilizing DataFiles,Ó providing an overview of IRB procedures, limitations, and prospects.
OPRR is in charge of enforcing federal policy for the protection of humanresearch subjects.  Nearly every executive branch agency of the federal gov-

ernment that supports human-subject research is a signatory to this policy,
which makes researchers subject to a common set of regulations.  The IRB

process and the requirement for informed consent are the two core protec-
tions provided to individuals by these regulations.Federally funded researchers become subject to the IRB process as soonas they access potentially identifiable private information about living indi-
viduals.  Information is considered private if an individual could reasonably

expect that it would not be used for purposes other than that for which it was
provided.  The IRB is charged with judging whether risks to data subjects are

ÒreasonableÓ in relation to the anticipated benefits of data release and whether
the risks are minimized by a sound research design, as well as with ensuring
that informed consent is acquired and that confidentiality protections under-
lying data dissemination are adequate.With regard to federally mandated informed consent, regulations requirethat subjects be notified about the degree to which the confidentiality of their
records will be maintained.  Meeting this requirement is not problematic for

certain specific-use data sets, but it is typically not possible to provide accu-
rate notification about information that will be linked or otherwise be incor-
porated in larger data sets.  It can be difficult to predict the level of security for

data that are extended beyond their original use, as is often the case with
clinical or administrative data not initially collected as part of a defined re-
search project.Similarly, it is frequently impossible to acquire informed consent forresearch of the type discussed in the workshop session on case studies.  In

survey-based social science research, IRBs may waive the consent require-
ment if they find that three conditions are met:  (1) the risk to subjects is

minimal, (2) use of the information for research will not adversely impact
the rights and welfare of the subjects, and (3) it would not be practicable toImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ETHICAL AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH DATA DISSEMINATION27obtain informed consent.  The second and third conditions usually pose little
difficulty; the first, however, requires more judgment.  As noted above, there

is no set of standards an IRB can apply in deciding whether a given applica-
tion should be considered as involving minimal risk and whether the confi-
dentiality protections in place are adequate.  In fact, it probably is not pos-

sible to establish a universal standard, given the case-by-case variation in key
parameters.With regard to data access policy, Puglisi noted that the inherent chal-lenge of the IRB mandate is in interpreting a standard, since the regulations
do not establish one.  Judgments must be made about what type of data can be

released, and in what form, for each research project.  The IRB must weigh the

risk of information disclosure and the potential ramifications associated with
it against the anticipated benefits to research and policy, and then decide on
an appropriate level of protection.During this process, IRB staff must first evaluate the nature and sensitiv-ity of the data.  Could disclosure put data subjects at risk of criminal or civil

liability?  Could it be damaging to financial standing, employability, insur-

ability, or the reputation of an individual or group?  Obviously, the more

sensitive the information is, the more stringent the protections must be.  Risk

is a function of the level of identifiability (and data protection) and the sensi-
tivity of the data.The probability of disclosure and subsequent damage often appears trivialfrom the perspective of the researcher, but disclosure of private information
does occur.  Puglisi provided several real-world examples of inadvertent dis-

closureÑone involving a case study and one involving exposure of notes at aprofessional meeting.  He also noted instances in which data were released by

investigators to news reporters and to congressional committees.  The risks

are real, but difficult to quantify.Frequently, IRBs are advocated in proposed legislation as the vehicle forresolving data access and confidentiality tensions.  There are hurdles to over-
come, however, if IRBs are to serve this purpose optimally.  IRB personnel are

often no more competent than other groups to make unstructured decisions.
Federal regulations do not require that IRB members have training in statisti-
cal disclosure limitation techniques and other methods of protecting confi-
dentiality.  Moreover, the federal requirement that IRBs have the scientific

expertise to judge research they review is not being met uniformly.  These

factors make it impossible to carry out cost/benefit assessment, which is,
strictly speaking, a violation of federal regulation.Another problem pointed out by Puglisi is that IRB standards tend tobecome increasingly restrictive as more procedural constraints are adopted;
staff who are inadequately trained may have incentives to err on the safe side.
With no increase in the expertise of IRB personnel, this trend is likely to
continue.  IRB administrators have an obligation to acquire (either internally
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAor through outside consultants) enough professional expertise to combat fearsthat an institution will be held liable for a mistake.  Communication between
researchers and IRBs is also key to improving knowledge levels and enhancing
the performance of IRBs.Another important aspect of efficient IRB utilization involves matching aresearch project with the appropriate IRB.  In most instances, a researcher
Õslocal IRB will not be the one best suited to evaluate research value and data
security risks.  The model Puglisi recommends would require that data access

proposals be reviewed at the location where data are maintained.  The host

IRB is in the best position to balance research potential against confidentiality
risks.  This approach would allow the host IRB to play an educational role as

well, which is appropriate since its staff should be most knowledgeable about
specific data characteristics, research applications, and conditions under
which data should be shared.  In acting as the responsible gatekeeper, the host

IRB could provide information to local IRBs that would help streamline the
approval process.  Researchers could submit judgments from the overseeing

IRB, demonstrating to the local IRB that a knowledgeable, respected body has
approved confidentiality protections.  Robert Willis noted that this is essen-

tially the model that has been implemented successfully at HRS.  Given the

expanding role of data enclaves, it is likely that, along with auditing proce-
dures developed by the National Center for Education Statistics, the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, and the National Science Foundation, IRBs will for the
foreseeable future continue to be the central mechanism for monitoring re-
searchersÕ access to data.
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294Alternative Approaches for
Limiting Disclosure Risks and
Facilitating Data Access
Presentations throughout the workshop confronted aspects of the re-stricted data, restricted access debate.  Data alteration allows for broader

dissemination, but may affect researchersÕ confidence in their model-ing output and even the types of models that can be constructed.  Restricting

access may create inconveniences and limit the pool of researchers that can
use the data, but generally permits access to greater data detail.  This chapter

reviews the presentations and discussions addressing these two approaches,
highlighting their advantages and disadvantages.  It also summarizes the dis-

cussion of potential technical solutions and the use of legal sanctions to modify
the behavior of individuals with access to the data.DATA ALTERATIONThere are both technical and statistical solutions for protecting data secu-rity.  Several workshop participants argued that these solutions need to be

blended with the substantive knowledge of researchers to solve disclosure
problems in a way that satisfies all interested communities.  This section

reviews the discussion of statistical approaches, for which a presentation by
Arthur Kennickell, titled ÒMultiple Imputation in the Survey of Consumer
Finances,Ó was the centerpiece.  Technical approaches are discussed later in

this chapter.Participants representing the research community expressed frustrationwith some of the standard perturbation methods employed by the large longi-
tudinal surveys.  Finis Welch of Texas A&M University articulated several
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAconcerns.  He argued that the introduction of noise to variables can, in certain
instances, create major headaches for the modeler.  For instance, adding noise

to a field that will be used as a dependent variable in models may be accept-
able as long as the expected value of the disturbance is zero, and hence effi-
ciency of estimates is preserved.  When dispersion is added to fields that will

be used as explanatory variables, however, expected errors tend to be corre-
lated with variable values.  Welch believes priority should be given to develop-

ing perturbation methods that, if invoked, will preserve the key statistical
properties of a data set.  He made some specific recommendations as well.

First, he advocated top-coding at fixed quantile levels, over time, rather than
at absolute values; when the percentage of records top-coded changes, serious
problems arise in longitudinal or panel modeling contexts.  Welch also would

like to see scramblingÑas opposed to truncationÑof ÒsensitiveÓ data above
the top-coded cutoff points to maintain full distribution, but eliminate knowl-
edge of where an individual record fits into the distribution.KennickellÕs use of a multiple imputation technique offers a more sophis-ticated form of data perturbation, one that could potentially improve data
security (and, hence, allow greater accessibility) without seriously compro-
mising modeling utility.  Several workshop participants expressed support for

the idea of exploring this type of approach to gain a clearer idea of how
models might perform using imputed data and to assess the promise of the
technique in terms of data protection.  There is now a large multiple imputa-
tion apparatus in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF); Kennickell has
shown it can be done.  What remains to be seen is how effective and how

useful the technique will be.  KennickellÕs research is moving toward answer-ing that question.The SCF is conducted by the Federal Reserve Board, with survey informa-tion collected by the National Opinion Research Center at the University of
Chicago.  The data include sensitive and detailed information about respon-

dentsÕ assets and liabilities, as well as extensive demographic and geographic
information.  The survey, which oversamples wealthy households, is derived

from statistical records based on tax returns maintained by the Statistics and
Income Division of the Internal Revenue Service.  To gain access to this

information, the Fed agrees to a disclosure review similar to that for the
public Statistics of Income files.Because the SCF is subject to legal constraints on data release, and be-cause it contains sensitive information on a sample that includes a high-
wealth population, the survey is a logical candidate for the multiple imputa-
tion experiment as a means of disclosure limitation.  Because missing data

have always been an important problem in the SCF, substantial resources
have been devoted to the construction of an imputation framework that can
be used to simulate data to replace those originally reported.For the public-release version of the SCF, the survey applies standardImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIMITING DISCLOSURE RISKS AND FACILITATING DATA ACCESS31perturbation and data limitation techniquesÑrounding, collapsing catego-ries, providing geographic detail only at the Fed division levels, truncating
negative values, withholding variables, and a variety of more minor changes
that cannot be disclosed.  In addition, the full final internal version of the data

is used to estimate models that are, in turn, used to simulate data for a
subsample of observations in the public version of the data set.KennickellÕs multiple imputation system deals with all variables, imput-ing them one at a time.  It is iterative and generates, as the name implies,

many imputations.  The models, which are different for binary, continuous,

and categorical variables, involve essentially relaxing data around reported
values.  The method requires a full probability specification at the outset; the

notion behind the multiple imputation is to then sample from the full poste-
rior distribution.  It is this sampling that generates the variability needed for

disclosure limitation.Kennickell described the application of multiple imputation for the SCFas a type of structured blurring:  Òa set of cases that are identified as unusualplus another set of random cases are selected, and selected variables within
those cases are imputed subject to a range constraint (unspecified to the
public), but they are constrained to come out somewhere in a broad neigh-
borhood around the original values.Ó  The knowledge of which data values
have been intentionally altered is also partially disguised.  The cumulative

effect of the process is to decrease a userÕs confidence that any given recordrepresents an actual original participant.The method is computationally intensive, but Kennickell described itonly Òas a modest step in the direction of generating fully simulated data.Ó  He
argued that it is possible to simulate data that do a good job of reproducing all
simple statistics and the distributional characteristics of the original reported
data.  The extent to which imputed data will be able to provide a satisfactory

basis for the leading-edge research required for fully informed policy is not
yet clear.  It is not known how imputation affects error structures of compli-

cated models; what sampling error means in a fully simulated data set; what
happens to complex relationships among variables; and, more generally, how
researchers will interpret modeling results.  One way to begin addressing

these questions is to create synthetic versions of existing data sets with known
nonlinear relationships or complex interactions and see whether they could
have been detected with the simulations.  Many of the workshop participants
agreed that these performance questions require serious attention and that
the answers will ultimately determine the success of imputation methods.
Quantitative assessments of the extent to which disclosure risks can be re-
duced using these methods are also needed.At this point, social science researchers are skeptical about the accuracy ofanalyses not based on ÒoriginalÓ data.  Richard Suzman of the National Insti-
tute on Aging (NIA) added that all leading researchers currently supported byImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATANIA are opposed to the imposition of synthetic data.1  Finis Welch and
Suzman each noted that the value of synthetic data sets in longitudinal re-
search is unproven; with the exception of the 1983Ð1989 panel, the SCF iscross-sectional.  While complex longitudinal data increase disclosure risks, it

is also more difficult to preserve key relationships and interactions among
variables when this type of data is altered.  Perturbation, therefore, may be

more damaging to analyses that rely on longitudinal data than to those that
rely on cross-sectional data.These criticisms notwithstanding, Stephen Fienberg of Carnegie-MellonUniversity considers KennickellÕs work a major success in the use of modernstatistical methods and disclosure limitation research.  Fienberg made the

point that all data sets are approximations of the real data for a group of
individuals.  Rarely is a sample exactly representative of the group about

which researchers are attempting to draw statistical inferences; rather, it rep-
resents those for whom information is available.  Even a population data set is

not perfect, given coding and keying errors, missing imputed data, and the
like.  Fienberg finds the argument that a perturbed data set is not useful for

intricate analysis not altogether compelling.  Yet researchers are more critical
of controlled modifications to the data and the introduction of structured
statistical noise than of sampling noise.Thus two clear perspectives emerged among workshop participants.  On
one side are those who believe that, in addition to its role in statistical disclo-
sure limitation, replacing real samples with records created from posterior
distributions offers great potential in terms of maintaining fidelity to the
original data goal (as opposed to the original data).  On the other side are

researchers who are concerned that synthetic data do not fit the model used
by top researchers as they actually work with the data.  Their position is that,

in addition to delaying data release, imputation programs blur data in ways
that create inaccuracies, such as those described earlier.  Suzman expressed

the need for the National Institutes of Health and others to advance empirical
research that would address these issues.  As these methods are advanced, it

may become possible to provide researchers with clearer explanations of how
imputation impacts the data.  Moreover, data management programs may be

developed that offer the option of choosing between using an altered public
data set and submitting to additional safeguards to gain access to raw data.RESTRICTED ACCESSPresentations during Session I illustrated the benefits that can be derivedfrom studies using complex research data filesÑthat is, microdata files with1Suzman did acknowledge a role for synthetic data in creating test data sets on which re-searchers could perform initial runs, thus reducing time spent in data enclaves.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIMITING DISCLOSURE RISKS AND FACILITATING DATA ACCESS33longitudinal data, contextual information for small areas, or linked adminis-trative data.  Each research example cited was carried out under restricted

data access arrangements.  None could have been undertaken solely using

microdata files that are available to the general public with no restrictions.
Many of the analyses required the use of files that link survey data with ad-
ministrative record information for the same persons.A survey of organizations that released complex research data files aspublic-use files was described during Session III by Alice Robbin, Indiana
University (for further details about this survey, see Chapter 5).  Files with

linked administrative data were seldom released in that format, primarily
because of concerns that users with independent access to the administrative
source files might be able to re-identify persons whose records were included
in the research file.  Restricted-access files were distinguished from public-use

files by the inclusion of more detailed information on the geographic location
of sample persons and contextual data, such as median income classes and
poverty rates, for the communities where they lived.While usually applied in a way that preserves basic statistics, maskingprocedures used to reduce disclosure risks associated with public-use files
may introduce substantial biases when more complex methods of analysis are
applied to the data.  Therefore, arrangements for providing special or re-

stricted access are often used to satisfy the needs of users for whom the avail-
able public-use data files are insufficient.  Several such arrangements have

been developed in recent years; primary among these are (1) use of the data by
users at their own work sites, subject to various restrictions and conditions
(commonly referred to as licensing); (2) controlled access at sites (often called
research data centers) established for the purpose by custodians of the data;
and (3) controlled remote access, in which users submit their analytical pro-
grams electronically to the custodian, who runs them and reviews the outputs
for disclosure risk prior to transmission to the users.2  The next chapter re-
views workshop presentations that described current and planned restricted-
access arrangements at various agencies.ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF DATA ALTERATIONVERSUS RESTRICTED ACCESSThe most frequently cited advantage of data alteration, as opposed torestricted access, is that it facilitates broader public release and simpler user
acquisition.  Steven Fienberg articulated the advantage of data perturbation
2There are other possible arrangements, such as the release of encrypted microdata on CD-ROMs with built-in analytical software, but these methods are not widely used at present andwere not discussed at the workshop.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAconcisely:  ÒThese methods (particularly if they can be developed to producemore acceptable statistical properties than people are willing to admit) ad-
dress a very compelling public need, which is the sharing of data collected at
public expense that are a public good and would otherwise not be broadly
accessed.Ó3  Proponents argue that sophisticated perturbation methods offer
one of the few tools that may help meet simultaneously the need of research-
ers to access better data and the need to protect respondents who supply
information.The primary disadvantage of data alteration generally and advanced per-turbation specifically is researchersÕ decreased confidence in modeling out-
put; use of such data is believed by some to limit modeling flexibility as well.
Researchers at the workshop expressed concern that data alteration inhibits
complex modeling, particularly when the relationships that have the greatest
policy relevance are nonlinear or when causal modeling requires correct or-
dering of temporal events.  For example, it may be difficult to accurately

model real-world retirement behavior, which is thought to be driven by jumps
in eligibility and benefit rules faced by workers, if blurring techniques are
used to smooth such spikes in the data.  Moreover, even if key statistical

properties are preserved, researchers must be convinced that this is the case
before they will use the data; they must also learn how to interpret and report
the results of models estimated from altered data.  These are real costs associ-

ated with data perturbation.The challenge for proponents of data imputation approaches is to deter-mine how accurately relationships among data fields can be preserved and to
communicate their findings to researchers.  The extent to which this chal-

lenge can be met is, as of now, uncertain.  Robert Boruch articulated a strategy

for addressing this need.  He suggested that it is important to monitor the

performance of increasingly complex models, when data used in estimation
procedures are altered in various ways, by building a knowledge base of cali-
bration experiments.The advantage of restricted access is that those granted permission havefuller access to primary data.  On the other hand, costs are incurred in enforc-

ing access rules and in operating data enclaves and remote programs.  Re-

stricted access arrangements also impose an operational burden on research-
ers.  These operational costs can be significant; for instance, Kennickell

reported that the Fed does not have the research budget to establish data
centers or even licensing agreements.  While their multiple imputation pro-

gram is a major undertaking, it is a less costly method of providing broad3Ivan Felligi and others believe that if data linkage continues to increase, it may not bepossible to safely offer public release files at all.  While this view may be extreme, it does point
to the tradeoff:  given more linking possibilities and richer native data, more restriction is
required to hold disclosure risk constant.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIMITING DISCLOSURE RISKS AND FACILITATING DATA ACCESS35access to researchers.  Kennickell also believes that, among users of the SCF,
unrestricted access to the data is a higher priority than is access to unrestricted
data.While researchers at the workshop did express a general preference forlimited access to full data, as opposed to public access to limited data, they
also noted that the on-site requirement can be burdensome.  Thus, they voiced

enthusiasm for the idea of developing flexible remote access systems.  Re-

searchers also want assurances that restricted access data sets at centers would
not replace the types of data now publicly available.  Most of the researchers

indicated a preference for the licensing option, which is viewed as least bur-
densome (since they plan to follow access rules).  Agency representatives

noted that the sanctions in existing laws could be strengthened (see the next
section).  However, it is impossible to ensure that all users are familiar with

the laws, and federal agencies are ultimately responsible for data safety.  Li-

censing is effective because it transfers a portion of that responsibility to users,
allowing agencies greater latitude in dissemination (see also the discussion of
licensing in Chapter 5).Ultimately, if different types of users can be identified reliably, appropri-ate levels of access can be established for each.  Researchers are probably

willing, for selected studies, to go through the required steps to use less-
altered data under restricted access arrangements.  In some cases, the exist-

ence of legal penalties for misuse will provide a sufficient deterrent, and access
to full raw data may be allowed.  Participants voiced the view that a one-size-
fits-all approach to data access is unsatisfactory, since it would likely produce
data of insufficient detail for cutting-edge research while perhaps unnecessar-
ily disclosing information not needed for more general research.  Similarly,

marketers or the general public who want fast Web access likely cannot be
granted the same access to the highest-quality data as those who undergo
security precautions.Participants were also optimistic about the ability to use technology toobtain a proper balance between confidentiality and accessibility.  Latanya

Sweeney and others described evolving approaches that may eventually ad-
vance confidentiality protection within both data alteration and restricted
access frameworks.  For example, there may be ways to improve remote access

using rapidly evolving net-based foundations that would allow researchers to
run interactive programs externally (see also the discussion of remote access
in Chapter 5).  More sophisticated linking may also be possible, particularly if

methods can be developed to monitor the combinations of variables regularly
used by researchers.  Once a clear research need to link certain variables or

data sources has been established, it may be safer to link at the source instead
of having copies of both data sets go out in their entirety each time a re-
searcher needs to make the link.  Similar approaches may enhance the ability

to establish joint data centers or centers with multiple sources of data.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAROLE OF LEGAL SANCTIONSStricter legislative protections offer another potentially efficient means ofimproving confidentialityÑefficient because the probability of disclosure canbe decreased without imposing costs on rule-abiding researchers.  Indeed,

several participants, including Richard Suzman, suggested that perhaps this
method of data protection should be given the highest priority.  These partici-

pants cited a recommendation from the report Private Lives and Public Poli-cies that there should be 
Òlegal sanctions for all users, both external and agencyemployees, who violate requirements to maintain the confidentiality of dataÓ(National Research Council and Social Science Research Council, 1993:7) and
added that existing penalties should be stiffened.4J. Michael Dean pointed out that the potential for unintended disclosureexists at the data source as well as at the user stage.  A primary reason that

agencies are able to maintain confidentiality is their ability to impose a high
cost penalty for misbehavior (violators can lose their jobs).  Dean argued that

this regulation should be expanded across agencies and institutional lines,
thereby creating more linking opportunities; in other words, the regulatory
approach to native databases could be extended to linked data.  Again, such

approaches are generally applauded by researchers, who prefer regulation of
the people using databases over alteration of the databases themselves.Presenters from the HRS noted that, in part because of a lack of confi-dence in the adequacy of sanctions, the funding agency (NIA) demands that
the University of Michigan provide linked data only to individuals working
under federal grants so that disregard for the confidentiality guidelines will be
subject to federal rules.  The situation is different for agencies that have a

licensing mechanism tied to the data, which allows for more options.  Other

agencies must operate purely within the realm of the Privacy Act.  Many

participants believe that increased harmonization of the legal framework is
needed, if for no other reason than to allow researchers to know roughly what
is expected without that expectation shifting from context to context.4Donna Eden pointed out that there is considerable room for increasing penalties.  For in-
stance, in HIPAA there exists no private right of action for subjects.  The act sets forth broad
criminal prohibition, but only minor criminal sanctions for disclosure of data in violation of
regulations.  A $100 civil penalty is unlikely to be effective against corporate or even most
individual abuses.  Also, it should be noted that the size of a penalty is of limited importance if
it is rarely imposed.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.375Current Agency and
Organization Practices
This chapter reviews presentations that described current practicesaimed at preserving the confidentiality of microdata.  Practices related

to release of public-use files and restriction of data access are reviewedin turn.RELEASE OF PUBLIC-USE FILESMore than 20 years ago the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodol-ogy (1978) recommended that all federal agencies releasing statistical infor-
mation formulate and apply policies and procedures designed to avoid unac-
ceptable disclosures.  In releasing public-use filesÑtypically made available

with no restrictions other than, in some cases, imposition of a user feeÑ
agencies generally comply with this recommendation through the use of vari-
ous forms of statistical disclosure limitation.  Two workshop presentations

described policies and procedures used for the release of microdata.  Alice

Robbin provided an overview of results from a survey on the statistical disclo-
sure limitation (SDL) practices used by government agencies and research
organizations that distribute public-use microdata files with longitudinal,
linked administrative, or contextual data for small areas.  Alvan Zarate of the

National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) presented an overview of the
Interagency Confidentiality and Data Access GroupÕs (ICDAG) Checklist on
Disclosure Potential of Proposed Data Releases, developed to help ensure thatImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAprincipal safeguards are in place when electronic data files are released forpublic use.1Statistical Disclosure Limitation PracticesAlice Robbin, Thomas Jabine, and Heather Koball conducted a survey oforganizations that produce and distribute complex research microdata files.
The survey was intended to contribute empirical evidence on how knowledge
about SDL procedures has been applied by these organizations in the produc-
tion of public-use microdata.  Information was gathered on the types of

microdata that are released publicly, current SDL practices applied to public-
use data, and organizationsÕ demarcation between public-use and restricted
access data.  Several themes emerged from this information, including (1) the

extent of variation in SDL practices across organizations, (2) special risks to
data confidentiality, and (3) the tension between the data needs of researchers
and data confidentiality.Variation in Organizational SDL Practices.  Survey respondents con-
veyed familiarity with the broad issue of data confidentiality.  All respondents

knew that direct identifiers of respondents should not be released and
expressed concern about protecting respondentsÕ identities.  Furthermore,
because of concerns about data confidentiality, few organizations release pub-
lic-use geographic/contextual data for small areas.  Similarly, linked adminis-

trative data are generally confined to a restricted access format.On the other hand, the survey revealed considerable variation across or-ganizations in terms of knowledge about SDL techniques.  This variation is a

function of the extent of practitionersÕ knowledge about deductive disclosure,
the type of organization, and the timing of decisions related to release of
public-use files.  Some respondents appeared to be unfamiliar with terminol-

ogy and concepts associated with data confidentiality, while others were well
versed in these matters.2   The treatment of special 
Òat-riskÓ variables, such as
age and income, varies widely by organization.Most organizations appear to base their SDL decisions for public-uselongitudinal files on a cross-sectional model.  That is, they assess the risks of

disclosure for a given cross section, with little consideration of longitudinal
effects.  One factor that may contribute to the relatively liberal policies ap-
1The ICDAG was recently renamed the Committee on Data Access and Confidentiality.2This generalizationÑthat there is a wide variety in knowledge and practice of SDL tech-niquesÑwas corroborated by Erik Austin of the Inter-University Consortium for Political andSocial Research.  Austin has been involved with this issue for three decades; his organization
has examined thousands of files and reviewed SDL plans so that data can be released publicly.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES39plied to longitudinal data is the fact that follow-up data are often releasedseveral years after earlier panels.  Decisions about previous data releases may

or may not play a role in decisions pertaining to the release of longitudinal
files.  A second factor that appears to influence decisions about release policies

for longitudinal data is knowledge of user preferences.  Staff are sensitive to

the fact that longitudinal data are deemed particularly useful when the data
contain the same variables over time.The survey responses indicated greater variation among the standards ofuniversities than among those of government agencies.3  Government agen-
cies, particularly the Bureau of the Census and NCHS, have standards on
which they base decisions about release of public-use data and SDL tech-
niques.  Many of the Census Bureau
Õs standards have had a significant influ-ence on other organizations that distribute microdata.  The Census Bureau

also has a Disclosure Review Board, which reviews microdata sets prior to
release.  NCHS has an IRB; a data confidentiality committee; and a data

confidentiality officer, who makes final decisions about SDL techniques for
public-use data.Special Risks.  In general, issues related to deductive disclosure have beenbrought to the attention of organizations only in recent years; as a result, the
SDL techniques applied to microdata sets have changed.  Moreover, older

longitudinal microdata sets are at particular risk for deductive disclosure as
they contain more detailed information about respondents than would be
released under current practices.  The data sets also follow respondents over

long periods of time, so they contain a wealth of detailed information, some
of which is revealed only as a result of the longitudinal structure.  The combi-

nation of changing SDL standards and the compilation of data on respon-
dents over time may make older longitudinal data sets particularly vulnerable.
At the same time, it is often the longitudinal structure that makes these
microdata sets particularly useful to researchers.Needs of Researchers Versus Data Confidentiality.  Organizations ap-
pear to be keenly aware that their microdata sets are more useful if they
provide greater detail.  One respondent stated that his organization increased

data availability because of the demands of users.  The organization increased

the level at which income was top-coded in response to complaints about the
lack of data detail.  Other respondents indicated that their decisions to release
3Austin agreed with this point as well, noting that academic data producers typically have lessknowledge about SDL techniques than agency counterparts.  He recommended establishing
venues for communicating SDL techniques more effectively.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAdata are based, in part, on providing as much data as possible to researchers.They ÒadvertiseÓ public-use data on Web sites by highlighting the data
Õs de-tailed and longitudinal nature.  This advertising is designed to increase use of
the data and to demonstrate to program funders that the data distribution
function is being performed.  Ease of access for researchers was also cited by

respondents as an aspect of the tradeoff between data utility and the need for
confidentiality.  The Internet makes access to public-use data increasingly

easy; this ease of access facilitates the research process, while also increasing
the risk of deductive disclosure.The survey findings are generally consistent with the body of empiricalevidence that has accumulated on organizational decision making.  They re-

veal that members of organizations are sensitive to the external environment,
and that structural and political factors influence decisions related to release
of public-use data.  The findings also reveal that structures within organiza-

tions can be fragmented.  Organizational units are governed by different poli-

cies, some of which are contradictory.  Further, staff turnover contributes to

loss of institutional memory, and historical records about data release deci-
sions are often not maintained to compensate.  Survey design, data collection,

and preparation of public-use files may be overseen by different units of the
same organization or by different organizations, and this can affect informa-
tion flows.  Management control also differs across organizations and units;

some project managers are familiar with the nuts and bolts of data release
decisions, while others are not.Agency staffs are sensitive to the consequences of releasing data that couldidentify individuals, particularly in light of legislative initiatives responding to
public concerns about confidentiality.  One agency respondent noted that his

organizationÕs dissemination of a public-use file of survey data had ceasedbecause of a recently enacted statute that was interpreted as preventing distri-
bution of the data.  Regardless of whether the statute was properly inter-

preted, what is important is that a perceived threat from the external environ-
ment resulted in the restriction of important data.  Furthermore, policies

governing data access and confidentiality are subject to change.  Institutional
interpretations of these policies influence decisions about the release of pub-
lic-use microdata, how data will be prepared, and the conditions under which
access will be permitted.Robbin, Jabine, and Koball offered a number of policy recommendationsregarding the release of public-use files.  These recommendations were di-

rected to producers, distributors, and analysts of large-scale microdata files,
as well as to funding agencies and project managers.Communicating and Educating About Statistical Disclosure Risk andLimitation Procedures.  Appropriate policy and policy compliance requireimproved communication about current research on disclosure risk, as wellImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES41as education of professionals about good practice.  Research into disclosure
risk has been conducted for more than 20 years.  Statistical agencies have

published documents analyzing the risk and providing guidelines for good
practice.  Peer-reviewed journals have published articles on the subject.  The

American Statistical AssociationÕs Committee on Privacy and Confidentialityhas prepared informational materials that are available at its Web site, and
ICDAG has disseminated its Checklist on Disclosure Potential of Proposed
Data Releases (discussed below).  Yet agency and organization staffs appear

inadequately aware of current SDL practices.  The result is that, in some cases,

statutory confidentiality requirements go unmet, while in others, data are
overly restricted.  To facilitate dissemination of information about good SDL
practices and standards, Robbin, Jabine, and Koball recommended producing
and circulating a bibliography of key publications that describe evaluative
deductive disclosure methods.  The American Statistical Association
Õs Com-mittee on Privacy and Confidentiality has prepared bibliographies on the
subject, and the committeeÕs work can serve as the basis for selecting addi-tional informational resources.Documents on the subject need to be available at a basic technical levelto be useful for staff who may have less statistical expertise but are on the
front lines of data production.  Responsibility for ensuring that data organi-

zations employ good SDL practices should not lie only with data processing
staff (the survey results indicated that, in many cases, programmers were
given nearly sole responsibility for preparing public-use files).  Internal re-

view units should be available to evaluate proposed releases of microdata
files; outside of government, IRBs and other groups can incorporate experts
on deductive disclosure.The survey revealed that a number of respondents, while familiar with thegeneral issues of data confidentiality, were not knowledgeable about disclo-
sure risk and SDL techniques.  Thus, there exists a clear opportunity to achieve

advances through further education.  Workshops and panels at annual pro-

fessional meetings offer an appropriate forum for launching such efforts.
Interactive environments such as IRBs and data centers represent additional
ongoing opportunities.Institutionalizing Communication to Improve SDL Practices.  A gen-eral set of rules governing data release is not possible because virtually every
proposed release is unique in some way, even within the same agency and
program.  It is important to obtain expertise on the subject in the initial

planning stages of statistical programs and research projects, and then later
during evaluation and testing to prepare public-use files.  Improved docu-

mentation is also an essential aspect of communicating survey objectives and
methods.  Detailed documentation can minimize the loss of institutional

memory that results from staff turnover and other factors.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAData User Participation in Data Release.  There are multiple approaches
to developing good SDL practices.  Data users have important knowledge to

contribute during the early stages of organizational decision making on the
practices to be employed.Checklist on Disclosure Potential of Proposed Data ReleasesThe introduction to the Checklist (Interagency Confidentiality and DataAccess Group, 1999:1) clearly describes its function:Federal statistical agencies and their contractors often collect data from per-sons, businesses, or other entities under a pledge of confidentiality.  Before

disseminating the results as either public-use microdata files or tables, theseagencies should apply statistical methods to protect the confidentiality ofthe information they collect.  .  .  . [The Checklist] is one tool that can assist
agencies in reviewing disclosure-limited data products.  This Checklist is
intended primarily for use in the development of public-use data products..  .  .  The Checklist consists of a series of questions that are designed to assist

an agencyÕs Disclosure Review Board to determine the suitability of releas-ing either public-use microdata files of tables from data collected from indi-viduals and/or organizations under an assurance of confidentiality.ZarateÕs overview of the Checklist was presented within the broader themeof how agencies operate Òcaught between the twin imperatives of makingusable data available, while also protecting the confidentiality of respondents.ÓZarate noted that, while disclosures can occur, it is not justifiable to withhold
valuable data for legitimate research purposes.Zarate explained that the Office of Management and BudgetÕs Statisticaland Policy Office helped form the ICDAG in 1991 to coordinate and promote
research on the use of statistical disclosure methods and to catalog related
developments at agencies and among academic researchers.  The Checklist is

intended for use in risk assessment by agency statisticians in charge of data
release.  Although it is not a formal regulatory document, its widespread

visibility should motivate a closer look at organizational methods.Though the Checklist does offer nontechnical discussion and advice onall basic SDL techniques, users must be familiar with survey design and file
content.  Zarate pointed out that none of the rules can be followed blindly.

There are real constraints on any attempt to standardize data protection; for
instance, rules may be very different when applied to data for a demographi-
cally unusual group or for a survey topic that involves especially sensitive
information.  The Checklist is not a substitute for knowing the data that are to

be released.Researchers at the workshop voiced the concern that, if users are notadequately knowledgeable about the data and the associated risks and ben-
efits, they may misuse documents such as the Checklist as a rationale forImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES43overprotection.  With institutions
Õ reputations on the line, standardization
can lead to conservatism in release policies, which researchers worry will
inevitably limit the availability of data required for the most important and
innovative research.  In this context, the Checklist must be an evolving docu-

ment.  Users must be educated enough to adapt it to fit their specific require-

ments, reflecting, as Zarate put it, Òthat there is an art as well as a science todisclosure analysis.ÓCurrently, the Checklist emphasizes proper handling of geographic infor-mation.  ÒSmall areasÓ are defined as 100,000 people by the Census Bureau;
previously, geographic information was available only at the 250,000 person
sampling unit level.  The more recent definition reflects a rule of thumb

without a real quantitative basis.  Zarate argued that there is a real research

need to develop empirical evidence to justify recommendations regarding
geographic specificity.  In fact, the disclosure risk posed by geographic delimi-

tation can be assessed only in the context of other variables that are available
in data records, as well as information about ease of external linkage.  Adding

detailed geographic identifiers to specific age, race, and other contextual vari-
ables makes data more useful, but also increases the probability of disclosure.
The Checklist directs attention to the variety of available external files (e.g.,
voter registration, birth and death records) that could be linked to disclose
record identity.  It may also help guide decisions when data are being issued in

a format that is easily manipulated.Finally, Zarate suggested that the Checklist needs to be developed to di-rect special attention to longitudinal data.  At the time of the workshop, the

Checklist had only scratched the surface in terms of alerting data dissemina-
tors about additional risks that arise when records are followed through time.
If an agency is locked into certain procedures, it can become clear over time
that appropriate levels of security are not in place.  For instance, characteris-

tics that can be predicted from one period to the next may not be masked by
top-coding or other techniques.  The Checklist does not currently address

these issues, but is expected to do so in the future.RESTRICTION OF DATA ACCESSSeveral of the workshop presentations described existing and plannedrestricted access arrangements for managing complex research data files.  Paul

Massell of the Census Bureau provided a comparative overview of licensing
arrangements used by six U.S. agencies and two university-based social sci-
ence research organizations.  Marilyn McMillen of the National Center for

Education Statistics (NCES) gave a detailed description of licensing proce-
dures used by  NCES, with emphasis on inspection procedures used to moni-

tor observance of the conditions of access.  Mark McClellan of Stanford Uni-
versity described procedures employed to protect confidentiality at anImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAacademic research center that is using microdata files from multiple sourcesunder licensing arrangements.  Several presentations addressed research data

centers:  J. Bradford Jensen of the Census Bureau
Õs Center for EconomicStudies and Patrick Collins of the recently established California Census Re-
search Data Center at the University of California, Berkeley, described their
centers.  John Horm reported on NCHS
Õs Research Data Center, which offersboth on-site and remote access to the agencyÕs non-public-use data sets.  And
Garnett Picot of Statistics Canada outlined his agencyÕs current restrictedaccess procedures, as well as its plans to establish several research data centers.The following sections summarize the features of the three principal kinds
of restricted access arrangements as presented and discussed at the workshop,
as well as one special procedure involving respondent consent that has been
used by Statistics Canada.  The main features of interest of these arrange-

ments are the adequacy of the data for the desired analyses, eligibility require-
ments, the means used to provide adequate protection for individually iden-
tifiable data, the costs of obtaining and providing access, and the way these
costs are shared by users and custodians of the files.LicensingNCES was one of the first organizations to issue licenses to researchersthat allow them to receive and use nonpublic microdata sets at their own
work sites.  Nearly 500 licenses for files from several different NCES surveys

have been issued since 1991.  There are no specific restrictions by type of

organization; licenses have been issued to government agencies at all levels,
universities, research corporations, and associations.  Applicants must pro-

vide a description of their research plan and demonstrate that it requires the
use of restricted data, identify all persons who will have access to the data, and
prepare and submit a computer security plan.  They must execute a license

agreement signed by an official with authority to bind the organization legally
to its conditions and submit affidavits of nondisclosure signed by all persons
who will have access to the data.  They must agree to submit to unannounced

inspections of their facilities to monitor compliance with security procedures;
an NCES contractor carries out a systematic program of inspections.  Licens-
ees are subject to severe criminal penalties for confidentiality violations, as
specified in the National Education Statistics Act of 1974.During the past decade, several other agencies and organizations havedeveloped and used licensing agreements for access to restricted data sets.
Specific conditions vary.  Some licensors provide access only to institutions

certified by the National Institutes of Health as having met procedural criteria
for IRBs or human-subject review committees.  The duration of license agree-

ments varies, with extensions being available in most instances.  Some licen-

sors require that publications based on the data be submitted to them forImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES45disclosure review; others leave this responsibility to the licensee.  Most agree-ments allow for unannounced inspections of facilities, but not all licensors
have a systematic inspection program such as that conducted for NCES.  Ev-

ery licensee must cover the costs of going through the application process,
which generally requires a significant amount of paperwork, and of establish-
ing the physical and other security safeguards required to obtain approval of
their computer security plans.  Unlike NCES, which uses agency funds to

cover the costs of processing applications and conducting inspections, some
licensors charge user fees to cover these costs fully or partially.Potential penalties for violations vary substantially.  Federal agencies other
than NCES that release files may be able to impose penalties under the Privacy
Act or other legislation; however, these penalties would be less severe than
those available to NCES.  Penalties available to universities and other licens-

ing organizations are generally of a different kind:  immediate loss of access

and denial of future access to data, forfeiture of a cash deposit, notification of
violations to federal agencies that fund research grants, and possible liability
to civil suits for violating contract provisions.Research Data CentersThe Census Bureau pioneered the distribution of public-use microdatafiles from the decennial census and household surveys.  However, microdata

from establishment censuses and surveys cannot be publicly released because
of higher associated disclosure risks.  The Census law does not permit release
of restricted data to users under licensing arrangements.  Thus, the only viable

option is to provide for access to such files at secure sites maintained by the
Census Bureau.  Access is allowed only to persons who are regular or special

sworn Census employees and would be subject to penalties provided in the
law for violations of its confidentiality provisions.The Census BureauÕs Center for Economic Studies, established in themid-1980s at Census headquarters in Suitland, Maryland, initially constructed
longitudinal files of economic data that were used for research by Census staff
and by academic research fellows working at the Center as special sworn
employees.  Since then, additional research data centers have been established

in the BureauÕs Boston regional office; at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pitts-burgh; and at the University of California at Los Angeles and the University of
California, Berkeley.  Another center is scheduled to open at Duke University

in 2000.  To date, only files of economic data for firms or establishments have

been available, but the centers are planning to add restricted data sets from
the decennial census and major household surveys, as well as linked em-
ployerÐemployee data sets.All researchers desiring to use the research data centersÕ facilities must
submit proposals that are reviewed for feasibility, scientific merit, disclosureImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATArisk, and potential benefits to the Census Bureau.4  The applicant must ex-
plain why the research cannot be done with publicly available data files.  To

minimize disclosure risks, projects are limited to those that emphasize model-
based estimation, as opposed to detailed tabulations.  To ensure that no con-
fidential data are disclosed, all research outputs are reviewed by center staff
and may not be removed from the center without the administratorÕs ap-proval.  Fees are charged for use of the centers
Õ facilities, but some fellowships
are available on a competitive basis to partially defray these costs; grantees of
the National Science Foundation and the NIA are exempted.NCHS recently established a research data center that provides both on-site and remote access to nonpublic data files from several NCHS surveys (see
below for discussion of the centerÕs remote access arrangements).  The main
requirements and conditions for on-site access are similar to those of the
Census BureauÕs research data centers.  Research proposals must be submit-
ted and are reviewed by a committee for disclosure risk, consistency with the
mission of NCHS, and feasibility given the availability of the centerÕs re-sources.  All outputs are subject to disclosure review before being taken off

site.  Users are charged a basic fee for use of the center
Õs facilities and anadditional fee for any programming assistance provided by the center staff.Statistics Canada recently decided to establish six to eight research datacenters to provide access to data from five new longitudinal surveys of house-
holds and persons, including one with linked employer data.  Other restricted

data sets will be added as needed.  The features of the centers will be similar in

most respects to those of the Census BureauÕs regional centers.  They will be
located at secure sites that have stand-alone computing systems and are staffed

by Statistics Canada employees.  They will operate under the confidentiality

requirements of the Canadian Statistics Act, and only Òdeemed employeesÓwill be allowed access to the data.  Proposed research projects will be subject

to a peer review process led by CanadaÕs Social Science and Humanities Re-search Council.  For users to be considered 
Òdeemed employees,Ó they must
produce an output or service for Statistics Canada.  To meet this requirement,

each user must produce a research paper that will be part of a series sponsored
by the agency.  The research paper will not include policy comments, but after

meeting the requirement to produce the paper, researchers will be free to
publish their results anywhere, accompanied by their interpretation of the
policy implications.4Access to identifiable data by special sworn employees is permitted only when such access isdeemed to further the agencyÕs mission, as defined by law.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES47Remote AccessArrangements for provision of remote access to NCHS restricted datafiles, which preceded the establishment of the research data center, have now
been taken over by the center.  Center staff construct the data files needed for

various analyses, a process that can include merging user-supplied files with
the appropriate NCHS data files.  The center provides a file of pseudo-data in

the same format as the real data so users can debug their programs.  In this

manner, the number of back-and-forth iterations is substantially reduced.
SAS is the only analytical software that can be used, and some of its functions,
such as LIST and PRINT, cannot be used.  Users submit their programs to the

center by e-mail; following disclosure analysis, output is returned to them by
e-mail.  Charges for access to a file for a specified time period depend on the

number of records included in the file.  There is also a charge for file construc-

tion and setup services provided by center staff.Statistics Canada has used remote access procedures on an ad hoc basis.An example is the provision of access to nonpublic data from a longitudinal
survey of children and youth.  The results have been mixed; a small evaluation

survey and informal contacts with researchers have indicated that the system
is judged by some to be cumbersome to use and not sufficiently interactive.Respondent Consent ProcedureSection 12 of the Canadian Statistics Act permits Statistics Canada toshare nonpublic survey data with an incorporated organization for statistical
purposes, provided that survey respondents have given their permission to do
so.  The agency has used this procedure, known as a Section 12 agreement, to

make such data sets available to other federal departments and to provincial
statistical agencies.  The respondent consent procedure must specify the orga-

nizations that will have access to the data.  Typically, from 90 to 95 percent of

respondents, who can be either persons or firms, give permission for their
data to be used in this way.DiscussionOne trend that emerged from the presentations and discussion of re-stricted access was the rapid growth during the 1990s in the number of re-
searchers obtaining access to complex research data files through all three of
the principal methods of restricted access.  The establishment of regional

research data centers and the inclusion of demographic files at the Census
BureauÕs centers is likely to fuel a further expansion.  NCES and the NationalScience Foundation are collaborating on the development of a manual of
licensing procedures, which could potentially be used by other agencies andImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAorganizations with the authority to employ this arrangement.  Adoption of a
more uniform set of procedures could reduce the cost and time required to
submit proposals to licensors.  There have been some negative user reactions

to the controlled remote access approach because of limitations on software
options, delays, and the relative difficulty of interaction between researcher
and data source.  However, a substantial research effort is now under way to

develop more effective procedures for controlled access to microdata sets via
the Internet.Although expanded access to research files by a variety of methods islikely, there are some legal obstacles.  Both the Census Bureau and NCHS, for

example, have concluded that they do not have the legal authority to issue
licenses that would allow researchers to use restricted data sets at their own
facilities.  Some workshop participants suggested that the Census Bureau

should make restricted data files of other agencies available at its research data
centers.  Even if this were done, however, access to files from various agencies

at a central point would probably still require different administrative proce-
dures because of differences in the laws governing access to each agencyÕsdata.  Under interagency agreements, NCES has undertaken distribution of

files created by other agencies using licensing arrangements; it has the legal
authority to do so as long as the files in question include data relevant to
education.The use of restricted access arrangements, which has been deemed neces-sary to provide adequate protection for confidential information about indi-
viduals and businesses, results in increased costs to conduct research.  Custo-

dians of the data files need additional resources to process applications,
operate inspection systems, staff research data centers, and inspect outputs to
ensure that disclosure does not occur.  Researchers require resources to pre-

pare applications for access, to provide appropriate physical security for the
data, or to visit a secure site.  At present, these costs are being covered partly

by federal agency budgets and partly by user fees.  The Census Bureau
Õs re-search data centers have been supported in part by grants from the National
Science Foundation and NIA, but may eventually have to recover more of
their costs from users.  Several workshop participants suggested that, if pos-

sible, graduate students should be exempted from such user fees.Various restricted access arrangements offer different levels of protectionfor the confidentiality of individually identifiable information.  Researchers

working in research data centers under the supervision of agency employees
are under closer supervision than those licensed to work with the data at their
own facilities.  Although there have been no known disclosures of individual

information from NCES data files released under licenses, inspections have
turned up numerous violations of the license requirements, such as failure to
notify the agency of changes in personnel authorized to use the data.  Protec-
tion of the data under controlled remote access arrangements depends prima-Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT AGENCY AND ORGANIZATION PRACTICES49rily on the effectiveness of automated screening systems and the vigilance ofagency staff responsible for manual reviews of outputs prior to their release to
users.Most arrangements for restricted access are time-limited, and licenseesare generally required to return or destroy their files and derived work files
containing potentially identifiable records.  It was pointed out that such pro-
visions can make it difficult or impossible for other researchers to attempt to
replicate research findings or for either the original or other researchers to
pursue leads generated by the initial results.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51References and Bibliography
Chapman, A.R., ed.1997Health Care and Information Ethics:  Protecting Fundamental Human Rights.  
KansasCity, KS:  Sheed and Ward.
Fanning, J.1998Privacy and Research:  Public Policy Issues.  Seminar presentation in Statistical Semi-
nar Series on Confidentiality, Washington, DC, October 15. 1998.  Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services.Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology1978Report on Statistical Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques.  Statistical Policy Working Pa-
per 2.  Subcommittee on Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques.  Washington, DC: U.S.

Department of Commerce.Gostin, L.O.1995Health information privacy. 
 Cornell Law Review
 80:451-528.
Interagency Confidentiality and Data Access Group1999Checklist on Disclosure Potential of Proposed Data Releases, Statistical Policy Office,
U.S. Office of Management and Budget.Jabine, T.B.1993aProcedures for restricted access data.  
Journal of Official Statistics 9(2):537-589.
1993bStatistical disclosure limitation practices of United States Statistical Agencies. 
 Jour-
nal of Official Statistics 9(2):427-454.
Juster, F.T.1991Discussion.  
American Statistical Association 1991 Proceedings of the Social SciencesSection. Alexandria, VA.: American Statistical Association.National Research Council1979Privacy and Confidentiality as Factors in Survey Response.  Panel on Privacy and Con-fidentiality as Factors in Survey Response, Committee on National Statistics, Com-mittee on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.  Washington, DC: NationalAcademy PressImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATANational Research Council and Social Science Research Council1993Private Lives and Public Policies:  Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Sta-
tistics.  Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, George T. Duncan, Thomas B.
Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, eds. Committee on National Statistics.  Washington,
DC:  National Academy Press.
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55APPENDIXAWorkshop Participants
PresentersNorman Bradburn (Workshop Chair), National Opinion Research Center
Erik Austin, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
Mary Ann Baily, Institute for Ethics, American Medical Association
Robert Boruch, University of Pennsylvania
Richard Burkhauser, Cornell University
Patrick T. Collins, California Census Research Data Center, University ofCalifornia, BerkeleyJ. Michael Dean, University of Utah
George Duncan, Carnegie-Mellon University
Donna Eden, Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Department of Health andHuman ServicesStephen E. Fienberg, Carnegie-Mellon University
Robert M. Gellman, Privacy and Information Policy Consultant,Washington, D.C.Rachel Gordon, University of Illinois at Chicago
John Horm, National Center for Health Statistics
J. Bradford Jensen, Center for Economic Studies, Bureau of the Census
Sallie Keller-McNulty, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Arthur Kennickell, Federal Reserve Board
Paul Massell, Bureau of the Census
Mark McClellan, Stanford University
Marilyn M. McMillen, National Center for Education StatisticsImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATAGarnett Picot, Statistics CanadaTom Puglisi, Office for Protection from Research Risks, National Institutesof HealthAlice Robbin, Indiana University
Latanya Sweeney, Carnegie-Mellon University
Robert Weathers, Cornell University
Finis Welch, Texas A&M University
Robert Willis, University of Michigan
Alvan Zarate, National Center for Health StatisticsInvited GuestsPaul P. Biemer, Research Triangle InstituteLewis Berman, National Center for Health Statistics
Katharine Browning, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
Jay Casselberry, Energy Information Administration
Chris Chapman, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Stephen Cohen, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Virginia A. de Wolf, Office of Management and Budget
Cathryn Dippo, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Nancy Donovan, General Accounting Office
Patricia Doyle, Bureau of the Census
Judy Droitcour, General Accounting Office
John Eltinge, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Anastasia J. Gage, USAID
Gerald W. Gates, Bureau of the Census
Dan Gaylin, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Nancy Gordon, Bureau of the Census
Brian Greenberg, Social Security Administration
Easley Hoy, Disclosure Review Board, Bureau of the Census
Betsy Humphreys, National Library of Medicine
Thomas Jabine, Consultant, Committee on National Statistics
Nancy Kirkendall, Department of Education
Julia Lane, Center for Economic Studies, Bureau of the Census
Susan Lapham, Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Thomas Louis, University of Minnesota, and Member, Committee onNational StatisticsDavid Mednick, Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Jay Meisenheimer, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Heather Miller, Office of Extramural Research, National Institutes of Health
Nancy Miller, National Institutes of Health
Joseph Moone, U.S. Department of Justice
Kristen Robinson, National Center for Health StatisticsImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A57Stuart Rust, Bureau of Labor StatisticsJames Scanlon, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Lois Schein, Social Security Administration
Eleanor Singer, University of Michigan
Edward Spar, Council of Professional Associations on Federal Statistics
James Spletzer, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Richard M. Suzman, National Institute on Aging
Louise Wideroff, National Institutes of Health
Laura Zayatz, Bureau of the CensusNRC StaffJamie Casey, Committee on National StatisticsBarney Cohen, Committee on Population
Kevin Kinsella, Committee on Population
Heather Koball, Committee on National Statistics
Christopher Mackie, Committee on National Statistics
Terri Scanlan, Committee on National Statistics
Miron Straf, Committee on National Statistics
Barbara Boyle Torrey, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences andEducationAndrew White, Committee on National Statistics
Lee Zwanziger, Institute of MedicineImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58APPENDIXBWorkshop Agenda
Thursday, October 14, 19998:45WELCOME AND OPENING REMARKS
Barbara Boyle Torrey, Director, Commission onBehavioral and Social Sciences and EducationMiron Straf, Director, Committee on National StatisticsRichard Suzman, Behavioral and Social Research Program,National Institute on AgingINTRODUCTION AND WORKSHOP PREVIEWNorman Bradburn, Workshop Chair9:05SESSION I.Linked longitudinal databases:
Achievements to date and prospectsA.TOPIC 1:  Case Studies
Paper 1:HRS application: ÒHow Policy Variables Influence
the Timing of Social Security Disability ApplicationsÓÐ Richard Burkhauser, Cornell University
Ð Robert Weathers, Cornell UniversityImproving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B59Paper 2:NLS-Y application: 
ÒConfidential Data FilesLinked to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979:
A Case StudyÓÐ Rachel Gordon, University Illinois at Chicago
B.TOPIC 2:  Risks and Rewards of Data Linking
Presentation: ÒProtecting Confidentiality of Linked Datasets:DonÕt Throw the Baby Out with BathwaterÓÐ J. Michael Dean, University of Utah
C.  TOPIC 3:  Report from the Conference on the Value of
Linked DataPresentation:  Robert Willis, University of Michigan
D.  GENERAL DISCUSSION OF PAPERS/PRESENTATIONS
11:10SESSION II.   Legal and ethical requirements for
dissemination:  Recent and  prospective developments
A.  TOPIC 1:  Philosophical Issues
Paper:  ÒRegulating Access to Research Data Files:Ethical IssuesÓÐ Mary Ann Baily, George Washington University
Discussant:  Robert Boruch, University of Pennsylvania
B.  TOPIC 2:  Recent and Prospective New Legislation
Paper:  Donna Eden, U.S. Department of Health and
Human ServicesDiscussant: Robert Gellman, Privacy and InformationPolicy ConsultantC.  TOPIC 3:  Problems and Issues of Institutional
Review BoardsPaper:  Thomas Puglisi/Jeffery Cohen, Office for Protection
from Research Risks, National Institutes of HealthD.  GENERAL DISCUSSION, led by Norman Bradburn
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATA2:00SESSION III.  Procedures for releasing public-use
microdata filesA.  TOPIC 1: Agency Practices for Releasing Public-Use
Micro-Data FilesPresentation: ÒChecklist on Disclosure Potential of ProposedData Releases,Ó developed by the Interagency Confidentiality
and Data Access GroupÐ Alvan Zarate, National Center for Health Statistics
Paper: ÒA Survey of Statistical Disclosure Limitation (SDL)Practices of Organizations that Distribute Public Use
MicrodataÓÐ Thomas Jabine, Private Consultant
Ð Alice Robbin, Indiana University
Ð Heather Koball, Committee on National Statistics
Discussant:  Erik Austin, Inter-university Consortium forPolitical and Social ResearchPaper: ÒMultiple Imputation in the Survey of ConsumerFinancesÓÐ Arthur Kennickell, Federal Reserve Board
Discussant: Stephen Fienberg, Carnegie Mellon UniversityB.  TOPIC 2: Quantification of Disclosure Risk
Paper: Ð Sallie Keller-McNulty, Los Alamos National
LaboratoryÐ George Duncan, Carnegie Mellon University
Discussant: Latanya Sweeney, Carnegie Mellon University4:30GENERAL DISCUSSION

5:00CLOSING COMMENTS AND ADJOURN
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B61Friday, October 15, 19999:00SESSION IV.   Procedures for restricting access: who gets access
to micro-data, and under what conditionsA.   TOPIC: Use of restricted access procedures for major linked
longitudinal databasesPaper:  ÒReview of Data Licensing Agreements at U.S.Government Agencies and Research OrganizationsÓÐ Paul Massell, U.S. Census Bureau
Discussant: Mark McClellan, Stanford UniversityPresentation:  Remote data access at the National Center for
Health StatisticsÐ John Horm, National Center for Health Statistics
Discussant: Finis Welch, Texas A&M UniversityPresentation: Statistics Canada procedures; data liberation andassociated Internet background informationÐ Garnett Picot, Statistics Canada
Presentation: Data licensing systemsÐ Marilyn McMillen, National Center for Education
StatisticsPresentation: Data CentersÑA critical assessmentÐ  Patrick Collins, California Census Research Data
Center
Ð  J. Bradford Jensen, Carnegie Mellon Census Research
Data Center1:30GENERAL DISCUSSION
Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RESEARCH DATA2:00SESSION V.   Workshop Summary
Review and address questions posed at the opening of theworkshopÐ Thomas Louis, Member, Committee on National Statistics
Ð Norman Bradburn, Workshop Chair
General response  Ð Workshop participants
2:45CLOSING COMMENTS/ADJOURN